CITY CODE
of
KELLOGG, IDAHO
1961
Code current through:
Ord. 642, passed 11-12-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Kellogg, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 642, passed November 12, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 203
AN ORDINANCE FOR REVISING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF KELLOGG
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KELLOGG,
SHOSHONE COUNTY, IDAHO:
   Section 1. That all ordinances of a general nature now in force in the City
of Kellogg, Shoshone County, Idaho, as revised, codified and compiled and
hereinafter set forth, be, and they are hereby adopted, passed, published and
declared to be the compiled ordinances of the City of Kellogg, pursuant to
Chapter 5, Title 50 of the Idaho Code, as amended, empowering any city of the
first or second class, or any village, to revise, codify and compile its
ordinances.
   Section 2. That this ordinance and all said ordinances of a general nature
compiled and codified as above stated, shall be in full force and effect upon
the passage, approval, and publication of this ordinance in one issue of the
Kellogg News Wardner, a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City
of Kellogg, and the official newspaper thereof.
   Passed under suspension of rules upon which a roll call vote was duly taken
and duly enacted an ordinance of the City of Kellogg at a regular adjourned
meeting of the City Council, held on November 16th, 1961 at the hour of 8:00
P.M.
   Approved by the Mayor this 16th day of November, 1961.
 
                              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
9b30d26b7abd7091baed27496ab385a516d41727/IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
(Seal)
 
Attest:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9b30d26b7abd7091baed27496ab385a516d41727/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.png]
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Adoption
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Construction Of Words
1-1-5: Definitions
1-1-6: Interpretations
1-1-1: TITLE:
This compilation and codification of the general ordinances of the city of
Kellogg is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
city code of the city of Kellogg. Any reference made to the number of any
section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the
same under its appropriate title heading, its chapter heading, and its section
heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal
document. (1961 Code)
1-1-2: ADOPTION:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of a general and permanent effect of the city. (1961
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for
insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement
page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each copy of this
code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1961 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or the masculine gender, several matters, parties, or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. Provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto. (1961 Code)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
OFFICER: Shall include officers and boards in charge of departments and members
of such boards. The word "city", "clerk", "treasurer", or other such title
shall mean city clerk, city treasurer, or other city officer as the use may be
applicable.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall be deemed to include any "person, firm, association, or
corporation" or any organization of any kind.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
STREETS: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING: May include printing.
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or
permit or authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such
board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done.
(1961 Code)
1-1-6: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.    Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   B.   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be deemed guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Pending Suits
1-2-4: Severability
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the passage of this code are
hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force
or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the
saving clauses herein contained) from which are excluded the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances, appropriation
ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations, franchise
ordinances, and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations, contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants, salary ordinances, ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places,
improvement ordinances, bond ordinances, ordinances relating to elections,
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city, all special ordinances, and zoning ordinances as amended, excepting as
this code may contain conflicting provisions in which case this code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance in respect to such conflicting provision
only. (1961 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provision for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. (1961 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrue or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinances in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding sections shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering
any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance
or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this code. (1961 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CLAIMS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Claims Filed With City Clerk
1-3-2: Claims For Damages
1-3-1: CLAIMS FILED WITH CITY CLERK:
All claims against the city must be filed with the city clerk, in writing, and
by him presented to the council for their auditing, with a full account of the
item, verified by the oath of the claimant, or his agent, that the same is
correct, reasonable and just and that it nor any part thereof has not been
paid, and no claims or demands shall be audited or allowed unless presented and
verified as provided for in this section. (1961 Code)
1-3-2: CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES:
All claims for damages against the city must be filed with the clerk, within
six (6) months after the time when such claim for damages shall have accrued,
specifying the time, place, character and cause of said damages. No action
shall be maintained against the city for any claim for damages until the same
has been presented to the council, and until sixty (60) days have elapsed after
such presentation. The allowance of any or all damage claims against such city
shall be by ordinance and not otherwise. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-4-1: Corporate Seal; Design
1-4-2: Adoption Of Seal
1-4-3: City Clerk Custodian Of Seal
1-4-1: CORPORATE SEAL; DESIGN:
The corporate seal of the city of Kellogg, Idaho, shall be circular in form
with inner and outer circles of a rope design. The outer circle shall be one
and one-half inches (1 1/2") in diameter and the inner circle shall be one inch
(1") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper portion of space between the two
(2) circles the words "City of Kellogg" in Gothic style type, and upon the
lower portion of the space between the two (2) circles the word "Idaho", in
Gothic style type. Upon the space within the inner circle and on the upper
portion thereof shall be the word "Shoshone" in Gothic style type, and upon the
lower portion of the space within the inner circle shall be the word "County"
in Gothic style type. Upon and across the center of the space within the inner
circle shall be the word "Seal" in Roman style type.
A facsimile of the above described seal follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9b30d26b7abd7091baed27496ab385a516d41727/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1300.png]
 
(1961 Code)
1-4-2: ADOPTION OF SEAL:
The seal described in section
1-4-1 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the corporate seal of the city of
Kellogg, Shoshone County, Idaho. (1961 Code)
1-4-3: CITY CLERK CUSTODIAN OF SEAL:
The city clerk of the city of Kellogg shall be the custodian of the corporate
seal of the city of Kellogg and shall affix said seal imprint upon all official
city documents, records and licenses. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official Newspaper Adopted
1-5-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER ADOPTED:
The Shoshone County News-Press, a newspaper printed and published in the city
of Kellogg, Shoshone County, Idaho is hereby appointed, designated and
constituted the official newspaper of the city of Kellogg, Shoshone County,
Idaho and all ordinances, notices, statements and other official writings
required to be published under and by virtue of the laws of the state of Idaho
and the municipal government shall be given publication in this newspaper.
(Ord. 337, 6-19-1985)
CHAPTER 6
SALARIES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Salaries Of Elected Officers
1-6-2: Salaries Of Appointive Officers
1-6-1: SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICERS:
The salary of the mayor of the city shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
month, payable monthly.
The salary of each member of the council shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00)
per month, payable monthly.
(Ord. 523, 12-13-2006, eff. 1-1-2008)
1-6-2: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
Salaries of appointive officers shall be fixed by resolution of the council.
(1961 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election Precincts
1-7-2: Hours Of Election
1-7-1: ELECTION PRECINCTS:
The city shall have one election precinct, which will be known as precinct
number one and will be comprised of all voters residing within the city limits
of the city of Kellogg, Shoshone County, Idaho. (Ord. 315, 9-12-1979)
1-7-2: HOURS OF ELECTION:
For all general and special city elections, the polls shall open at twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and remain open until all registered electors of that
precinct have voted or until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of the same day,
whichever comes first. (Ord. 433, 8-13-1997)
CHAPTER 8
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-8-1: General Penalty
1-8-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the city may be fined
in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any offense and such
person may be confined in jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition
thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
The penalty herein provided shall be applicable to every ordinance of the city,
the same as though it were a part of each and every separate ordinance. Any
person convicted of a violation of any ordinance of this city shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 253, 1-19-1971)
CHAPTER 9
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-9-1: Mayor; Duties
1-9-2: Mayor To Sign Contracts
1-9-3: Mayor May Offer Reward
1-9-4: Mayor May Grant Pardon
1-9-5: Veto Power Of Mayor
1-9-6: Accounts And Reports Of Officers
1-9-7: Police Powers Of Mayor
1-9-8: Mayor May Require Aid
1-9-9: Other Powers
1-9-1: MAYOR; DUTIES:
The mayor shall devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as an
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. He shall from time to
time give the council such information and recommend such measures as he may
deem beneficial to the city, he shall examine the grounds of all complaints
against any of the officers of the city to determine existence of a violation
or neglect of duty, and report the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for
the removal of said officer to the council. He shall require that every
officer, on the expiration of his term of office or resignation or removal from
the same, deliver to his successor all money, books, papers, maps, plats,
furniture, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, tools, and instruments and
appurtenances belonging to such office. He shall perform all other duties
imposed on him by the laws of the state of Idaho. (1961 Code)
1-9-2: MAYOR TO SIGN CONTRACTS:
The mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in
behalf of the city on all contracts, including deeds, bonds, bills, notes,
obligations, and other agreements, documents and papers, to which the city is a
party, and to require that the conditions in the said instruments are
faithfully performed and to borrow money on the credit of the city when
authorized by the council. (1961 Code)
1-9-3: MAYOR MAY OFFER REWARD:
The mayor, whenever he deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to offer a
reward not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and
conviction of any person charged with violating the ordinances of the city.
(1961 Code)
1-9-4: MAYOR MAY GRANT PARDON:
The mayor is empowered to grant a pardon to any person imprisoned for a
violation of the laws of the city, and to remit so much of any fine or
forfeiture as in his judgment may seem just and reasonable, and shall report
such remittance or pardon with the cause thereof to the council at its next
meeting. (1961 Code)
1-9-5: VETO POWER OF MAYOR:
The mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the city
council, provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the mayor may be passed over
his veto by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the council elected
notwithstanding the veto, and should the mayor neglect or refuse to sign any
ordinance and return the same with his objection, in writing, at the next
regular meeting of the council, the same shall become a law without his
signature. (1961 Code)
1-9-6: ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the power, when he deems it necessary, to require any
officer of the city to exhibit his accounts or other papers, and to make
reports to the council in writing touching any subject or matter he may require
pertaining to his office. (1961 Code)
1-9-7: POLICE POWERS OF MAYOR:
The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles of the
corporate limits of the city for the enforcement of any health or quarantine
ordinance and regulation thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all matters,
excepting taxation, within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits of the
city. (1961 Code)
1-9-8: MAYOR MAY REQUIRE AID:
The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant in the city
over eighteen (18) years of age and under the age of fifty (50) years to aid in
enforcing the laws. (1961 Code)
1-9-9: OTHER POWERS:
The mayor shall have all other powers granted by the laws of the state of
Idaho. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 10
THE COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-10-1: Duties Of Councilmen
1-10-2: Assignment Of Council Seats
1-10-3: Vacancy; How Filled
1-10-4: Time And Place Of Meeting
1-10-5: How To Conduct Council Meetings
1-10-6: Elect President Of The Council
1-10-1: DUTIES OF COUNCILMEN:
The members of the city council, the legislative and policy making branch of
the government of the city, shall devote so much of their time to the duties of
their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. They
shall attend all meetings of the council unless lawfully excused therefrom, and
perform all duties which by the nature of their office they should reasonably
perform. (Ord. 214, 10-10-1963)
1-10-2: ASSIGNMENT OF COUNCIL SEATS:
Any candidate seeking election to the council shall file for one of the
assigned council seats. The council seat presently held by Wayne Ross shall be
designated seat one. The council seat presently held by Bernard Goodson shall
be designated seat two (2). The council seat presently held by Kim Bradshaw
shall be designated seat three (3). The council seat presently held by Kay
Marcy shall be designated seat four (4). The council seat presently held by Jim
Miller shall be designated seat five (5). The council seat presently held by
Terry Douglas shall be designated seat six (6). (Ord. 339, 7-10-1985)
1-10-3: VACANCY; HOW FILLED:
In the event an office of councilman shall become vacant, through death, moving
out of the ward, or for any other cause, the mayor shall appoint, with the
approval of the council, a resident of the ward to fill the unexpired portion
of the term, until the next general election, when the unexpired term shall be
filled by regular election. (Ord. 214, 10-10-1963)
1-10-4: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING:
The city council of the city shall hold regular sessions of the council in the
city hall on the second Wednesday of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. If
said Wednesday of any month is a holiday, the meeting shall be held the evening
following at the same time. (Ord. 462, 6-20-2001)
1-10-5: HOW TO CONDUCT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the conduct of council meetings, the clerk's duties and the
mayor's duties in relation to council meetings, that booklet entitled "How To
Conduct Municipal Council Meetings" published by the Idaho Municipal League,
being the 1953 edition thereof, of which not less than three (3) copies are now
on file in the office of the city clerk and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein. (1961 Code)
1-10-6: ELECT PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL:
At the time of taking office the council shall elect one of the members of the
council who shall be styled president of the council, and who shall preside at
all meetings of the council in the absence of the mayor; and, in the absence of
the president, to elect one of their own body to occupy his place temporarily,
who shall be styled acting president of the council, and the president and
acting president, when occupying the place of mayor, shall have the same
privileges as other members of the council, and all acts of the president and
acting president, while so acting, shall be binding upon the council and upon
the city as if done by the mayor. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 11
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; DUTIES AND BONDS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Appointment By Mayor
1-11-2: Term Of Office And Removal
1-11-3: Appointments To Offices Hereafter Created
1-11-4: City Clerk, Duties
1-11-5: City Attorney, Duties
1-11-6: Superintendent Of Public Works, Duties
1-11-7: Chief Of Police, Duties
1-11-8: Chief Of Fire Department And Assistants, Duties (Rep. by correspondence
dated 6-15-2001)
1-11-9: City Treasurer, Duties
1-11-10: City Engineer, Duties
1-11-11: Bonds Of Officers
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT BY MAYOR:
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a city clerk,
city attorney, superintendent of public works, chief of police, city treasurer
and city engineer. (1961 Code)
1-11-2: TERM OF OFFICE AND REMOVAL:
All appointive officers shall hold office for the term for which they were
appointed and qualified, provided, that any appointive officer may at any time
be removed by the action of the mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the
city council; provided further, that all employees holding positions by virtue
of appointment only, without the approval of the city council, may be removed
or discharged at the pleasure of the appointing power. (1961 Code)
1-11-3: APPOINTMENTS TO OFFICES HEREAFTER CREATED:
The mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, shall make appointments
to all city offices now existing in the city which have not been in this
chapter specifically named and which may be hereafter created from time to time
by the city council. (1961 Code)
1-11-4: CITY CLERK, DUTIES:
   A.   Clerk To Keep Seal, Ordinances And All City Records: The city clerk
shall be custodian of the city seal and affix same to documents as in this code
provided.
   The city clerk shall also be the custodian of all public records, documents,
ordinances, resolution and orders of the city council and such other papers and
documents as may be delivered into his custody.
   B.   Attend Meetings Of Council And Keep Minutes And Records: The city clerk
shall attend all sessions of the city council, keep a correct journal and shall
keep in a separate book a record of ordinances passed by the city council and
of the titles of such ordinances; and all ordinances not published in a book
form shall be carefully indexed alphabetically. The city clerk shall see that
each ordinance is published as required by law, and he shall keep on file the
proof of such publication.
   C.   Report To City Council: The city clerk shall prepare and present to the
city council at its regular meeting each month a full and complete statement of
the financial transactions of his office during the month preceding, which said
statement shall set forth all receipts for licenses issued; money received with
applications for licenses which are to come before the city council. All other
funds received by him as city clerk and said report shall give a detailed
explanation of disbursements, including a statement of the aggregate of
warrants and checks of each fund issued, of warrants redeemed and checks paid
during the month and warrants and checks outstanding against each fund at the
close of such month. He shall also at the close of each fiscal year present to
the city council an annual report covering the operations for the entire year,
which said report shall also contain a description of the bonds issued and sold
during the year, and the terms of sale; and shall itemize each and every
expense thereof. The city clerk shall also make such additional reports and
furnish such other data from the records and files of his office as may be
requested by the mayor or city council.
   D.   Furnish Copies Of City Records: It shall be the duty of the city clerk
to furnish any city officer with a certified copy of any record, paper or
public document on file in his office or in his custody, for the use of such
officer in the discharge of his official duties, and he shall also furnish a
certified copy of any such record, paper or document to any person not an
officer of the city upon the payment in advance of fifteen cents ($0.15) per
folio of one hundred (100) words for such copy.
   E.   Keep Books And Records: The city clerk shall keep such books and
permanent records of the transaction and business of his office as may be
necessary to accurately disclose all transaction and business in his office. He
shall also countersign all warrants and checks and keep a "warrant register and
abstract of expenditures", showing the numbers and amounts of warrants issued
and the person to whom issued, the date redeemed, the interest paid, and the
several funds against which each of said warrants is drawn.
   F.   File Audit Claims Against The City: The city clerk shall file and audit
all claims against the city and shall submit the same to the council at the
next regular meeting or when ordered by the council so to do.
   G.   Issue Licenses: The city clerk shall issue all licenses, a duplicate of
which shall be kept on file, but no license shall be issued to any person
unless fees and charges fixed by ordinance shall have first been paid, for
which payment the city clerk shall issue a receipt in duplicate. The city clerk
shall endorse upon the receipt and duplicate receipt the number of the license
issued, the number of the application for license, and the duplicate of such
receipt so issued shall be kept on file with the duplicate license.
   H.   Keep Record Of Municipal Bonds: The city clerk shall keep a record of
outstanding bonds of the city, showing the number and amount of each, for what
and to whom said bonds were issued, and when any of said bonds are purchased or
paid or cancelled said record shall show the fact, and in his report at the
close of each fiscal year he shall describe particularly the bonds issued and
sold during the year, the terms of sale, itemize each and every expense
thereof.
   I.   Turn Money Over To City Treasurer: Within ten (10) days after the
filing of his monthly report as provided in this chapter, the city clerk shall
deposit with the city treasurer all funds collected by him during the preceding
month, less refunds of money paid on applications for licenses which are
disallowed by the city council.
   J.   Ex Officio Police Judge: The city clerk of the city, shall be ex
officio police judge of the city, and in such capacity shall have the same
jurisdiction, powers and duties as are now, by the operation of the statutes of
the state of Idaho, vested in police judges of cities of the second class.
(1961 Code)
1-11-5: CITY ATTORNEY, DUTIES:
The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the council. He shall commence,
prosecute and defend all suits or actions necessary on behalf of the city, or
that may be ordered by the council. When requested, he shall attend meetings of
the council, and give them his opinion upon any matters submitted to him. (1961
Code)
1-11-6: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, DUTIES:
The superintendent of public works shall have charge of the superintending of
all city work as follows:
   A.   Streets And Alleys: He shall supervise the grading, constructing,
maintaining and repairing of all streets and alleys of the city.
   B.   Sewers: He shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all
sewer lines in the city, except the installation of sewer projects which are
done under contract.
   C.   Equipment: He shall have charge of and supervise the repair and upkeep
of all city works' equipment.
   D.   Employment And Supervision: He shall have authority to employ and
discharge, with the consent of the mayor and the city council, such help as is
needed to carry on the work of the city, such help to be directly under his
supervision.
   E.   Other Duties: The superintendent of public works shall be responsible
for the accomplishment of such other work of the city which the mayor may from
time to time assign him.
   F.   Make Report: The superintendent of public works shall present to the
city council at its regular meeting each month a written report of the city
work accomplished the preceding month and also, as far as can be foreseen, city
work planned for the current month. (1961 Code)
1-11-7: CHIEF OF POLICE, DUTIES:
The chief of police, under the direction of the mayor, shall direct and control
the police of the city. He shall preserve the peace and good order of the city,
quell riots, arrest and bring all violators of the provisions of this code
before the police judge for trial, either with or without process, serve all
processes issued by the police judge to him directed, and enforce all orders
and judgments of said courts, and take such measures as shall secure the peace
and good order of all public meetings. The chief of police, in execution of his
duty, with or without warrant, in arresting any person accused or suspected of
crime or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful assembly, or in the
prevention of the violation of the provisions of this code, shall have the
power to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in the execution of
his duty. He shall inquire into and report to the police judge all violations
of the provisions of this code and criminal laws of this state, and cause all
ordinances passed by the council to be enforced. He shall take into custody
with or without process, any person found violating the provisions of this code
and bring such person before the police judge to be dealt with according to
law.
The chief of police shall, with the consent of the mayor, appoint such special
policemen as may be required, but no such special policemen shall be appointed
for a period longer than ten (10) days, without the consent of the council, and
the same shall not be reappointed at the expiration of the ten (10) days
without the consent of the council. All such appointments of special policemen
shall be reported to the council by the mayor at the next regular meeting after
such appointment. (1961 Code)
1-11-8: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT AND ASSISTANTS, DUTIES:
(Rep. by correspondence dated 6-15-2001)
1-11-9: CITY TREASURER, DUTIES:
   A.   Receive And Safely Keep Funds: It shall be the duty of the city
treasurer to receive and safely keep in designated depositories as required by
law, all monies or funds belonging to the city which may come into his hands;
to disburse the same upon an appropriation by ordinance or resolution of the
city council after audit and allowance by the council of claims therefor, and
upon warrant of the mayor, countersigned by the city clerk, or upon bank checks
signed by the mayor, clerk and treasurer. Securities belonging to the city,
incapable of deposit in a checking account, shall be kept by the city treasurer
in a safety deposit box in some banking institution designated by the city
council. All bonds or securities delivered to the city treasurer by any
designated depository of city funds as security for such funds shall be
deposited with the county auditor or other public official as may be provided
by law.
   B.   Keep Proper Records And Books: The city treasurer shall keep a suitable
book or books of a full and accurate account of all city money and funds
received by him, showing the date of receipt thereof, the person from whom
received and on what account and to what fund the same is credited with the
date of disbursement, the person to whom disbursed, on what account and against
what fund.
   C.   Deliver All Paid Vouchers, Warrants And Checks To Clerk: All warrants,
checks or orders paid and redeemed and all vouchers shall be delivered to the
city clerk immediately upon payment or redemption and such redeemed warrants
shall have written or stamped on the face thereof the word "Paid".
   D.   Issue Duplicate Receipts For Money Received: The city treasurer shall
execute and deliver to every city officer or other person paying money or funds
into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, the
amount thereof and upon what fund or account the same is received. The city
treasurer shall issue such receipt from blank books, which books shall contain
a duplicate of the receipt delivered to the person making payment, and such
duplicate shall be delivered to the city clerk.
   E.   City Warrants To Show Fund Drawn Upon And Amount Appropriated To Such
Fund: Each city warrant shall show the fund upon which the same is drawn and if
against any fund based upon an appropriation shall show the amount appropriated
to such fund and the amount expended therefrom after deducting the amount of
such warrant.
   F.   City Warrants; When Called: Outstanding warrants shall be called for
payment in their order whenever the city treasurer shall have on hand in the
fund upon which such warrants are drawn one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more, provided that if the aggregate of such warrants is less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), they may be called at any time that money is available to
pay the same.
   G.   Warrants; Order Of Payment; Registration: Every fund in the hands of
the city treasurer shall be paid out in the order in which the warrants are
presented for payment; provided, that in case that there are no funds in the
hands of said treasurer applicable to the payment of any warrant when presented
to the city treasurer shall be endorsed on the same "Not Paid For Want Of
Funds" and enter same in a book to be kept for such purpose known as the
"warrant register", and thereafter said warrants shall bear interest at the
rate of seven percent (7%) per annum until there are funds in the hands of the
city treasurer with which to pay the same.
   H.   Deliver Books And Papers To Successor: The city treasurer shall deliver
to his successor in office all books, money, papers, and other personal
property pertaining to his office.
   I.   Publish Quarterly Reports Of Receipts And Expenditures: It shall be the
duty of the city treasurer to cause to be published for at least one insertion
in some newspaper in the city, between the first and third Mondays of May,
August, November and February of each and every year a full statement of the
receipts and expenditures of the city, giving the source from whence received,
to what purpose applied and to whom paid.
   J.   Collect All Monies: The city treasurer shall receive and all officers
or other persons shall forthwith pay to the city treasurer, except as otherwise
provided by ordinance, all money due the city on any account whatsoever.
   K.   Make Monthly Report To City Council: The city treasurer shall at the
end of each and every month, and at other times when required by the mayor and
city council, render an account, under oath, showing the condition of the
treasury at the date of such account, including in said statement the balance
of money in the treasury and a detailed statement of the specified amount in
each designated depository and of the amount and class of security held to
guarantee each deposit. Such account shall also contain a statement of receipts
and disbursements and of all warrants redeemed and paid by him, which said
warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be filed with his said accounts
in the clerk's office. The mayor or any member of the city council shall have
free access to any and all books or papers in the office of the city treasurer
for the purpose of inspection or examination. (1961 Code)
1-11-10: CITY ENGINEER, DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to locate the lines and grades of all
streets, sidewalks, alleys, avenues and other public ways and to perform such
other services as may be required of him by statute, ordinance or the mayor and
council. (1961 Code)
1-11-11: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The several officers herein named shall give bonds to the city with two (2) or
more sufficient sureties in the penal sums as follows; provided, surety bonds
may be furnished at the expense of the city in lieu of personal bonds:
 
City clerk     $5,000.00
City treasurer 5,000.00
 
(1961 Code)
CHAPTER 12
UNIFORM SYSTEM OF SURVEY
SECTION:
1-12-1: Official Kellogg Coordinates And Meridian
1-12-2: Elevation Datum
1-12-3: Surveys Required To Conform
1-12-4: Surveys For Public Record To Be Filed With The Clerk
1-12-5: Duties Of Clerk And Engineer
1-12-1: OFFICIAL KELLOGG COORDINATES AND MERIDIAN:
All surveys within the city limits of the city of Kellogg hereafter made shall
be based upon the Kellogg survey control system which shall be based upon the
U.S. coast and geodetic survey monuments known as follows:
 
Station North            West             Idaho State Plane
            Latitude    Longitude  Coordinates
Stan    47 32'37.38497"  116 07'01.67971" 409,327.08 2,142,705.74
Wood    47 32'02.61002"  116 07'25.06414" 407,705.86 2,139,190.09
Green   47 32'02.94492"  116 06'42.19750" 410,647.40 2,139,210.10
 
From the stations established aforesaid, the following Kellogg coordinates
survey system has been evolved and is hereby officially adopted for the use in
all surveys.
   A.   Kellogg Coordinate System: A meridian to be officially known as the
"Kellogg meridian" shall be adopted to control the direction of all surveys in
the Kellogg survey control system. The bearing or direction between the U.S.
coast and geodetic survey triangulation stations shall be referred to in the
Kellogg system as follows:
 
    Stations         Direction
Green to Stan–North 254.049' West
Stan to Wood–South 2427.837' West
Wood to Green–North 819.060' East
 
   The direction of all lines of the Kellogg coordinate survey system shall be
based upon the above described "Kellogg meridian".
   B.   Coordinate Positions: The survey coordinate position of any point
within the city shall be referred to a system of survey coordinates. The survey
coordinates position of the Kellogg survey control system shall be based upon
coordinates assigned to and fixed upon the above mentioned coast and geodetic
triangulation stations as follows: Green, North 8,611.37; East 6,613.25; Wood,
North 8,576.34; East 3,671,53; Stan, North 12,100.61; East 5,274.96, All city
of Kellogg coordinates are based upon a mean elevation of two thousand three
hundred feet (2,300') referred to "North American Datum, 1947, revised". All
coast and geodetic survey coordinates and Idaho state plane coordinates are
based at elevation zero referred to said datum. (Ord. 198, 8-11-1960)
1-12-2: ELEVATION DATUM:
In surveys in which elevation datum is used or determined, said elevation datum
shall be based upon "North American Datum, 1947, revised", as determined from
the nearest city of Kellogg survey monument, the elevation of which may be
obtained from the engineer or the clerk of the city of Kellogg. (Ord. 198, 8-
11-1960)
1-12-3: SURVEYS REQUIRED TO CONFORM:
Hereafter all surveys made by any person which are to become a matter of public
record, all resurveys or retracements of real property which are to be
monumented, all utility surveys, all road and highway surveys, all cemetery
surveys, and any surveys which effect the general public in any way within the
city limits of the city of Kellogg shall be tied in at least one point with the
Kellogg survey system. Such tie must be made to the nearest city of Kellogg
survey monument. The survey position of such monuments shall be obtainable from
the records of the city, either from the engineer or the clerk. Further the
direction of at least one line of any such survey shall be referred to the
official "Kellogg meridian". (Ord. 198, 8-11-1960)
1-12-4: SURVEYS FOR PUBLIC RECORD TO BE FILED WITH THE CLERK:
Hereafter all surveys made for the purpose of public record within the limits
of the city of Kellogg shall be described and such description shall be filed
with the clerk and if a plat is prepared in connection with such survey, an
exact copy of such plat shall be filed with the clerk. (Ord. 198, 8-11-1960)
1-12-5: DUTIES OF CLERK AND ENGINEER:
It shall be the duties of the clerk upon the filing of any description or plat
filed under the terms of this chapter to notify the engineer, if there be one,
or the superintendent of public works that such filing has been made and upon
such notice by the clerk it shall be the duty of the engineer or superintendent
of public works, as the case may be, to check said description or plat for
compliance with this chapter and if there is no compliance, the engineer or
superintendent of public works shall notify the person filing said description
or plat of the violation by written notice and if such discrepancies are not
corrected by the filing party within a reasonable time after such notice, it
shall be the duty of the engineer or the superintendent of public works to file
a complaint against the filing party for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 198,
8-11-1960)
CHAPTER 13
OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Depositories Designated
1-13-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
American West Bank, Panhandle State Bank, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo, are
hereby designated as the official depositories for funds of the city. The
treasurer is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies belonging to
or in the care of the treasurer in the above named depositories; provided,
however, that when so authorized by the mayor and council, city funds may, by
the treasurer, be invested in securities authorized by law. (Ord. 548, 10-13-
2010)
CHAPTER 14
AREA OF CITY IMPACT  1
(Rep. by Ord. 598, 7-11-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-11-8 of this Code.
CHAPTER 15
MUNICIPAL CITATIONS
SECTION:
1-15-1: Adoption
1-15-2: Authority
1-15-3: Contents, Description
1-15-4: Fines, Payment, Payment Period And Deposit Of Fees
1-15-5: Contesting Charges
1-15-6: Means Of Service
1-15-7: Effect Upon Other Ordinances
1-15-1: ADOPTION:
The city of Kellogg hereby adopts and authorizes the use of municipal citations
as a means of enforcing ordinances of the city of Kellogg. Municipal citations
may be issued for alleged violations of ordinances of the city of Kellogg.
(Ord. 449, 1-12-2000)
1-15-2: AUTHORITY:
Municipal citations may be issued charging violations of the city of Kellogg
ordinances by any police officer, animal control officer, or by other persons
authorized by the mayor to enforce such ordinances, as prescribed by Idaho
Code. (Ord. 449, 1-12-2000)
1-15-3: CONTENTS, DESCRIPTION:
Each municipal citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged
violator, a description of the alleged violation(s) of city of Kellogg
ordinance(s), the date, time and location of the alleged violation(s), and the
fee(s) for said violation(s). The municipal citation form, or accompanying
instruction document, shall also contain a statement advising the alleged
violator that payment of the indicated fee(s) within the time given will
preclude further criminal charges regarding the specific violation(s) charged
in the body of the citation. The alleged violator must also be advised that
failure to remedy the violation may result in further fines assessed and/or
criminal proceedings. The signature of the issuing person must be included in
the municipal citation for it to be considered valid. (Ord. 449, 1-12-2000)
1-15-4: FINES, PAYMENT, PAYMENT PERIOD AND DEPOSIT OF FEES:
The mayor and city council will develop and set by resolution or ordinance a
fine structure for individual violations of appropriate ordinances of the city
of Kellogg. This structure may be updated at any time as deemed necessary by
the city council. Fines may be incremental and increase for additional
violations within a one year period.
Municipal fines shall be paid to the city clerk, and an official record kept by
the city clerk. No receipt of payment is valid without the signature of the
city clerk or designee. No partial payments will be accepted.
The amount of time given for a violation of city of Kellogg ordinances to pay
the fee indicated within an issued municipal citation shall be ten (10) days
from the date of issuance. In extreme circumstances, the chief of police may
extend the payment period to no more than thirty (30) days from the date of
issuance. In the event an extension of time is given to pay fees, a new
municipal citation will be issued and the original retained and filed at the
Kellogg police department. The new citation shall contain the same information
as the original retained and filed at the Kellogg police department, with the
exception of the deadline for payment for fees assessed.
Fees collected for payment of municipal citations shall be treated the same as
other fines or fees collected or received by the city of Kellogg. (Ord. 449, 1-
12-2000)
1-15-5: CONTESTING CHARGES:
Issuance of a municipal citation is discretionary with the issuing officer. The
issuing officer may, in his discretion, file criminal charges by issuing an
Idaho uniform citation or filing a criminal complaint. Anyone charged by
municipal citation may contest it by notifying the person issuing the municipal
citation. The issuing officer may then file criminal misdemeanor or infraction
charges as deemed appropriate. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to create or
grant any right to receive a municipal citation prior to any criminal or
infraction charges being filed. (Ord. 449, 1-12-2000)
1-15-6: MEANS OF SERVICE:
A municipal citation may be personally served by the issuing person upon the
alleged violator or it may be served by regular mail. If the municipal citation
is served by mail, the final date for payment of fees shall be fifteen (15)
days from the date of mailing. (Ord. 449, 1-12-2000)
1-15-7: EFFECT UPON OTHER ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this chapter shall have no effect upon the prescribed
abatement procedures of any other Kellogg city ordinance or resolution. (Ord.
449, 1-12-2000)
CHAPTER 16
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-16-1: Creation Of Right
1-16-2: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-16-3: Form Of Petition
1-16-4: Time For Filing Referendum Petitions
1-16-5: Printing Of Petition And Sheets For Signatures; Time Limits For
Perfecting Petition
1-16-6: Verification On Sheets For Signatures
1-16-7: Examination And Certification Of Signatures
1-16-8: Sufficiency Of Petition; Notification; Effect Of Council Action;
Election
1-16-9: Form Of Ballot
1-16-10: Conduct Of Election
1-16-11: Canvass Of Returns
1-16-12: Prohibited Acts; Penalties
1-16-13: Application Campaign Expenditures Reporting Law
1-16-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of the city of Kellogg shall have the right to enact ordinances
through the initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum
process, according to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 546, 8-
11-2010)
1-16-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum,
there shall be attached or appended to the petition the signatures of the legal
voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of electors who cast votes at the last general election in the city. (Ord. 546,
8-11-2010)
1-16-3: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
      WARNING
   It is a felony for anyone to sign any initiative or referendum petition with
any name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for
the measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a qualified elector.
   Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of Kellogg, Idaho:
   "We, the undersigned citizens and qualified electors of the City of Kellogg,
respectfully demand that the following proposed ordinance, to-wit:
   (setting out full text of measure proposed)
   shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the City of Kellogg, for
their approval or rejection at an election, to be held on the            day of
              , AD.,          in accordance with Idaho Code Section 50-501(3),
and each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I am a
qualified elector of the City of Kellogg; my residence and post office are
correctly written after my name.
 
SIGNATURE: PRINTED NAME: RESIDENTIAL STREET AND POST OFFICE BOX AND CITY: DATE:
                         NUMBER:
 
   (Here follow twenty numbered lines for signatures)
The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the city council shall
be in substantially the same form with appropriate title and changes, setting
out in full the text of the ordinance to be referred to the people for their
approval or rejection. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-4: TIME FOR FILING REFERENDUM PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be
filed with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days following the final
adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-5: PRINTING OF PETITION AND SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES; TIME LIMITS FOR
PERFECTING PETITION:
   A.   Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any petition for
initiative or referendum, the person or persons, organization or organizations,
under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, shall send or deliver
to the city clerk a copy of such prospective petition duly signed by at least
twenty (20) electors eligible to sign such petition. The clerk shall
immediately examine the petition and specify the form and kind and size of
paper on which the petition shall be printed and circulated for further
signatures. All petitions and sheets for signatures shall be printed on a good
quality bond or ledger paper of standardized size, with a margin of one and
three-fourths inches (1 3/4") at the top for binding and the sheets for
signatures shall be numbered lines thereon from one to twenty (20) for
signatures. The petition shall be prepared in sections, with each section
numbered consecutively. Each section shall have attached to it not more than
ten (10) sheets for signatures.
   B.   The city clerk shall indicate in writing on the petition that the clerk
has approved it as to form, and the date of such approval. Upon approval as to
form, the clerk shall inform the person or persons, organization or
organizations under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, in
writing, that the petition must be perfected with the required number of
certified signatures within seventy five (75) days following the date of
approval as to form. Signatures on the prospective petition shall not be
counted toward the required number of certified signatures. Any petition that
has not been perfected with the required number of certified signatures within
the seventy five (75) days allowed shall be declared null and void ab initio in
its entirety. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
   A.   Any person who circulates any petition for an initiative or referendum
shall be a resident of the state of Idaho and at least eighteen (18) years of
age. Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures
shall be verified on the face of such sheet in substantially the following form
by the person who circulated the sheet of the petition, by his or her affidavit
thereon, as a part thereof:
   STATE OF IDAHO       )
               ) ss
   County of Shoshone    )
 
   I,                                    , swear under penalty of perjury, that
I am a resident of the State of Idaho and at least eighteen years of age; and
that every person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or
her name thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her
name, post-office address and residence, and dated his or her signature
correctly, and that the person was eligible to sign this petition.
   Signature                    
   Residence & Post Office Address                    
   SUBSCRIBED and SWORN TO before me this               day of               ,
     ,
   (Notary Seal)
 
 
   Notary Public                    
   Residing at                    
 
(Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
   A.   All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented on the
same day to the city clerk, who shall make a cursory examination of them to
determine whether the petitions apparently contain the necessary number of
signatures.
      1.   If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveal:
         a.   Erasures on any signature;
         b.   Illegible or undecipherable signatures;
         c.   Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
         d.   Duplicate signatures; and/or
         e.   Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have their
names removed from the petition; the city clerk shall draw through and initial
such signatures with ink.
   B.   All petitions presented to the city clerk found to apparently contain
the necessary number of signatures, after the cursory examination provided for
in subsection A of this section, shall be transmitted to the county clerk who,
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the petitions, shall
examine the petitions to verify whether the petition signers are qualified
electors and verify that the person who circulated each petition is a resident
of the state of Idaho and at least eighteen (18) years of age. All petitions
returned to the city clerk shall become public records of the city of Kellogg,
not to be returned. The county clerk shall certify each signature found to
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter by attaching a certificate
to the signature sheets stating the number of signatures on the petition that
are eligible electors. The city clerk shall total the number of certified
signatures, and if found to total the number of signatures required by section
1-16-2 of this chapter, shall proceed as provided in section
1-16-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; EFFECT OF COUNCIL ACTION;
ELECTION:
   A.   In the event that a petition filed with a city clerk does not contain
the required number of certified signatures, the city clerk shall inform the
person or organization under whose authority the petition was circulated that
the petition is defective for lack of certified signatures.
   B.   In the event that a petition filed with the city clerk is found by the
city clerk to contain the required number of certified signatures, the city
clerk shall promptly, by certified mail, inform the petitioners, and shall also
notify the city council at its next meeting that the initiative or referendum
petition is in proper form, and an election shall be ordered by the city to be
conducted citywide. A special election for initiative or referendum shall be
provided at the next available date for election as set by Idaho Code section
34-106, as amended, for which there is adequate time for publication of
election notice pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-436, as amended.
      1.   If the petition is for a referendum, the city council shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of certification of the petition to repeal the
ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the council repeals the
ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void and the
election canceled.
      2.   If the petition is an initiative petition, the city council shall
have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance substantially as proposed by the
petition. In the event the council passes such an ordinance, the initiative
petition shall be null and void and the election canceled. (Ord. 546, 8-11-
2010)
1-16-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
The city council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
   A.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted on
does not exceed one hundred (100) words in length, it may be set out in full on
the election ballot; or
   B.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted
upon exceeds one hundred (100) words in length, and the council votes not to
have it printed at length on the election ballot, it shall, with the assistance
of the city attorney, prepare a short title and description of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance which shall clearly and impartially state its purpose and
effect, which short title and description shall be printed on the election
ballot. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as
near as practicable, in like manner as general elections, except as otherwise
provided. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-11: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The mayor and city council shall meet within six (6) days after the election to
canvass the votes cast at such election, pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-467,
and the city clerk shall immediately announce the results. Any initiative
measure approved by a majority of the votes cast shall be in full force and
effect from the date of such announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject
of a referendum receiving less than a majority of the votes cast shall be
repealed, effective on the date of such announcement. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-12: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTIES:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   A.   Signs any name other than his own to any initiative or referendum
petition;
   B.   Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or
referendum petition;
   C.   Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or referendum petition if he
is not a registered city elector;
   D.   Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum
petition to which is attached, appended or subscribed any signature which the
person so filing such petition knows to be false or fraudulent, or not the
genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such petition, or whose name
is attached, appended or subscribed thereto;
   E.   Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum
petition, knowing the same to contain false, forged or fictitious names;
   F.   Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative or referendum
petition or the signatures appended thereto;
   G.   Offers proposals or threats for any pecuniary reward or consideration:
      1.   To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any
initiative or referendum petition or any part thereof or any signatures
thereon,
      2.   To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning promoting or
circulating any initiative or referendum petition,
      3.   To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use
any recall petition or any power of promotion or opposition in any manner or
form for extortion, blackmail, or secret or private intimidation of any person
or business interest. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
1-16-13: APPLICATION CAMPAIGN EXPENDITURES REPORTING LAW:
The provisions of Idaho Code sections 67-6601 through 67-6616 and 67-6623
through 67-6630, as amended, insofar as they relate to the reporting of
campaign contributions, are hereby made applicable to all elections for any
citywide measure, except that the city clerk shall stand in place of the
secretary of state and the city attorney shall stand in place of the attorney
general. (Ord. 546, 8-11-2010)
CHAPTER 17
HOTEL-MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
1-17-1: Definitions
1-17-2: Imposition And Rate Of Hotel-Motel Room Occupancy Tax
1-17-3: Duration Of Taxes
1-17-4: Purposes For Which The Revenues Shall Be Used
1-17-5: Property Tax Relief Fund
1-17-6: Administration And Collection
1-17-7: Permit Required, Application And Issuance
1-17-8: Method For Payment And Reporting
1-17-9: Audits, Deficiencies, Determinations
1-17-10: Credits And Refunds, Limitations
1-17-11: Appeal
1-17-12: Period Of Limitation Upon Assessment And Collection
1-17-13: Penalties
1-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
HOTEL-MOTEL: Any business including, but not limited to, hotels, motels,
condominiums, tourist homes, bed and breakfast establishments and any other
business which in the regular course of business rents or leases for occupancy
temporary lodging to individuals with or without meals, except where residence
is maintained continuously under terms of a lease or similar agreement for a
period in excess of thirty (30) days.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit to own or operate a hotel-motel.
This definition shall include the officers, employees and agents of the owner
or operator.
ROOM OCCUPANCY CHARGE: Means and includes the total amount charged for the
rental use or temporary occupancy of a room or living unit, valued in money,
whether paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction. (Ord. 574, 5-19-
2015)
1-17-2: IMPOSITION AND RATE OF HOTEL-MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX:
   A.   A hotel-motel room occupancy charge tax is hereby imposed at the rate
of five and one-half percent (5.5%) on room occupancy charge (30 days or less)
for each hotel- motel room rented or leased within the city limits. Said room
occupancy tax shall apply to, be computed on and collected on, all room
occupancy charge, including all credit, installment, conditional or similar
rental or lease fees, at the time the fee for rental is charged. Said room
occupancy tax shall be collected by the owner of said property or the owner's
authorized agent from the renter or lessee.
   B.   All monies collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be held
in trust for the city of Kellogg and for payment thereof to the city treasurer
in the manner and at the times in this chapter provided. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015;
amd. Ord. 623, 3-8-2023)
1-17-3: DURATION OF TAXES:
The local option non-property tax authorized and collected under this chapter
is hereby imposed for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date
hereof. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord. 623, 3-8-2023)
1-17-4: PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE REVENUES SHALL BE USED:
The nonproperty tax revenue derived from and collected under this chapter shall
be used for the following purposes:
   A.   Maintenance of city street system and related projects;
   B.   Matching grant funds;
   C.   Any excess revenues received will be placed in a designated property
tax relief fund;
   D.   Actual cost of collecting and administering the tax (to be retained by
the city);
   E.   City parks; and
   F.   Maintenance of public rights-of-way. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015; amd. Ord.
623, 3-8-2023)
1-17-5: PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
There is hereby created in the office of the city treasurer a fund to be
designated as the "municipal property tax relief fund". All monies collected
under this chapter, and not otherwise budgeted by the city council, shall be
placed by the city treasurer into the municipal property tax relief fund. All
monies collected and placed into said fund shall be used to replace city
property taxes in the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-6: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The city treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to administer,
regulate and collect payment of all nonproperty taxes adopted and imposed by
this chapter. Said treasurer shall have all of the powers set forth in this
chapter together with those additional powers necessary and proper to carry out
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The city treasurer is authorized to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules
and regulations relating to its administration and enforcement. The city
treasurer may employ qualified auditors for examination of taxpayers' books and
records, and may delegate the authority to conduct hearings, or perform other
duties imposed by this chapter.
   C.   Every permittee (hereinafter defined) subject to this chapter shall
keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the city
treasurer may require. Every such permittee who files tax payments required
under this chapter shall keep all such records for not less than four (4) years
after making such payment unless the city treasurer in writing authorizes their
destruction.
   D.   The city treasurer, or any person authorized in writing by the
treasurer, may examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any
permittee, and may investigate the character of the business of the permittee
in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by
the permittee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Any
permittee whose pertinent records are kept outside of the city must bring the
records to the city for examination by the city treasurer upon request of the
latter, or by agreement with the city treasurer permit an auditor designated by
the city treasurer to visit the place where the records are kept, and there
audit such records. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-7: PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   Each owner desiring to engage in or conduct the business of renting a
hotel-motel room within the city limits shall make application to the city
clerk, in such form and manner as provided herein, for a municipal nonproperty
tax permit. A separate application must be filed for each separate place of
business.
   B.   The application shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city clerk
and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to
transact business, the location of the business, and such other information as
the city clerk may require. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
business or an authorized representative of the owner.
   C.   Upon filing an application meeting the requirements set out above, the
city clerk will issue a nonassignable permit, with a tax number affixed
thereto, to the person and place of business stated in the application (the
"permittee"). The permit shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the
location for which it was issued. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-8: METHOD FOR PAYMENT AND REPORTING:
   A.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the total dollar
value of hotel-motel room charges and paid for each calendar month, due and
payable to the city treasurer on or before the twentieth day of the succeeding
month. Each permittee shall file a municipal nonproperty tax return and a copy
of their Idaho state sales tax return for the month at the same time said taxes
are paid, unless said person has provided to the city treasurer written
verification that the Idaho state tax commission has authorized reporting state
taxes on other than a quarterly basis. In that event, the city treasurer may
approve reporting of the state tax returns to the city treasurer over some
other period.
   B.   The first payment of any new taxes under this chapter shall be due and
payable on November 20, 2015, for the period beginning October 1, 2015 and
ending October 31, 2015. Thereafter all payments shall be made monthly.
   C.   Any permittee who is required to collect and pay over to the city any
tax imposed by this chapter and fails or refuses to pay the same when due in
accordance with this chapter, shall be liable for a penalty on the tax not
paid. Said penalty shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the tax not paid, or
a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00) (whichever is greater). The city treasurer
shall assess and collect said fee at the time any delinquent tax payment is
tendered. The permittee may appeal this determination pursuant to section
1-17-11 of this chapter. If no appeal is timely made as herein provided, said
penalty determination shall be final.
   D.   A municipal nonproperty tax return shall be filed each and every month
by every owner engaging in the hotel-motel rental or lease regardless of
whether or not any tax is due. Returns shall be signed by the person required
to file the return or by a duly authorized agent.
   E.   A valid sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Idaho state tax
commission upon filing a copy thereof with the city clerk shall have the same
effect to exempt the sale from the taxes imposed hereunder as in the Idaho
sales tax act.
   F.   As soon as practical after the monthly municipal nonproperty tax return
and payment is filed, the city treasurer shall examine the same for the purpose
of ascertaining the correctness of any payment or lack thereof. (Ord. 574, 5-
19-2015; amd. Ord. 623, 3-8-2023)
1-17-9: AUDITS, DEFICIENCIES, DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   The city treasurer may order an audit of any permittee under this
chapter for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any
return or payment. In conducting that audit, the city treasurer, or duly
authorized deputy, is authorized: 1) to examine the books, papers, records or
other data which may be relevant or material to the inquiry; 2) to summon the
permittee liable for the tax or any officer, agent or employee of such
permittee, or any person having possession, custody or care of books of
accounting containing entries relating to the business liable for the tax, to
appear before the city treasurer, or deputy, at a time and place named in its
summons to produce such books, papers, records or other data and/or give such
testimony under oath as may be relevant or material to such inquiry.
   B.   If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other
way, the city treasurer may compute and determine the amount of tax due or
overpaid for the period or multiple periods upon the basis of facts obtained.
   C.   The city treasurer shall give written notice of its determination and
the amount of its deficiency, including interest at the judgment rate
established by the state treasurer from the date due, to the permittee from
whom such deficiency amount is due. Such notice may be given personally or
mailed to the permittee at the address provided on the application. Mailed
notice shall be presumed to be received three (3) business days after the
notice is mailed. The deficiency and interest shall be due and payable upon
receipt of notice from the city treasurer. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-10: CREDITS AND REFUNDS, LIMITATIONS:
   A.   If the city treasurer determines that any amount due under this chapter
has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, after documenting the supporting facts, the city treasurer is
authorized to credit the amount of any excess payments toward any nonproperty
tax amount due and payable by the permittee and to refund to the permittee any
remaining balance.
   B.   No such credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one year from
the time the payment was made unless before the expiration of such period a
claim therefor is filed by the permittee. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-11: APPEAL:
   A.   Any permittee against whom a deficiency or penalty determination is
made under this chapter or a claim of refund has been denied may appeal the
determination by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30)
days after service of the notice. If the appeal is not filed within the thirty
(30) day period, the determination/denial becomes final at the expiration of
that period. If the appeal is timely filed, it shall be set for hearing at the
next available city council meeting. If the city council decision is
unsatisfactory to the appellant, the taxpayer may file a complaint with the
district court for review of the city treasurer's determination. There shall be
no right of appeal to the city council, nor review by the district court,
unless the appeal was timely filed.
   B.   The collection of the deficiency and the assessment of interest shall
be stayed during the pendency of a timely filed appeal. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-12: PERIOD OF LIMITATION UPON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within
three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax asserted to be due
was or should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a
deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed
time, such tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after
assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be
suspended during the stay pending the appeal, and for thirty (30) days
thereafter.
   B.   In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax,
or of a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in
court for collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time
within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts
constituting fraud. (Ord. 574, 5-19-2015)
1-17-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six (6) months in jail and/or one
thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Furthermore, each month in which a
person fails to report, or intentionally fails to accurately compute, or
intentionally fails to accurately disclose the total amount of sales or rentals
or the amount of tax to be paid as imposed under this chapter, shall be
considered a separate offense.
   B.   The burden of proving that rental of hotel-motel room is not a room
occupancy charge under this chapter is upon the permittee. (Ord. 574, 5-19-
2015)
CHAPTER 18
ESTABLISHING EMERGENCY POWERS
SECTION:
1-18-1: Emergency Powers
1-18-2: Legal Authority
1-18-3: Purpose And Intent
1-18-4: Scope
1-18-5: Definitions
1-18-6: Public Health Emergency Orders
1-18-7: Process For Enacting Public Health Emergency Orders
1-18-8: Exclusions
1-18-9: Force Majeure
1-18-10: Penalty
1-18-1: EMERGENCY POWERS:
The City Council shall have such jurisdiction over all places within the
corporate limits of the City, for the enforcement of any health or quarantine
ordinance and regulation thereof, including ordinances and all regulations
necessary to preserve the public health; to prevent the introduction of
contagious diseases into the City; and enforce quarantine regulations and laws
for that purpose. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020; amd. Ord. 617, 4-14-2021)
1-18-2: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-304 and 50-606 authorize the city of Kellogg, state of
Idaho ("City") to pass ordinances granting certain powers to the City Council
related to public health emergencies. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
1-18-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City finds that the preservation of public health, safety, and welfare may
require immediate action by the City in response to emergency situations.
Therefore, the City hereby authorizes the City Council certain powers for
immediate response to foreseeable, imminent, or present public health
emergencies. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
1-18-4: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the procedures for activating the emergency powers of
the Mayor and City Council during a public health emergency. (Ord. 611, 7-29-
2020)
1-18-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein, shall
have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply
to the feminine, masculine, and neuter genders.
 
                               The separation of infected persons, or of
                               persons suspected to be infected, from other
ISOLATION:                     persons to such places, under such conditions,
                               and for such time as will prevent transmission
                               of the infectious agent.
                               The foreseeable, imminent, or present threat of
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY:       any pathogen, agent, vector, or environmental
                               condition, including hazardous materials, which
                               does or may cause illness or injury to humans.
                               An advisory, social distancing, isolation, or
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDER: quarantine order enacted by the Mayor and City
                               Council.
                               Actions taken to maintain distance from other
SOCIAL DISTANCING:             people, including avoiding or canceling
                               congregate settings and mass gatherings.
                               The restriction placed on the entrance to and
QUARANTINE:                    exit from the place of premises where an
                               infectious agent or hazardous material exists.
                               (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
 
1-18-6: PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
The Mayor and City Council, being duly authorized by Idaho Code sections 50-304
and 50-606, may issue the following orders, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor
and City Council following consultation with or review of information issued by
local, regional, state, or national public health authorities.
   A.   Advisory Order: Where a public health emergency is foreseeable or
imminent, the Mayor and City Council may enact an advisory order, which order
may provide information and recommended guidelines for preventing, detecting,
and/or mitigating the onset or spread of a public health hazard.
   B.   Social Distancing Order: Where a public health emergency is imminent,
the Mayor and City Council may enact a social distancing order, which order may
establish any or all of the following:
      1.   Appropriate restrictions regarding the operation or occurrence of
planned or foreseeable commercial, recreational, or expressive gatherings or
events.
      2.   Restrictions on travel through, or visitation within, the community.
      3.   Postponement or cancellation of public meetings and hearings.
      4.   A limit on the number of persons who may gather in one location and
may apply to indoor or outdoor venues.
      5.   Suspension of businesses or visitor lodging accommodations.
      6.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      7.   A social distancing order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. A social distancing order shall apply within
Kellogg city limits.
   C.   Isolation Order: Where a public health emergency is present, and poses
a credible threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor and City Council may
enact an isolation order, which order may establish any or all of the
following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the isolation order:
         a.   An isolation order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. An isolation order shall be effective only
when and for so long as the public health emergency is present, and when no
less restrictive alternative exists. Any person shall be entitled to appeal an
isolation order or to request a modification of any provision of such order by
filing a written appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal shall be heard by City
Council at their next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term
of the isolation order, the Police Chief or designee shall review such appeal
and issue a written decision. The Police Chief's decision shall be final.
   D.   Quarantine Order: Where a health emergency is present and poses a
credible threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor and City Council may
enact a quarantine order, which order may establish any or all of the
following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical or other areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the quarantine.
      7.   A quarantine order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. A quarantine order shall be effective only
when and for so long as the public health emergency is present, and when no
less restrictive alternative exists. Any person shall be entitled to appeal a
quarantine order, or to request a modification of any provision of such order
by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal shall be heard by
City Council at their next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the
term of the quarantine order, the Police Chief or designee shall review such
appeal and issue a written decision. The Police Chief's decision shall be
final. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020; amd. Ord. 617, 4-14-2021)
1-18-7: PROCESS FOR ENACTING PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
   A.   Approval by City Council: At a duly noticed public meeting, the
proposed Public Health Emergency Order shall be presented. At the discretion of
the City Council, public input may be taken at such meeting in such form as may
be directed by the Mayor or Council President, but a public hearing shall not
be required. Following approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall
prepare a written order and publish it pursuant to this chapter. Except as may
be specifically stated in the Public Health Emergency Order, such order shall
be effective upon posting at Kellogg City Hall.
   B.   Publication of Public Health Emergency Order: As soon as possible and
prudent under the circumstances, the City Clerk shall cause a Public Health
Emergency Order to be published by:
      1.   Posting the order in a prominent place at Kellogg City Hall;
      2.   Posting the order on the City's website;
      3.   E-mailing the order to all persons subscribed to City e-mail
notification services;
      4.   Posting the order to all City social media accounts;
      5.   Providing the order to local media, television, and radio broadcast
outlets; and
      6.   Notifying other government agencies, including Joint School District
#391, Shoshone County Fire Protection District #2, Shoshone County, Central
Shoshone County Water District, and South Fork Coeur d'Alene Sewer District;
and
         a.   Such other means of notice as the City Council may determine is
in the best interests of the City.
         b.   Except as may be specifically stated in the Public Health
Emergency Order, such order shall be effective upon posting at Kellogg City
Hall.
   C.   Term of Order: Every public health emergency order shall include an
effective date and a termination date that shall be no more than thirty (30)
days from the effective date, which may be extended upon approval of the City
Council. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
1-18-8: EXCLUSIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by a Public Health Emergency Order
duly enacted by the Mayor and City Council, the following activities shall be
exempt from the scope of such order:
   A.   Any and all expressive and associative activity that is protected by
the United States and Idaho Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly,
and/or religious activity. Provided, this exclusion shall not prohibit
reasonable restrictions on the time, place, or manner for exercising these
fundamental rights as permitted by law.
   B.   Educational institutions, which shall follow the duly adopted policies
of their respective governing bodies.
   C.   Activities necessary to operate critical infrastructure and utilities.
   D.   Activities necessary to operate and use medical facilities and
services.
   E.   Activities necessary to buy, sell, or otherwise deliver food, fuel, and
necessities. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
1-18-9: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the context of this ordinance, a public health emergency is a force majeure.
No person shall be entitled to recover from the City of Kellogg any costs
incurred, or profits lost, as may be alleged to be attributed to the enactment
of a Public Health Emergency Order. (Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
1-18-10: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful to violate any provision or directive of a duly enacted
social distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order while such order
is in effect. The violation of any provision or directive of a social
distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 611, 7-29-2020)
TITLE 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation
2-1-2: Membership And Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Vacancies
2-1-4: Organization
2-1-5: Meetings
2-1-6: Duties
2-1-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created and established, a commission to be known as "Kellogg
traffic safety commission". (Ord. 286, 7-9-1975)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
The traffic safety commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed
by the mayor, with consent and approval of the council. Members shall be
selected so that there shall always remain in the commission: one school
district 391 transportation director, one member of the Kellogg city council,
one Kellogg superintendent of public works, one Kellogg chief of police, one
Kellogg planning and zoning administrator, one Kellogg city clerk, one Kellogg
fire official, two (2) Kellogg citizens.
Members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and the council or upon
resignation. Letters of resignation shall be submitted to the chairman of the
commission who will forward the letter to the mayor for action. (Ord. 436, 7-
15-1998)
2-1-3: VACANCIES:
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the consent of the
council. (Ord. 286, 7-9-1975)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall elect its own chairman and secretary, and create and fill
such other offices as it may determine necessary, and adopt such rules as it
shall deem necessary to carry out its purposes. (Ord. 286, 7-9-1975)
2-1-5: MEETINGS:
The commission shall hold four (4) meetings each year with additional meetings
scheduled as necessary. A majority of the appointive members of the commission
shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting. All meetings shall be
open to the public. A written record of its meetings, resolutions, findings,
and determinations shall be kept, which shall be a public record.
The commission may require the attendance at any meeting of such other city
officials as it may deem necessary. (Ord. 536, 2-20-2008)
2-1-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to review all complaints or changes
relating to traffic and pedestrian safety within the city and to make
recommendations for projects designed to increase safety in pedestrian, school
traffic, and general safety within the entire city. All recommendations,
findings, and determinations shall be forwarded to the mayor and council for
final action and approval. (Ord. 436, 7-15-1998)
CHAPTER 2
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Tax Levy
2-2-2: Library Board Created
2-2-3: Organization And Powers Of Trustees
2-2-4: Library To Be Free
2-2-5: Reports Of Trustees
2-2-6: Donations To Library
2-2-7: Separate Fund
2-2-1: TAX LEVY:
In order to establish and maintain a City library and reading room as
authorized by section 33-2601, Idaho Code, as amended, there is hereby ordered
a tax to be levied not exceeding three (3) mills on the dollar of taxable
property of the City, to constitute a Library Fund. (1961 Code)
2-2-2: LIBRARY BOARD CREATED:
For the government of such library and reading room there shall be a board of
five (5) Trustees appointed by the City Council from among the citizens hereof
at large. Such Trustees shall hold their office for five (5) years from the
date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed, but upon their
first appointment they shall divide themselves at their first meeting, by lot,
into five (5) classes: One member shall form the first class and shall serve
for one year from the date of appointment; one member shall form the second
class and shall serve for two (2) years from the date of appointment; one
member shall form the third class and shall serve for three (3) years from the
date of appointment; one member shall form the fourth class and shall serve for
four (4) years from the date of appointment; and one member shall form the
fifth class and shall serve for five (5) years from the date of appointment.
All vacancies shall be reported to the Council within five (5) days by the
Trustees and shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as appointments
are originally made. Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for
the residue of the term only. No compensation shall be paid or allowed to any
Trustee in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 594, 3-14-2018)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION AND POWERS OF TRUSTEES:
The said Trustees shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and organize
by the election of one of their number President, and by the election of such
other officers as they may deem necessary. They shall make and adopt such
bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and for the government of
the library and reading room as may be expedient. They shall have the exclusive
control of the expenditure of all monies collected for the Library Fund, and
the supervision, care, and custody of the room or buildings constructed, leased
or set apart for that purpose; and such money shall be drawn from the Treasury
by the proper officers, upon properly authenticated vouchers of the Board of
Trustees, without otherwise being audited.
They may, with the approval of the Council, lease and occupy, or purchase or
erect on purchased ground, an appropriate building; provided, however, that not
more than one- half (1/2) of the income in any one year can be set apart in
said year for such purchase of building. They may appoint a librarian and
assistants and prescribe rules for their conduct. (1961 Code)
2-2-4: LIBRARY TO BE FREE:
The City library and reading room shall be forever free for the use of the
inhabitants of the City, always subject to such reasonable rules and
regulations as the Library Board may find necessary to adopt and publish in
order to render the use of the library and reading room of the greatest benefit
to the greatest number, and they may exclude and cut off from the use of said
library and reading room any and all persons who shall wilfully violate such
rules. (1961 Code)
2-2-5: REPORTS OF TRUSTEES:
The said Board of Trustees shall annually and no later than September 1 of each
year, file with the State Library Board, in the Office of the State Librarian,
a report of the operations of the library for the fiscal year just ended,
stating the condition of their trust, the various sums of money received from
the Library Fund and from all sources, and how much has been expended, the
number of books and periodicals on hand, the number added by purchase, gift, or
otherwise during the year, the number lost or missing, the number of books
loaned out, and the general character of such books, with such other
statistics, information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest,
and the State Library Board may require. (1961 Code)
2-2-6: DONATIONS TO LIBRARY:
All persons desirous of making donations of money, personal property, or real
estate for the benefit of the City library, shall have the right to vest the
title to the same in the Board of Trustees created under this chapter, to be
held and controlled by said board, when accepted according to the terms of the
deed, devise or bequest of such property, and as to such property the said
board shall be held and considered to be the special Trustees. (1961 Code)
2-2-7: SEPARATE FUND:
The City Treasurer shall keep all monies collected for the Library Fund
separate and apart from other monies of the City, and be used exclusively for
the purchase of books, periodicals, necessary furniture and fixtures, and
whatever is required for the maintenance of the City library and reading room.
(1961 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Definitions
2-3-2: Creation Of Commission
2-3-3: Qualifications And Terms Of Office
2-3-4: Rules; Organization And Meetings
2-3-5: Duties And Responsibilities
2-3-6: Employees And Expenditures
2-3-7: Acquisition And Disposition Of Property
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
APPOINTIVE MEMBERS: All other members of the commission.
COMMISSION: The parks and recreation commission.
EX OFFICIO MEMBERS: The members of the commission chosen from among the
officials or employees of the city. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-2: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a permanent commission for the parks and recreation to
consist of a total of seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor of the
city and confirmed by the city council. The commission may consist entirely of
appointive members or of both appointive members and ex officio members.
Residents who reside within the city limits and are a minimum of eighteen (18)
years of age are eligible. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-3: QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
Members on the commission shall be residents of the city of Kellogg. One member
shall be from the council and act as the chairman - public works committee
chairman; one member shall be from the board of directors of school district
391; one member shall be from the GEM community team board; and four (4)
members shall be chosen from the residents of the city. The superintendent of
public works will be an ex officio member with no voting rights. The term of
office for the first appointive members of the commission shall be three (3)
years. Terms shall expire on December 31 of the last year of the designated
term. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall
be filled by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members may be
removed after a public hearing by a majority vote of the number of city council
members confirming the original appointment. Members shall be selected without
respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. (Ord.
512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-4: RULES; ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet regularly at a time and place determined by
resolution of the commission. At its initial meeting of each calendar year, the
commission members shall create and fill such offices as it may determine it
requires for the proper conduct of the affairs and business of the commission.
A majority of the appointive members of the commission shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum at any meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public
and notice of such meetings shall be provided to allow and promote public
participation in the subject matter considered by the commission. Written rules
consistent with this chapter and the laws of the state of Idaho for the
transaction of business of the commission shall be adopted and a written record
of meetings, resolutions, findings and determinations shall be kept, which
record shall be a public record. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the commission to advise city staff
and the mayor and city council concerning the conduct of, and the supervision
of, public parks and public playgrounds, athletic fields, and recreation
activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, or on
other sites used for recreation purposes by the city with the consent of the
city council. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-6: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures of the commission exclusive of gifts, shall be within the
amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council of the city for the
parks and recreation purposes of the commission. The city clerk shall approve
and designate a recording secretary to create and maintain records for the
commission. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
2-3-7: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
The commission may with prior consent of the city council, acquire by gift,
devise or bequest, lands or other property to carry out the parks and
recreation purposes. (Ord. 512, 2-8-2006)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: General
2-4-2: Membership
2-4-3: Terms
2-4-4: Vacancies
2-4-5: Removal For Cause
2-4-6: Responsibilities And Duties
2-4-7: Advisory Committees
2-4-8: Organization And Procedures
2-4-1: GENERAL:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6504, there is hereby created a planning and
zoning commission. Said commission shall perform the duties, have the
responsibilities and fulfill the requirements imposed upon them by Idaho Code
67-6501 et seq., and any and all ordinances and policies regarding land use
within the planning area of the city of Kellogg. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The Kellogg planning and zoning commission shall consist of five (5) members.
The mayor shall appoint these members, with the consent of a majority of the
city council as provided by state law. Appointed members may be removed as
provided by state law. Four (4) members shall be residents of the city of
Kellogg and one member may be a resident within an area of city impact jointly
agreed upon with Shoshone County. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-3: TERMS:
Planning and zoning commissioners are appointed for four (4) year terms, and:
   A.   Members may be appointed to successive terms without limitation.
   B.   Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation.
   C.   Should a vacancy occur in a seat, other than through expiration,
appointment to fill the vacancy shall be made for the remainder of the term
otherwise attached to such seat. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-4: VACANCIES:
All vacancies shall be noted by the planning and zoning commission chairman and
reported to the mayor. A vacancy shall occur under the following circumstances:
   A.   Whenever an appointed member no longer satisfies the appointment or
residency requirements of section
2-4-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Whenever a member is removed for cause.
   C.   Whenever a member resigns from the commission. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-5: REMOVAL FOR CAUSE:
Members of the planning and zoning commission may be removed from the
commission in the following manner:
   A.   Members of the commission may be removed by a majority vote of the city
council.
   B.   The chairman of the planning and zoning commission may recommend to the
city council that a member be removed for cause. "Cause" shall constitute
missing at least thirty percent (30%) of the regularly scheduled meetings of
the commission over any consecutive twelve (12) month period or a wilful
disregard of planning and zoning commission rules and procedures. Such
recommendation shall be based upon a majority vote of the commission.
   C.   Upon request of the member proposed for removal, the council shall hold
a hearing on the removal before it becomes effective. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-6: RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES:
The planning and zoning commission shall be responsible for carrying out duties
assigned by titles 11, "Land Use Regulations" and 12, "Subdivisions", of this
code in the manner directed by state law and provisions of this code, and other
duties as may be assigned by the mayor and city council pertaining to land use,
planning and development. The city clerk shall approve and designate a
recording secretary to create and maintain records for the commission.
   A.   Additional Duties Of The Commission:
      1.   Make studies and recommend to the council plans, goals, and
objectives relating to the growth, development, and redevelopment of the city
and the area of city impact.
      2.   Develop and recommend to the council policies, ordinances,
administrative procedures, and other means for effective planning.
      3.   Make recommendations to the council concerning proposed changes to
title 11 of this code, the zoning map, and any other ordinances regarding land
use. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-7: ADVISORY COMMITTEES:
The commission may establish subcommittees, advisory committees, or
neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out its responsibilities.
Members of such advisory committees may sit as nonvoting members of the
commission when subject matter of their committee is being considered. However,
all formal recommendations to the council shall be made by the planning and
zoning commission. (Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
2-4-8: ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Officers:
      1.   At its regular meeting in January of each even numbered year, the
commission shall, by majority vote of its membership (excluding vacant seats),
elect one of the members to serve as chairperson and preside over the
commission's meetings and one member to serve as vice chairperson. The
commission may create and fill any other office that it may deem necessary in a
like manner.
      2.   The officers so designated shall serve in these capacities for two
(2) year terms.
   B.   Quorum:
      1.   A quorum for the planning and zoning commission shall consist of a
majority of the commission membership (excluding vacant seats). Those members
abstaining or disqualifying but remaining present shall be counted for the
purpose of determining a quorum.
      2.   No business shall be conducted nor information accepted unless a
quorum is present.
      3.   In the event of a lack of quorum, the commissioners present may
reschedule the meeting to a future date certain and time by a motion and vote.
(Ord. 561, 7-10-2013)
TITLE 3
DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
3-1-1: Chief Of Police
3-1-2: Chief Of Police To Keep Record
3-1-3: Ex Officio Police Judge
3-1-1: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   The chief of police, under the direction of the mayor, shall direct and
control the police of the city. He shall preserve the peace and good order of
the city, quell all riots, arrest and bring all violators of the provisions of
this code before the police judge for trial, either with or without process,
serve all processes issued by the police judge to him directed, and enforce all
orders and judgments of said court and take such measures as shall secure the
peace and good order of all public meetings. The chief of police, in the
execution of his duty, without warrant, in arresting any person accused or
suspected of crime or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful assembly, or
in the prevention of violation of the provisions of this code, shall have the
power to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in the execution of
his duty. He shall inquire into and report to the police judge all violations
of the provisions of this code and criminal laws of this state, and cause all
ordinances passed by the council to be enforced. He shall take into custody
with or without process, any person found violating the provisions of this code
and bring such person before the police judge to be dealt with according to
law.
(1961 Code)
3-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE TO KEEP RECORD:
   The chief of police shall keep a record in a book provided for that purpose,
of all monies belonging to the city which may come into his hands from whatever
source, stating from whom and on what account received and pay the same into
the city treasury. He shall also record the name, if known, of every person
arrested, the date and cause of arrest, and such other facts as may be deemed
important, and report an abstract thereof to the council quarterly, or more
often if required.
(1961 Code)
3-1-3: EX OFFICIO POLICE JUDGE:
Repeal. Ordinance No. 203, codifying and compiling ordinances, Section 3-1-3,
enacted November 16, 1961, is repealed.
(1961 Code; amd. Ord. 635, 2-12-2025)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Adoption Of Construction Codes
4-1-2: Definitions
4-1-3: Permit Required For Construction Or Alteration
4-1-3-1: Contractor Registration
4-1-4: Time Requirements
4-1-5: Design Conformance In Certain Districts (Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-6: Certificate Of Exterior Design Approval (Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-7: Appeal To City Council (Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-8: Unlawful To Commence Construction Without A Permit
4-1-9: Civil Enforcement
4-1-10: Standards; Exceptions
4-1-11: Issuance Of Permits; Duties Of Applicant
4-1-12: Fees For Building Permits And Associated Services
4-1-13: ICP Permits Required
4-1-14: Consultants
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this Code for additional regulations.
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF CONSTRUCTION CODES:
   A.   Effective January 1, 2021, the 2018 edition of the International
Building Code as adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code
Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the International Building
Code made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, is adopted with the following exceptions or amendments:
      1. Plan check fee: Shall be set by resolution of the Kellogg city
council.
   B.   Effective January 1, 2021, the 2018 International Energy Conservation
Code, as prepared and promulgated by the International Conference of Building
Officials, together with the 2018 amendments for residential portion or
revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho Building Code
Board through the negotiated rulemaking process is hereby adopted to provide a
minimum standard of energy conservation.
   C.   Idaho manufactured home installation standard (IMHIS).
   D.   American national standard ICC/ANSI A117.1.
   E.   Effective January 1, 2021, the 2018 edition of the International
Residential Code, as adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code
Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the International Building
Code made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process is adopted.
   F.   Effective January 1, 2021, the 2018 edition of the International
Existing Building Code, prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as
adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with
any amendments or revisions to the International Building Code made by the
Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process is adopted.
(Ord. 593, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord. 616, 12-9-2020)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Wherever the words "Municipality" or "City" are used in said codes, it
shall be held to mean the City of Kellogg.
   B.   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in said codes, it shall
be held to mean the attorney for the City. (Ord. 346, 6-11-1986)
4-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION:
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the Clerk. (Ord. 346,
6-11-1986)
4-1-3-1: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued to a contractor for construction of
any type without the contractor's Idaho contractor registration number being
presented by the contractor, except when the permit applicant provides evidence
to the satisfaction of the building official that the applicant is exempt from
the registration requirements pursuant to title 54, chapter 52 of the Idaho
Code.
   B.   The Idaho contractor registration number shall be conspicuously entered
on the face of the permit so issued.
   C.   No person engaged in construction activities who is exempt shall be
required to have a contractor registration number. A permit issued to an exempt
person shall conspicuously contain the phrase "no contractor registration
required" on the face of such permit.
   D.   Exempt persons are set forth in Idaho Code 54-5205 and include: 1)
those providing volunteer work, 2) those providing construction activities
fairly valued at less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and 3) construction
performed by a property owner.
   E.   All issued building permits shall be posted at the construction site in
such a manner that the conspicuous statements are visible.
   F.   The building official charged with the duty of issuing a permit shall
not be required to verify the contractor's registration number or verify the
information provided to substantiate a claim for exemption. Accountability
shall be handled by the Bureau of Occupational Licenses and the Idaho
Contractors Board.
   G.   Pursuant to Idaho Code section 54-5217, failure to register as required
by the Idaho Contractor Registration Act is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the County
Jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 513, 4-12-2006)
4-1-4: TIME REQUIREMENTS:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90)
days from the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire. The work
described in the building permit must be substantially completed within one
year of the date of issuance of the permit. If the work described in the permit
is not substantially completed within one year of the date of its issuance, no
further work shall be done until a new permit is issued. (Ord. 346, 6-11-1986)
4-1-5: DESIGN CONFORMANCE IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-6: CERTIFICATE OF EXTERIOR DESIGN APPROVAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-7: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
(Rep. by Ord. 567, 3-12-2014)
4-1-8: UNLAWFUL TO COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT A PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to commence construction upon any building within the city
without first securing a building permit and any person convicted of failing to
comply with this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 346, 6-11-
1986)
4-1-9: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT:
The city, through its authorized agents, may initiate injunction or abatement
proceedings or other appropriate action in courts of competent jurisdiction
against any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
chapter to prevent, enjoin, abate or terminate violation of this chapter. (Ord.
346, 6-11-1986)
4-1-10: STANDARDS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Snow Load:
      1.   Roof: The minimum roof design snow load shall be forty (40) pounds
per square foot. Exception: Manufactured home approval by HUD. (Ord. 481, 12-
11-2002)
      2.   Ground: Ground snow load shall be fifty six (56) pounds per square
foot. (Ord. 549, 12-8-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
   B.   Building Permit Not Required: A one story detached accessory structure
used for a tool and storage shed, playhouse, and similar uses shall not require
a building permit so long as it is less than two hundred (200) square feet,
measured from outside eave to outside eave, and meets setback requirements.
   C.   Frost Protection: The minimum depth for frost protection purposes, from
ground surface to bottom of a footing, shall be thirty inches (30"). (Ord. 481,
12-11-2002)
4-1-11: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; DUTIES OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Complies with city of Kellogg land use ordinance and all other
applicable ordinances of the city.
   B.   Has received final approval on a business/zoning development permit,
variance, conditional use permit, temporary hardship, final subdivision plat,
planned unit development, or zone change, if one is required.
   C.   Has received necessary water, sewer, and health permits. Permit
approval through central Shoshone County water district, South Fork Coeur
d'Alene River sewer district, and Panhandle health district.
   D.   Has received an access, approach, or encroachment approval from the
city when applicable.
   E.   Has a floodplain determination from the floodplain administrator for
the city of Kellogg with approval for an elevation certificate within the AO
designation and/or an elevation certificate stamped by an Idaho licensed
engineer, architect, or surveyor when the parcel is located in a special flood
hazard area. (Ord. 481, 12-11-2002)
4-1-12: FEES FOR BUILDING PERMITS AND ASSOCIATED SERVICES:
Fees for building permits and related building department services shall be set
by resolution of the Kellogg city council. (Ord. 481, 12-11-2002)
4-1-13: ICP PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Construction, Demolition And Renovation: The following work within the
boundaries of the city shall require a building permit and an institutional
controls program (ICP) permit from the Panhandle health district no. 1 (the
"district"):
      1.   Construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings;
      2.   Demolition of buildings;
      3.   Renovation of buildings which would result in removal of ceilings or
insulation or excavation within basements or crawl spaces.
   Applications for permits from the district must be obtained from the Kellogg
office of the district, but must be issued (or the need for a permit waived) by
the district prior to issuance of the city building permit.
   Application must be made to the district within thirty (30) days of
submitting the building permit application to the city and both permits must be
approved and issued prior to the applicant commencing work.
   B.   Excavations: All excavations, except as herein exempted, shall require
an ICP permit from the district. Applications for such permits shall be
available at the Kellogg office of the district. This requirement shall not
apply to: 1) excavations of less than one cubic yard of earthen material, or 2)
excavations in a remediated area which do not penetrate the visible delineation
lines between remediated and unremediated soil (this barrier is at
approximately 1 foot in lawn areas and 2 feet in garden areas) and which do not
reduce the depth of the barrier, or 3) areas which have been totally
remediated. Application for such permit must be approved by the district prior
to excavation.
   C.   Subdivisions And Planned Unit Developments: All subdivisions and
planned unit developments in the city shall require an ICP permit and approval
from the district of the developer's plan for dealing with contaminated soil.
Such approval must be obtained prior to final plat approval and prior to
commencing work.
   D.   Violations: Should any applicant for a required permit fail to obtain
such permit from the district as required by this section, the building permit
or subdivision permit issued shall be void and the applicant shall be deemed to
have committed a misdemeanor for each day of such violation. Such violation
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), up
to thirty (30) days in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 405,
5-10-1995, eff. 5-10-1995)
4-1-14: CONSULTANTS:
The following shall apply to all applications which require outside consultants
to assist in the review of the request:
   A.   If in the opinion of the building official and/or the planning
director, the city does not have qualified staff to review certain elements of
a proposal, then the building committee of the council may authorize that
review be performed by a qualified outside consultant and the reasonable costs
of this review may be borne in whole or in part by the applicant.
   B.   If the city has engaged the services of a consultant who will in turn
bill the city, and where the consultant's fee is to be paid in whole or in part
by the applicant, no approval or conditional approval will be granted by the
planning and zoning commission or the city if, after proper billing through the
city, this fee has not been paid by the applicant. (Ord. 393, 9-8-1993)
   C.   If in the opinion of the building official and/or the planning
director, the applicant has not shown the ability or means to repay the city
for engineering services, then the building official and/or the planning
director can request an engineering deposit for the desired review of the
applicant's proposal. Any deposited funds not used by the city official shall
be refunded to the applicant within sixty (60) days of the completion of the
city review. (Ord. 522, 12-13-2006)
   D.   Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration,
inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to
applicants for business development permits, zoning improvement permits, sign
permits, conditional use permits (special use permits), subdivision plat
approval, zoning amendments, variances and other administrative relief. The
amount of the fees charged shall be as set forth by resolution of the council
filed in the office of the city clerk. When the administrator finds it
necessary or desirable to have legal review of an applicant's request for a
permit or other action, the amount charged by the city attorney or other
outside counsel shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 524, 2-14-2007)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Administration
4-2-3: Required Connection
4-2-4: Liability Of Owner For Connection
4-2-5: Refusal To Connect A Misdemeanor
4-2-6: Permit/Application/Hookup Fee
4-2-7: Compliance With State Law
4-2-8: Inspection; Report
4-2-9: Applications For Permits
4-2-10: Monthly Service Fees
4-2-11: Payment Of Fees And Charges
4-2-12: Appeals
4-2-13: Violation; Penalty
4-2-14: Prohibitions
4-2-15: Right Of Entry
4-2-16: Clear Water Connections; Building Foundation Drains
4-2-17: Clear Water Connections; Sump Pump Specifications
4-2-18: Volume Of Discharge Limited
4-2-19: Property Owner Responsibility For Maintenance
4-2-20: Reserved
4-2-21: Permission Required To Open Manholes
4-2-22: Sewer Connections; Procedure
4-2-23: Sewer Connections; Notice To Inspector
4-2-24: Compliance With Provisions
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The meanings of words used throughout this chapter shall be as set forth in the
"Glossary For Water And Wastewater Engineering" published by the American
Public Health Association.
The following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter unless
otherwise apparent from the context:
CITY SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM, CITY SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM AND PUBLIC SEWERS: Are
synonymous within this text, and are a collective term referring to the entire
piping system that transports domestic sewage within the city.
CLEAR WATER: Any water flow that is not domestic sewage and includes rainwater,
ground water, melted snow and ice, surface runoff, irrigation or sprinkler
discharge, and domestic car wash water.
OWNER: The person owning real or personal property that is, or proposes to be,
connected to the city sewer system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point where the service line connects to city sewer
collection system.
SERVICE LINE: The sewer line running from the city sewer collection system to
the user's property.
USER: A person using the city sewer system and it shall be synonymous with
"owner". (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-2: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered as directed by the city council, and as
modified by the council from time to time.
   A.   All plumbing including wastewater and sewer within the exterior wall of
a structure is governed by the state of Idaho division of building safety using
the international plumbing code.
   B.   Service connections and the city sewer collection system are governed
by the city of Kellogg following South Fork Coeur d'Alene River sewer district
guidelines.
   C.   Septic systems are governed by the state of Idaho, Panhandle health
district.
   D.   All exterior sewer connections, including recreational vehicle
stations, are governed by the state of Idaho department of environmental
quality. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-3: REQUIRED CONNECTION:
   A.   All permanent residential building structures that include one or more
bedrooms, or a multiple use room that can be used as a bedroom (i.e., studio
apartment), shall contain at least one toilet and lavatory sink and connect
with the city sewer. All commercial building structures, that are occupied a
portion of the day, shall contain at least one toilet and lavatory sink and
connect with the city sewer.
   B.   Any commercial structure that has water service shall also be connected
to the sewer.
   C.   All plumbing fixtures and devices within the building structure that
generate wastewater shall be plumbed in accordance with the international
plumbing code and the applicable state permit shall be obtained by the owner.
(Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
   D.   All structures/properties that are connected to the city sewer must
have a line dedicated to the property. Shared/party lines connecting more than
one property to the service connection are not permitted.
   E.   If a structure does not comply with this required connection, the
superintendent of public works, or such officer as may be designated by the
city council, will present a notice of noncompliance. If within thirty (30)
days of the notice the owner or occupant does not comply with all the
requirements of this chapter and other regulations of the city council, the
inspector may employ a competent plumber to provide the connections at the
expense of the city, and upon the completion of the work the cost thereof shall
be certified to the city council, and upon confirmation thereof by city
council, an action may be commenced against the owner and occupant of the
premises for the recovery of the amount thereof together with costs.
   F.   Any property with a shared/party line must cease such shared/party use
upon any modification or upgrade to the shared service line. The requirement to
cease use applies regardless of the need for the modification. (Ord. 579, 10-
14-2015)
4-2-4: LIABILITY OF OWNER FOR CONNECTION:
When work is commenced to make a sewer connection, it shall be made by a
licensed person and be prosecuted with due diligence until completed. The owner
of the property for which the sewer connection is being made shall be liable
for all acts of negligence in making such connections. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-5: REFUSAL TO CONNECT A MISDEMEANOR:
Any owner or occupant of any premises within the city who refuses or neglects
to make sewer connections as provided by section
4-2-3 of this chapter within the time specified shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-6: PERMIT/APPLICATION/HOOKUP FEE:
   A.   No public sewer, or building sewer, shall be constructed, repaired or
modified until a permit/hookup fee has been obtained from the city of Kellogg
and a fee, set by resolution, is paid to that office.
   B.   If the applied for location is outside the bounds of the present sewer
collection system, a "will service" approval document must be issued by the
city and the South Fork Coeur d'Alene River sewer district before an
application process is begun.
   C.   Application for a permit shall contain all necessary information
requested by the city of Kellogg; and as required by other state or local
agencies.
   D.   Permits are issued at the time of building permit issuance and are
valid for one year from that date.
   E.   The city of Kellogg shall issue the permit only after collection of the
fee and receipt of all necessary information. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-7: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
All sewerage works construction shall comply with applicable standards as set
forth in the state of Idaho regulations and/or the international plumbing code.
(Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-8: INSPECTION; REPORT:
   A.   Inspection of the completed work prior to covering shall be made by the
superintendent of public works or other inspector duly authorized by the city
council.
   B.   The inspector will review the completed work, ascertain that materials,
workmanship, and construction details comply with standards and permit plans
and conditions. Upon a finding of satisfactory and compliant construction, the
inspector will sign the permit as complete providing adequate backfilling and
covering is evidenced.
   C.   Copies of the completed report are to be filed with the city of Kellogg
and with the South Fork Coeur d'Alene River sewer district. The original should
remain with the owner of the connected property. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-9: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Applications for permits may only be made by owners of a property, or by their
duly authorized representatives. The owner is liable at all times for
compliance with this chapter and is subject to the penalties set forth in
section
4-2-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-10: MONTHLY SERVICE FEES:
There is established and assessed a sewer charge and fee for construction,
operation and maintenance of a sewer system against the owners of all premises
having, or required to have, connection with the sanitary sewage system of the
city upon the premises.
   A.   Each service connection discharging to the city sewerage system shall
pay a monthly fee as is determined and fixed by resolution of the council. The
city of Kellogg sewer fee shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Kellogg
city hall.
   B.   In addition to the city fee, which is used for maintenance and
operation of the city sewerage system, each service connection shall pay an
additional fee to the South Fork Coeur d'Alene River sewer district to cover
maintenance and operation costs of the interceptor and treatment systems. Above
fees, set by resolution, may be modified by the responsible parties as needed
from time to time to match income to costs. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-11: PAYMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   All fees and charges are due and payable upon delivery of the notice of
charges.
   B.   Unpaid charges are delinquent twenty (20) days after delivery of
notice, and are subject to a basic penalty charge of ten percent (10%) of the
delinquent balance.
   C.   Extended delinquency is cause for disconnecting the service, with costs
for both disconnection and reconnection to be billed to the property.
Alternatively, delinquent charges may be assessed to the tax rolls. (Ord. 521,
10-11-2006)
4-2-12: APPEALS:
Aggrieved parties who feel unjustly treated under this chapter may file a
written appeal with the city council, within ninety (90) days of the cause of
the grievance, who shall set a specific time, date and place to hear such
complaint. The ruling of the city council, after such hearing, shall be final.
(Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any violations of this chapter may be punished by:
      1.   Immediate disconnection of the sewerage line;
      2.   A fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day;
      3.   Both of the above. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-14: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No person shall connect any building or premises with the city sanitary
sewer system by a drain or connection nor permit a condition to exist, by which
clear water may be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system, and any
existing drain or connection by which such waters may be discharged into the
city sanitary sewer shall be disconnected, mechanically severed or altered.
   B.   By this chapter cesspools, septic tanks, private sewage treatment, or
any other drainage of domestic sewage other than to the city sewer collection
system is prohibited. Exception to this subsection may be granted upon
application approval by the Idaho department of environmental quality,
Panhandle health district, and third party engineering review. (Ord. 521, 10-
11-2006)
4-2-15: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The sewer inspector of the city and/or his designees, upon identification, may
enter any building or premises supplied with public water service or public
sewer facilities for the purpose of inspecting and testing all plumbing,
together with all form of clear water drainage, to ascertain quantity, quality
and condition of sanitary and clear water sewerage facilities. (Ord. 521, 10-
11-2006)
4-2-16: CLEAR WATER CONNECTIONS; BUILDING FOUNDATION DRAINS:
All building foundation drains shall conform to the international plumbing
code. The drain shall terminate in a sump pit not less than twenty inches (20")
in diameter and twenty four inches (24") in depth. The sump crock shall project
a minimum of two inches (2") above the adjacent finished floor. An approved
ejector pump shall be maintained to be functional. The minimum size (ejector)
sump pump discharge and extensions thereto shall be one and one-fourth inches
(1 1/4"). The vertical discharge pipe shall be provided with a flexible joint
or sound deadening fitting. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-17: CLEAR WATER CONNECTIONS; SUMP PUMP SPECIFICATIONS:
All sump pump installations shall conform to the international plumbing code.
Sump pumps installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from
foundation drains and ground infiltration, and where the building is not
serviced by a storm sewer, shall discharge into a drywell at least three feet
(3') outside the building exterior and of sufficient size to contain five (5)
minutes of discharge from the sump pump and percolate dry in an additional five
(5) minutes. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-18: VOLUME OF DISCHARGE LIMITED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city sanitary
sewer system by means of a drain or any connection the following total volume
of flow of normal domestic sewage:
   A.   Residential users: Total volume of flow not to exceed two hundred (200)
gallons per day per resident of the connected facility.
   B.   Business and commercial users: Total volume of flow not to exceed the
amount of metered water used per day. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-19: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to install and
maintain the service line which provides service to the property up to the
point of connection to the city sewer collection system. The public sewer lines
are generally located within the public right of way (street or alley);
therefore the owner's responsibility includes the extension of the service line
into said right of way. The service line shall be permanent and watertight to
ensure that clear water including subsurface waters is not discharged into the
city sewer collection system. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-20: RESERVED:
(Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-21: PERMISSION REQUIRED TO OPEN MANHOLES:
No plumber, drain layer or other person shall open or uncover any manhole, air
inlet, flush tank, or other private connection with the public sewer, without
permission of the superintendent of public works or such other officer as may
be designated by the city council; nor shall any of such persons leave openings
to the sewer without ample protection against admission of dirt, rubbish or
other injurious matter. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-22: SEWER CONNECTIONS; PROCEDURE:
All connections with a public sewer or drain shall be made in a workmanlike
manner and conform to all state requirements and the international plumbing
code. The street must be opened and the earth deposited in a manner that will
occasion the least inconvenience to the public and provide for free passage
along the gutter. One-half (1/2) of the street must be left clear for the
passage of vehicles, and bridgeways must be provided on sidewalks for foot
passengers. In refilling the trench, the earth must be deposited in layers of
not more than six inches (6") in depth and well tamped to provide for
settlement. As soon as such drain or sewer is complete, the surface or the
street must be restored in as good condition as previous to the excavation and
all rubbish and surplus earth immediately removed. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-23: SEWER CONNECTIONS; NOTICE TO INSPECTOR:
Notice must be given the superintendent of public works by any person desiring
to make connection with any public sewer, previous to the time of making such
connection, when such work will be ready for inspection. The inspector of
plumbing shall inspect the same, and the connection shall be made in the manner
provided in the city's ordinances and to the satisfaction of the inspector
before the trench is filled. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
4-2-24: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be cause
for disconnecting the sewer service to the property and the costs of
disconnection and reconnection shall be billed to the property owner. After
sewer service to property has been disconnected, the sewer service shall not be
reconnected until a report as set forth in section
4-2-8 of this chapter has been completed. In addition, sewer service shall not
be reconnected until both the costs of disconnection and the anticipated costs
of reconnection are paid in full. The cost of disconnection, if sewer service
is not reconnected, shall be the responsibility of the property owner and if
the costs are not paid after being notified of the same, the costs shall be
assessed to the tax rolls. (Ord. 521, 10-11-2006)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-3-1: National Electrical Code Adopted
4-3-2: State License And Bond Required
4-3-3: Persons Making Own Installations
4-3-4: Permit Required; Application; Issuance
4-3-5: Inspection Requirements
4-3-6: Installation Of Meters And Outside Wiring
4-3-7: Specifications Of Service Wires
4-3-8: Certificate Of Inspection
4-3-9: Right To Enter Premises
4-3-10: Damage Not Assumed By City
4-3-11: Right Of Appeal
4-3-1: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
All electric wiring, installation of electrical fixtures, apparatus or
electrical appliances, for furnishing light, heat or power, or other electrical
work introduced into or placed in or upon or in any way connected on any
building or structure within the limits of the city shall be in conformity with
the provisions set forth in the 1959 national electrical code, standard of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters for electrical wiring and apparatus as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association including amendments
thereto, and as said code shall be amended, revised, compiled and published
from time to time, and all fittings and materials used in such construction or
installation shall be such as are sanctioned and approved in the latest list of
electrical fittings published by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. The
1959 national electrical code, standard of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters for electric wiring and apparatus as recommended by the National
Fire Protection Association and as the same shall be amended, revised, compiled
and published from time to time, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of
the city under and by virtue of authority granted by the provisions of section
50-2002, Idaho Code, three (3) copies of the above adopted code being on file
in the office of the city clerk and properly certified as the officially
adopted and certified electrical code of the city. (1961 Code)
4-3-2: STATE LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on the
business of electric wiring without first having secured a state license so to
do and executing to the city a good and sufficient bond, signed by some surety
company authorized to transact business in the state of Idaho, in the penal sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), running to the city, said bond to be
approved by the mayor and city council and conditioned by the saving of said
city harmless and free from all damages or costs by reason of his operation, or
his failure or neglect to properly perform any duties incumbent upon him, and
for faithful performance of the laws of the state of Idaho and the city. (1961
Code)
4-3-3: PERSONS MAKING OWN INSTALLATIONS:
If an owner wishes to do wiring in his own building, he may do so without a
state license, but he must first obtain a permit as required by this chapter.
The clerk may refuse to issue a permit to such person, if, in his estimation,
such person is not competent to install the electrical work to be done under
said permit applied for in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(1961 Code)
4-3-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or install in any building any
wiring, apparatus or fixtures for the use of electric current for light, heat,
or power, or to make any alterations or changes in, or additions to any wiring,
apparatus or fixtures for such use, without first obtaining from the clerk a
written permit to do such work. Such permit shall state the kind of work to be
done and the amount, and shall cover only work so specified. The contractor,
person, firm or corporation shall submit a plan of wiring system to be followed
if deemed necessary by the clerk. Said permit shall also state the exact
location of the building where such work is to be done, and shall be valid only
for the location stated.
The fee should be charged for every permit issued under this chapter as
follows:
   Temporary Services: Five dollars ($5.00). A temporary service is a service
A. entrance which will be used for construction purposes only and will be
   removed when the permanent service is installed. All other services are
   classified as permanent.
B. Residential:
   Service rated 100 ampere or less     $7.50 plus $1.00 for each room in which
                                        any wiring is installed.
   Service rated over 100 ampere to 200 $10.00 plus $1.00 for each room in
   ampere                               which any wiring is installed.
                                        $15.00 plus $1.00 for each room in
                                        which any wiring is installed. Included
                                        shall be all finished and unfinished
                                        rooms including basements, residential
                                        garages and carports, etc. (Areas such
   Over 200 ampere                      as a combination kitchen-dining shall
                                        be counted as a room for each indicated
                                        use.) Apartment buildings, including 8
                                        units, come under this subsection and
                                        each apartment shall be counted as an
                                        individual residence.
   When there is no change in service:
    Extension or addition to an         $5.00
    existing circuit
    Installation of 1 new circuit       $5.00
    Installation of subfeed panel or    Same as residential for size and number
    feeder and additional circuits      of rooms wired.
C. Residential Electric Space Heating:
                                        $5.00 plus $2.00 for each 5 kW or
                                        fraction thereof in excess of 5 kW.
    1 to 5 kW                           These fees are an addition to the fees
                                        for general wiring covered in
                                        subsection B of this section.
                                        $3.50 in addition to required
D. Domestic Water Pumps:                residential fee. When separate from
                                        residential construction, permit $7.50.
E. Mobile Homes:
   Each connection or reconnection      $7.50 plus $3.00 each additional feeder
   service rated 100 amperes, or less   or branch circuit connected at same
                                        time as mobile home.
                                        $10.00 plus $3.00 each additional
   Services over 100 amperes            feeder or branch circuit connected at
                                        same time as mobile home.
   Other Installations Including Industrial And Commercial: The inspection fees
   listed in this subsection shall apply to any and all electrical
   installations not specifically mentioned elsewhere in this schedule. The
   wiring cost shall be the cost to the owner of all labor charges and all
   wiring materials and equipment installed as part of the wiring system. When
F. labor is performed by the owner for uniformity of fee such labor costs shall
   be based upon the market value of said labor and used or reused materials
   shall be based at 50 percent of new retail cost or actual cost whichever is
   greater. The value of factory installed wiring switches and controls on
   equipment shall be included in wiring costs, and paid through the permittee
   by those furnishing such equipment. Motors, appliances, and utilization
   equipment (except light fixtures) need not be included.
   Apartment buildings with 9 or more dwelling units come under this schedule.
                                        Distribution wiring including pedestal
                                        or service is under this section. Note:
   Mobile home parks                    This does not include or permit the
                                        connection of the mobile home. See
                                        subsection E of this section.
                                        Service conductors, distribution and
   Recreation vehicle parks             lot supply to individual units come
                                        under this schedule plus $3.00 per lot.
   Wiring cost not exceeding            $7.50
   $100.00
   Wiring cost over $100.00 not         $7.50 plus 2 percent of total wiring
   exceeding $500.00                    cost.
   Wiring cost over $500.00 not         $17.50 plus 1 percent of that portion
   exceeding $10,000.00                 of the wiring costs exceeding $500.00.
                                        $117.50 plus 1/2 of 1 percent of that
   Wiring cost over $10,000.00          portion of wiring costs exceeding
                                        $10,000.00.
G. Water Pumps, Each Motor:
   0 to   5 hp                          $ 7.50
   5 to   10 hp                         10.00
   11 to  25 hp                         13.00
   26 to  50 hp                         14.00
   51 to  75 hp                         15.00
   76 to  100 hp                        16.00
   101 to 125 hp                        17.00
   126 to 150 hp                        18.00
   151 to 175 hp                        19.00
   176 to 200 hp                        20.00
   201 to 300 hp                        24.00
   Over 300 hp                          24.00  plus $4.00 per 100 hp over 300
H. Electrically Driven Irrigation Machine:
    Center pivot                        $10.00 plus $5.00 per tower or drive
                                        motor.
    Other types                         $10.00 plus $5.00 per motor.
   Note: The electric supply to the irrigation machine shall be in addition to
   above and according to subsection F of this section.
I. Electric Signs And Outline Lighting:
    Electric signs                      $5.00 plus 10 cents per square foot,
                                        measured on 1 side.
    Outline lighting                    $5.00 plus 2 cents per foot of tubing.
J. Requested Inspections Of Existing Wiring:
    1 hour or less                      $11.00 minimum.
                                        $11.00 plus $5.50 for each 1/2 hour or
    Over 1 hour                         portion thereof in excess of 1 hour
                                        including travel time.
                                        When corrections have not been made in
K. Reinspection:                        prescribed time and an extension has
                                        not been requested and granted, $10.00.
                                        Fee for permits not clearly giving
L. Reinspection:                        location of installation either by
                                        directions or maps, $10.00.
 
(Ord. 276, 1974)
4-3-5: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to inspect or cause to be
inspected any and all work for which permits have been issued within forty
eight (48) hours, Sunday and holidays excluded, after time of notice has been
received, in writing from the person, firm, contractor or corporation doing the
said work. The same will not be considered ready for inspection and covering
until all enclosed plumbing, steam heating, furnace work and gas fittings are
in place. Inspection shall, when necessary, be made two (2) or three (3) times
during the progress of installation; first when work is roughed in, and last,
when work is completed; and it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector or
person qualified and delegated by him, to indicate inspection of any work by a
tag or label, which shall specify the date and whether first or final
inspection has been made, and it shall be unlawful for any workman or other
person to lath or otherwise conceal any electrical wiring until such first
inspection tag has been placed.
   A.   Upon application for inspection of any wiring apparatus, or appliances
as hereinafter provided, the electrical inspector shall after inspection and
examination issue a certificate showing the results of such examinations and
require to be made the necessary corrections.
   B.   If the said electrical inspector shall find any part of any electric
light or power wiring apparatus or fixtures in or on any building in the city
to have been installed without a permit or not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or to be dangerous to life or property, the
electrical inspector shall have the right and power and it is hereby made his
duty to disconnect such defective wiring and place a seal upon it. He shall at
the same time give written notice of such disconnection to the owner or
occupant of the building. After such disconnected wiring, apparatus, fixtures
have been put in the condition required by this chapter, the seat or seals so
placed shall be removed by said electrical inspector. It shall be unlawful for
any person to use any current, through, or by means of such disconnected
wiring, apparatus or fixtures or to remove, break or deface any seal so placed.
The electrical inspector shall require all bathroom lights to be equipped with
a receptacle and switch which receptacle shall be so attached as to prevent any
person while standing in the bathtub to reach or touch the same. (1961 Code)
4-3-6: INSTALLATION OF METERS AND OUTSIDE WIRING:
   A.   Meters must be placed in a dry place, free from vibration and
accessible to the meter readers, testers and inspectors at all times. Under no
circumstances will meters be installed in bathroom, bedroom, clothes closets,
over doors, in stairways, attics or places likely to cause the visits to the
meters to be an annoyance to the occupants.
   B.   Meters shall be installed on the outside of buildings at a height of
not less than five feet (5'), or not more than six feet (6') from the ground.
In office buildings, apartment buildings, and commercial buildings of multiple
occupancy, meters may be mounted inside, providing a readily accessible place
is provided for meters and service equipment. Said meters and service equipment
shall be kept free and clear of all obstructions.
   C.   All buildings shall be provided with a main disconnecting switch and
all branch circuits shall be fused to match the wire size, in accordance with
the latest national code. All 240-volt circuits such as to ranges, dryers,
water heaters, cooking equipment, and motors above one horsepower shall have a
separate branch circuit to each appliance.
   D.   Wires carried on the outside of buildings, or attached thereto for
electric signs, outline or decorative and similar lighting, shall run in
approved metal conduit or approved armored cable. If the latter is used, it
shall be of a type having lead covering between the outer braid of the
conductors and the steel armor; all fittings such as outlets, fuses, switches
and similar devices, or on the outside of buildings and attached thereto, or,
otherwise exposed to moisture, shall be enclosed in approved weatherproof metal
boxes or cabinets. (1961 Code)
4-3-7: SPECIFICATIONS OF SERVICE WIRES:
   A.   All service wiring entering buildings shall be enclosed in conduit
which must be continuous from the service head to the inside of the cutout
cabinet.
   All switches must be of the enclosed safety type, with meter trim, and must
have branch fuse accessible to the consumer. Departure from this rule may be
made by special permission only. (1961 Code)
4-3-8: CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION:
Upon the completion of the wiring in or on any building, it shall be the duty
of the corporation, copartnership, firm or individual doing the same to notify
the electrical inspector, who shall at once inspect the same and if approved by
him, shall issue a certificate of proper inspection which shall contain the
date of such inspection and an outline of the result; and it shall be unlawful
for any person to turn on or connect the current with such installation until
such certificate shall be issued; and it shall be unlawful to make any change,
alteration or extension in or to the wiring of any building after inspection
without first notifying said electrical inspector and procuring a permit
therefor. (1961 Code)
4-3-9: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
The electrical inspector shall have the right to enter any premises at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the same. (1961 Code)
4-3-10: DAMAGE NOT ASSUMED BY CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed as to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any electrical
wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for damages to anyone
injured or damages either in person or property by any defect therein; nor
shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by
reason of inspection authorized herein or certificate of inspection issued.
(1961 Code)
4-3-11: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any applicant denied a permit under this chapter shall have the right to appeal
within ten (10) days to a board comprised of the city clerk, building
inspector, electrical inspector and plumbing inspector, by filing with the city
clerk written objections to the ruling and such board shall after due notice
hold a hearing and sustain said ruling or order the issuance of said permit.
(1961 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Permit Required
4-4-2: Sufficient Bond Or Liability Insurance Filed
4-4-3: File Continuous Bond
4-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any house,
building or other structure of any kind or nature upon, over, along or across
any of the streets or alleys in the city without first obtaining from the clerk
of said city a permit therefor, which said permit shall state the name of the
owner of said house, building or other structure, the name of the person to
whom the said permit is granted, the place from which and the plane to which it
is desired to move the said house, building or other structure, and the streets
and alleys along, over, upon and across which it is desired to move the same,
the length of time required to be fixed by the chief of police. (1961 Code)
4-4-2: SUFFICIENT BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE FILED:
Before a permit shall be granted by the said clerk, said applicant for said
permit must file with the city clerk a good and sufficient bond or liability
insurance policy in a sum to be fixed by the city clerk, saving and holding the
city harmless from any accident or damages that may result from the moving of
such house, building or other structure, which said bond shall be approved by
the attorney for the city. (1961 Code)
4-4-3: FILE CONTINUOUS BOND:
If the person, firm, or corporation making application for the permit provided
for in this chapter shall be regularly engaged in the business of moving
houses, buildings and other structures in the city, the said person, firm or
corporation may upon application to the city clerk be permitted to file a
continuing bond or liability insurance policy conditioned as provided in this
chapter, which said bond or insurance policy shall cover all the moving of
houses, buildings and other structures, in which the said person, firm, or
corporation may be engaged during the fiscal year in which said application is
made and thereafter it shall not be necessary for said person, firm or
corporation to file a separate bond or liability insurance policy with each and
every application for the permit provided for in this chapter. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 5
GAS CODE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Installation Standard
4-5-3: Installation Of Gas Service
4-5-4: Bond And Insurance
4-5-5: Industrial Use
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases are
hereby defined and shall have the meaning herein given to them:
GAS: Natural gas suitable for domestic or industrial fuel.
GAS APPLIANCE: Any appliance or device used for burning gas.
GAS COMPANY: Any person or persons holding and exercising a franchise to
distribute gas within the corporate limits of the city.
GAS FITTER: Any person who does gas fitting work on any gas system or gas
appliance.
GAS FITTING SYSTEM: All gas piping, ductwork, appliances and accessories
installed or used in connection with consumption of gas on a consumer's
premises.
GAS FITTING WORK: The installation, alteration, extension, repair or
maintenance, from the outlet of the gas meter, of gas piping, venting and
appliances.
GAS INSTALLER: Any person who engages or employs gas fitters, servicemen, and/
or apprentices, to install gas equipment and accessories within the city.
GAS PIPING SYSTEM: All gas piping from the outlet of the gas meter installed or
used in connection with consumption of gas on a consumer's premises.
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, corporation or municipal corporation.
(Ord. 353, 6-10-1987)
4-5-2: INSTALLATION STANDARD:
Any gas company, gas installer or gas fitter installing gas appliances, gas
piping systems or gas fitting systems shall comply with the international fuel
gas code, 2012 edition, as prepared by the International Code Council, Inc.,
together with any amendments or revisions made by the Idaho building code board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, which effective January 1, 2015, is
hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city for any installation of gas
appliances and gas piping. Provisions for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees, and all regulations, conditions, provisions and terms of
such code is hereby adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 572, 12-10-2014)
4-5-3: INSTALLATION OF GAS SERVICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee of the
gas company to connect any gas appliance to any supply of fuel gas. (Ord. 353,
6-10-1987)
4-5-4: BOND AND INSURANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake to install any gas appliance,
gas fitting system or gas piping system unless that person shall first obtain a
bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) secured by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho. Such bond shall secure
the full performance of all provisions of law and regulations of the city
relating to gas fitting work and that any person injured by failure of the
principal to comply with such laws and regulations, or with any of the
provisions thereof, shall have the right of action against the principal and
surety in his name; provided that liability of any surety upon the bond
required to be given by the gas installer, as herein provided shall be limited
to the amount specified in the bond and in case of recoveries had by two (2) or
more persons for violations of the conditions of such bond in excess of the
amount of the bonds such recovery shall be prorated and the total recovery
against such surety shall not exceed the amount of the bond; provided further
that if any person wishing to avail himself of the benefits of the bond shall
commence action thereon within one year after the date of the completion of the
work alleged to have been improperly done.
Before any person undertakes to install any gas appliance, gas piping system or
gas fitting system, that person shall secure a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in
the state of Idaho with a combined aggregate limit of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for losses on account of bodily or personal injury,
death, property damage or other loss as a result of any one occurrence or
accident regardless of the number of persons injured or the number of
claimants. (Ord. 353, 6-10-1987)
4-5-5: INDUSTRIAL USE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to the installation, use,
maintenance, alteration or repair of gas piping, gas fitting work, gas fitting
system, gas appliances and gas venting by any person, who has previously
installed natural gas for industrial use and performs its work through its
trained regularly employed journeymen, provided that such person shall comply
with all laws, rules and regulations in regard to proper gas installation.
(Ord. 353, 6-10-1987)
CHAPTER 6
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Unsanitary And Dilapidated Buildings
4-6-2: Failure To Comply
4-6-3: Hearing
4-6-1: UNSANITARY AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
   A.   No person shall permit or suffer to be in or accumulate in, or upon any
yard, lot, place or premises or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or
abutting upon any lot, block, place or premises or in any building or shed
owned or occupied by him or them or for which he or they may be agents within
the limits of the city, any refuse, vegetable decay or decaying substance,
garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer such yard, lot, place, building or
premises to be or to remain in such condition as unsightly or to cause or
create a nuisance or offensive smell or to pollute or render unhealthful the
atmosphere or the premises or thereby to be, become, cause or create a public
nuisance.
   B.   No person shall permit or suffer any yard, lot, place or premises, or
any building or shed owned or occupied by him or them or for which he or they
may be agents, within the limits of the city, in such dilapidated condition for
want of repairs or by reason of age, or from an other cause, which is
especially liable to fire or endangers the health, welfare, and safety of the
public in any way, or thereby to be, become, cause or create a public nuisance.
(Ord. 225, 3-8-1967)
4-6-2: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Whenever a situation or condition advances to a state or deemed or determined
to be in violation of this chapter, the municipality, or its designated
official, shall notify and order such occupant or owner to remedy the same
within twenty (20) days following the date of notice. If the occupant or owner
fails to comply with the notice and order, the municipality may remove, repair
or remedy the condition and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the
premises or property so cleaned or cleared, such assessment to be certified by
the clerk to the county assessor and tax collector, who shall place the same
upon the tax roll for collection as a special tax in addition to the taxes for
general revenue purposes, and he shall collect the same in the manner and
subject to the same penalties as other city taxes. (Ord. 225, 3-8-1967)
4-6-3: HEARING:
In the event an occupant or owner desires a hearing on the matter, he may
notify the council in writing within five (5) days from date of notice and a
time and place will be set for the hearing. The running of the time required
for compliance shall be held in obeyance until the matter is decided. (Ord.
225, 3-8-1967)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
5-1-1: License To Be Obtained Before Operation
5-1-2: Circuses And Sideshows License Fees
5-1-3: Booths, Stands Or Games
5-1-4: Tent Shows
5-1-5: Fortune Tellers, Palm Readers, Mind Readers, Phrenologists, Astrologers,
Clairvoyants
5-1-6: Merry Go Rounds And Rides
5-1-7: Carnivals
5-1-8: Consent Of Property Owners Near Mechanical Rides
5-1-9: Bond
5-1-1: LICENSE TO BE OBTAINED BEFORE OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to operate, engage
in or carry on any business, amusement or device as referred to in this chapter
without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk. (1961 Code)
5-1-2: CIRCUSES AND SIDESHOWS LICENSE FEES:
The keeper or proprietor of a circus or menagerie shall pay a license fee of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) per day and for each and every side show fifteen
dollars ($15.00) per day. (1961 Code)
5-1-3: BOOTHS, STANDS OR GAMES:
The proprietor or conductor of any booth, stand or game operated in connection
with or in proximity to a circus shall pay a license fee of five dollars
($5.00) per day. (1961 Code)
5-1-4: TENT SHOWS:
The keeper or proprietor of every tent show, other than a circus, for which a
charge is made shall pay a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day.
(1961 Code)
5-1-5: FORTUNE TELLERS, PALM READERS, MIND READERS, PHRENOLOGISTS, ASTROLOGERS,
CLAIRVOYANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on the
occupation of fortune telling, palm reading, mind reading, phrenology,
astrology, clairvoyance, or any other means or device whereby the past or
future of any person is intended to be told, without first obtaining a license
from the city clerk so to do. The applicant for such a license must make out an
application form, furnished by the city clerk, giving his or her name, age,
place or location where business is to be carried on and furnish a true
likeness photograph of said applicant, such photograph to be attached to said
application form. The city clerk, before issuing such license, shall obtain the
approval of the city council to do so. The license fee for the herein mentioned
occupations shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day. No weekly or monthly
license rate reductions are provided for. Licenses are nontransferable. (1961
Code)
5-1-6: MERRY GO ROUNDS AND RIDES:
Merry go rounds and equipment of all kinds giving rides to people, to which an
admission is charged, are declared places of public entertainment and shall pay
a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day if granted for less than a week,
and if granted for one week or more, then forty dollars ($40.00) per week and
sixty dollars ($60.00) per month. (1961 Code)
5-1-7: CARNIVALS:
A carnival, operated on the streets or in a vacant lot or place other than in a
building, shall be required to take out a license for each merry go round and
other apparatus giving rides, at the rates hereinbefore provided for the same,
and in addition shall pay a license at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per day
for every booth, stand or game. (1961 Code)
5-1-8: CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS NEAR MECHANICAL RIDES:
Any person who shall make application to the city clerk for a license to
conduct or operate any merry go round or mechanical device giving rides to
people shall at the same time of making such application file with the city
clerk a written statement, particularly describing the location of the place
where he desires to conduct or operate such mechanical rides which statement
shall have attached to it the written consent of four-fifths (4/5) of the
occupants of residence and business property within a radius of four hundred
feet (400') and no license shall be issued without such written consent being
filed. (1961 Code)
5-1-9: BOND:
Before a license be issued to a manager, owner or operator of a circus,
menagerie or carnival, such person shall be required to deposit with the city
clerk a cash bond of fifty dollars ($50.00), such bond to be a guarantee that
after the period during which the circus, menagerie or carnival is operated the
grounds or street or streets used for such operation be cleaned of all trash,
paper and other debris caused to be deposited thereon by said circus, menagerie
or carnival. Before returning said bond to the depositor, the city clerk shall
have such grounds, street or streets inspected for the purpose of ascertaining
that such cleaning has been done. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LICENSING AND REGULATING THEATERS
SECTION:
5-2-1: License Required; Application
5-2-2: Fee
5-2-3: Inspection
5-2-4: To Keep Aisles And Lobby Open
5-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
Before operating a theater within the city a license therefor shall be obtained
from the city clerk. The application for such license shall describe the
premises intended to be used, shall state the names and addresses of the owner
of the premises and of the proprietor of the business, shall have sufficient
evidence in connection with such application to establish that said theater and
its equipment and method of operation do and will conform with all building,
zoning, electrical, health and other applicable regulations of the city and the
state of Idaho; and shall contain such other information as may be deemed
necessary or advisable in the form of application which shall be furnished by
the city clerk. (1961 Code)
5-2-2: FEE:
There is an annual license fee to be paid to the city at the time of filing
such application for each theater to be licensed. All annual licenses shall
expire on December 31 following the issuance thereof. The license fee shall not
be prorated because of the fact that the license is issued for less than twelve
(12) months. (1961 Code; amd. per correspondence dated 6-15-2001)
5-2-3: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of any qualified person delegated by the mayor, to inspect
the place of business described in the application for a theater license prior
to the issuance of the license therein applied for, and also to make such
inspection, from time to time, to ensure that said place of business is, and
shall continue to be, suitable and safe for its use as a theater, and that all
regulations of the city and laws of the state of Idaho are being adhered to.
(1961 Code)
5-2-4: TO KEEP AISLES OPEN AND LOBBY OPEN:
No persons, other than ushers in the employ of the theater shall be allowed to
remain standing, and no chairs or seats shall be permitted to remain within any
of the aisles, passageways or in the lobby of the theater. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ADVERTISING AND BILLPOSTING
SECTION:
5-3-1: No Billposting Without A License
5-3-2: License, Terms
5-3-3: Littering Streets And Alleys With Posters
5-3-4: No Posting On Fences, Telegraph Poles; Consent For
5-3-1: NO BILLPOSTING WITHOUT A LICENSE:
No person or corporation shall engage in the distribution, posting, painting,
pasting or tacking of signs, bills, pictures or advertising matter announcing
the business or place or meeting of any entertainment, opera, theater,
menagerie or other exhibition of whatsoever nature or kind, or any other
advertising matter in any manner in the city except as hereinafter specified,
unless the said person or corporation shall first have been licensed as
hereinafter provided. (1961 Code)
5-3-2: LICENSE, TERMS:
Any person or corporation of good moral character desiring a license shall be
licensed by the city clerk to engage in the business of billposting, handbill
and sign advertising for the term of one year from the date of said license
upon the payment of the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the city
treasurer. Conditioned that the said person or corporation shall perform such
duties in a good, lawful and proper manner in compliance with the provisions of
the city governing the character of the matter posted, painted or distributed
and the manner of posting, painting and distributing the same. (1961 Code)
5-3-3: LITTERING STREETS AND ALLEYS WITH POSTERS:
No person shall scatter or throw upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the
city, handbills, posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein shall be
construed to authorize any person to obstruct the streets, sidewalks, and
alleys of the city or create any nuisance therein. The provisions of this
chapter do not interfere or prevent the posting of notices required by law to
be posted. (1961 Code)
5-3-4: NO POSTING ON FENCES, TELEGRAPH POLES; CONSENT FOR:
No person or corporation shall post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice
or other advertising matter to any of the fences, walls or buildings or other
property in the city. The person or corporation shall first obtain the consent
of the owner of such property or his authorized agent or tenant. No person or
corporation shall post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notices or
advertising matter to any of the telegraph, telephone, electric or other poles
in the streets or alleys of the city. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Applicability
5-4-2: Purpose
5-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and
retail businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits
or professions that conduct business from or at a location or locations within
the City of Kellogg or engage in any business, trade, or profession within the
geographic boundaries of the city of Kellogg with the object of gain, profit,
benefit or advantage. Each business location shall be deemed a separate
business unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business.
The permit is not intended to repeal any permit, license or franchise
provisions of any other ordinance, nor is the permit to be considered a waiver
of any other requirements of compliance with any federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. 639, 4-9-2025)
5-4-2: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to assist in providing the city information
as to congestion, zoning, planning, street construction and utility
distribution. These standards are desired to protect and promote the public
welfare, health, and safety of persons within the community, and to aid in the
development and promotion of business and industry.
(Ord. 639, 4-9-2025)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING SINGLE TRAILER COACHES
(Rep. by Ord. 364, 4-5-1989)
CHAPTER 6
MOTELS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Building Permit Required
5-6-2: Service Station Restrictions
5-6-3: Parking Space On Premises
5-6-4: Minimum Size; Equipment
5-6-5: To Conform With Fire And Building Code
5-6-6: Application To Include Plan
5-6-7: Guests Required To Register
5-6-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before construction of a motor court is started, a permit for such construction
shall be obtained from the city clerk of the city for its approval. (1961 Code)
5-6-2: SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS:
Automobile service stations incidental to the facility shall be located no
closer than one hundred feet (100') to any unit. (1961 Code)
5-6-3: PARKING SPACE ON PREMISES:
Each unit of a motel or tourist court shall be provided with an assigned
parking space entirely on the premises. (1961 Code)
5-6-4: MINIMUM SIZE; EQUIPMENT:
The minimum space for each unit shall be twelve feet by twenty feet (12' x 20')
and shall contain a full bath, toilet facilities, dressing compartment and
sleeping room. (1961 Code)
5-6-5: TO CONFORM WITH FIRE AND BUILDING CODE:
The plumbing, heating, fenestration and ventilation components shall meet all
local fire and building code requirements. (1961 Code)
5-6-6: APPLICATION TO INCLUDE PLAN:
Each application for a motel or tourist court shall be submitted with a
complete plan, including the plot plan and adjacent buildings, parking
arrangement and driveways, unit sizes, plumbing and heating layout, accessory
uses, materials to be used, front and rear elevations and architectural design.
Permits shall be issued by the city clerk. (1961 Code)
5-6-7: GUESTS REQUIRED TO REGISTER:
Every operator of a motor court shall maintain a register in which each guest
of such motor court shall register his name, home address and license number of
the motor car in which he is traveling. The date of his arrival and departure
shall also be recorded. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the motor court, and shall be preserved for a period not less
than one year. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose Of Chapter
5-7-2: Nuisance Declared
5-7-3: Unlawful To Perpetrate Nuisance
5-7-4: Authorization To Abate
5-7-5: Exceptions
5-7-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is passed to prevent and abate nuisances caused by peddlers,
hawkers, itinerant merchants and solicitors making uninvited entries in and
upon private residences. (1961 Code)
5-7-2: NUISANCES DECLARED:
The annoyances and disturbances attendant with the practice of engaging in
uninvited entries in and upon or trespassing in and upon private residences in
the city by peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and solicitors of any kind
of goods, wares, commodities, merchandise, publications and pictures or
services for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting for orders or offering or
exposing for sale, goods, wares, commodities, merchandise, publications and
pictures or services, for the purpose of canvassing, soliciting for orders or
offering or exposing for sale goods, wares, commodities, merchandise,
publications and pictures or services, or disposing of and/or peddling or
hawking the same, is hereby declared a nuisance and such nuisance is punishable
as a misdemeanor as hereinafter set forth. (1961 Code)
5-7-3: UNLAWFUL TO PERPETRATE NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or solicitor
of any kind or character of goods, wares, commodities, merchandise,
publications, pictures, or services to perpetrate such a nuisance as described
in this chapter, and any person convicted of such a nuisance shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1961 Code)
5-7-4: AUTHORIZATION TO ABATE:
The police authorities of the city are hereby authorized and directed to abate
said nuisance as described herein and arrest violators of this chapter and also
to suppress such nuisance. (1961 Code)
5-7-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, or soliciting of
orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs, and
other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named
herein is now authorized by law; provided, further, that such exempted
commodities must be produced in Idaho. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ITINERANT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
5-8-1: License Required
5-8-2: Definitions
5-8-3: Application
5-8-4: Investigation And Issuance
5-8-5: Bond
5-8-6: Service Of Process
5-8-7: Exhibition Of License
5-8-8: Fees
5-8-9: Transfer
5-8-10: Loud Noises And Speaking Devices
5-8-11: Duty Of Police To Enforce
5-8-12: Records
5-8-13: Revocation Of License
5-8-14: Appeal
5-8-15: Expiration Of License
5-8-16: Hours Of Door To Door Sale
5-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor as defined in this chapter to engage in such business within the city
without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (1961 Code)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter a "transient merchant, itinerant merchant or
vendor" is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent,
consignee, employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a
temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise
within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses
or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or
boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any place
within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction provided that such
definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation
who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but
exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery
only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or be
conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the
name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (1961 Code)
5-8-3: APPLICATION:
Applicants for license under this chapter, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if
an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, with the city clerk, showing:
   A.   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it
will be carried on in the city, the local address or addresses of such person
or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses
of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will
act (that is, whether as a proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and
address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will
be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the
same is incorporated;
   B.   The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three (3)
letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county,
certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or
other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the mayor the good
character and business responsibility of such person or persons;
   C.   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposes that
said business will be conducted;
   D.   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where applicant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of
said application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which
such business was conducted;
   E.   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the city, the
invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, whether the
same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in
possession and by sample; at auction, by direct sale or by taking orders for
future delivery; where the goods or property proposed to be sold are
manufactured or produced and where such goods or products are located at the
time said application is filed;
   F.   A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done
or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the
clerk, copies of all said advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper
advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits
thereto;
   G.   Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such
offense and the punishment assessed therefor;
   H.   Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative; and
   I.   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city clerk may
deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the
public good. (1961 Code)
5-8-4: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of such application the city clerk shall cause such investigation
of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral character to be
made as he deems necessary to the protection of the public good. If, as a
result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied.
If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business reputation
appear to be satisfactory, the city clerk shall so certify in writing, and a
license shall be issued by the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a full
record in his office of all licenses issued. Such license shall contain the
number of the license, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business
authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration
date of said license, the place where said business may be carried on under
said license, and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to
carry on the same. (1961 Code)
5-8-5: BOND:
Before any license, as provided by this chapter shall be issued for engaging in
a transient or itinerant business as defined in this chapter in the city, such
applicant shall file with the city clerk a bond running to the city in the sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed by the applicant, as principal,
and two (2) sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state of
Idaho; said bond to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the said
applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the
city and the statutes of the state of Idaho regulating and concerning the sale
of goods, wares and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against
said applicant for any violation of said laws or statutes, or any of them
together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any
person or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception
practiced on any person or persons transacting such business with such
applicant, whether said misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practices
by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of
making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever,
printed, or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold
or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city
to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the city
attorney, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon.
(1961 Code)
5-8-6: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in business
as an itinerant merchant as herein defined in the city, such applicant shall
file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city
clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his true and
lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of
process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matter connected
with or arising out of the business transacted under said license and the bond
given as required by this chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of
said bond or for any breach thereof, which said instrument shall also contain
recitals to the effect that said applicant for said consents and agrees that
service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so made
shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person
or persons applying for the said license under this chapter, according to the
law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by
reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. Immediately
upon service or process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk
shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a
copy of said process. (1961 Code)
5-8-7: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons
applying for said license shall desire to do business in more than one place in
the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall
be posted conspicuously in each place of business. (1961 Code)
5-8-8: FEES:
Licensees under this chapter shall pay a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per
day, payable in advance. (1961 Code)
5-8-9: TRANSFER:
No license shall be transferred. (1961 Code)
5-8-10: LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES:
No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make an
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any
loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places in the said city or upon any premises in the said city
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of
being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. (1961 Code)
5-8-11: DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE:
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all places
of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the
provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with
and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same. (1961 Code)
5-8-12: RECORDS:
The city clerk shall deposit the record of fingerprints of licensee, together
with a license number with the chief of police. The chief of police shall
report to the city clerk any complaints against any person licensed under the
provisions of this chapter and any conviction for violation of this chapter,
the city clerk shall keep a record of all such licenses and of such complaints
and violations. (1961 Code)
5-8-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked
by the mayor of the city after notice and hearing for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      2.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;
      3.   Any violation of this chapter;
      4.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
      5.   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid to the
licensee, at his last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. (1961 Code)
5-8-14: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk in regard to the denial
of application for license as provided for in this chapter or in connection
with the revocation of a license as herein provided, shall have the right to
appeal to the council of the city. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
the council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the decision by the city
clerk has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set the time and
place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in this chapter for notice of
hearing on revocation. The order of this council on such appeal shall be final.
(1961 Code)
5-8-15: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire ninety
(90) days after the date of issuance thereof unless a prior date is fixed
therein. (1961 Code)
5-8-16: HOURS OF DOOR TO DOOR SALE:
No person shall sell door to door or solicit for sale or petition between the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. according to the
standard of time recognized by the city. (Ord. 551, 3-9-2011)
CHAPTER 9
PHOTOGRAPHERS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definition
5-9-2: License Required For Resident Photographer
5-9-3: License Fee Of Resident Photographer
5-9-4: Definition Of Transient Photographer
5-9-5: License Required For Transient Photographer
5-9-6: License Fee Of Transient Photographer
5-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term photographer in this chapter shall include any person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of taking pictures or views by or with
photographic equipment whether said business is carried on as a sideline to the
sale of merchandise other than pictures or solely carried on for the purpose of
dealing in pictures. It shall also include persons engaged in the business of
engraving, retouching or reconditioning photographs. (Ord. 268, 2-7-1973)
5-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR RESIDENT PHOTOGRAPHER:
Any resident person, firm or corporation conducting the business of photography
in the city shall first obtain a license from the city clerk authorizing him
and/or them to carry on such business. (Ord. 268, 2-7-1973)
5-9-3: LICENSE FEE OF RESIDENT PHOTOGRAPHER:
The license fee for any resident person, firm or corporation conducting the
business of photography in the city shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year,
payable on January 1. (Ord. 268, 2-7-1973)
5-9-4: DEFINITION OF TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER:
A "transient photographer", for the purpose of this chapter, is hereby defined
as any itinerant photographer, picture or view taker, coupon salesman,
enlargement solicitor or canvasser therefor, not residing in and/or conducting
said business in said city for a period of at least one full calendar month,
after which he is considered a resident photographer and shall be entitled to
the rights and privileges thereof, and a refund of all money in excess of the
regular resident photographer fees. (Ord. 268, 2-7-1973)
5-9-5: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER:
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or follow the business or
occupation of a transient photographer within the city without first having
obtained a license therefor from the city clerk of the city. (Ord. 268, 2-7-
1973)
5-9-6: LICENSE FEE OF TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER:
The license fee for any transient person, firm or corporation carrying on the
business of photography in the city, shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day for
each and every person engaged in, assisting, soliciting, touching up, or in any
way connected with such business. Providing however, that when any person, firm
or corporation shall buy, purchase, or in any legal way acquire a legally
established business within the city he shall be entitled to resident license
rates immediately. (Ord. 268, 2-7-1973)
CHAPTER 10
BEER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-10-1: Definitions
5-10-2: Alcoholic Content
5-10-3: License Required
5-10-4: Application Form
5-10-5: Annual License Limited In Number Issued
5-10-6: License Fee
5-10-7: Qualifications Of Licensee
5-10-8: Power To Refuse, Revoke And Inspect
5-10-9: Licenses Transferable
5-10-10: To Post License
5-10-11: Sale In Private Residence Prohibited
5-10-12: Soliciting Sales Prohibited
5-10-13: Limitations On Age Prescribed
5-10-14: Open Container Of Beer In Or On Public Highways, Streets, Sidewalks Or
Parking Lots Prohibited
5-10-15: Hours Of Sale
5-10-16: Loaning Of Money Or Credit Prohibited
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or
decoction of barley, kale and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the
consumer. (1961 Code)
5-10-2: ALCOHOLIC CONTENT:
Beer containing not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by weight may be
sold and distributed in the city, or possessed therein in the manner and under
the conditions prescribed in this chapter and not otherwise. It shall be
unlawful to sell and dispose of, or possess for the purpose of retail sale,
beer of any kind or character of any alcoholic content greater than herein
prescribed or other than in the manner permitted by this chapter. (1961 Code)
5-10-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell at retail to
the consumer any beer within the corporate limits of the city, without first
obtaining a license therefor from the said city, and a separate license shall
be required for each place of business where beer is sold. (1961 Code)
5-10-4: APPLICATION FORM:
All applications for licenses must be in writing and filed with the city clerk
upon forms, provided by the city, and such applications must be accompanied by
the license fee prescribed herein, and shall specify:
   A.   The name, age and citizenship of the applicant if an individual, and if
a corporation, the name of the state or county in which corporated, its
principal place of business, together with its principal place of business in
Idaho, and the names and places of residence of its designated agent in Idaho,
and if a partnership, the names and residences of all partners.
   B.   If the application is made by an individual, a statement as to whether
or not he is a citizen of the United States and if so, when and where born, if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place and where he was naturalized.
   C.   The length of time the applicant has resided in the city and if a
corporation, when and where it first commenced to do business in Idaho.
   D.   The city council shall grant or deny the application within thirty (30)
days of the time it is filed with the city clerk. Prior to any revocation or
suspension the licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to section 23-
1016, Idaho Code. Whenever the mayor and city council deny an application, they
shall specify in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   In all cases where the city council is considering applications for
licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of
the proceeding shall be made. If the applicant for a license, transfer or
renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the
matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention
of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The
city council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the
proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by
law.
   No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation
by the police department of all applicants hereunder. After investigation the
applications will be forwarded to the city council with a recommendation from
the chief of police. If the chief of police recommended that an application be
denied, he shall state in writing:
      1.   The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 333, 4-11-1984)
5-10-5: ANNUAL LICENSE LIMITED IN NUMBER ISSUED:
Such licenses shall in the first instance be issued for the remainder of the
then current year and thereafter shall be reissued or renewed for the full
period of one calendar year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which they were issued. No license shall be issued for a shorter period
of time than one year, except as herein provided. There shall not be issued in
excess of four (4) licenses of each classification as the same are defined for
licensing purposes herein in this chapter per each one thousand (1,000)
population or fraction thereof. (1961 Code)
5-10-6: LICENSE FEE:
The retailer desiring to engage in the retail sale of beer shall apply to the
city for a retail license and shall pay an annual license fee as follows:
   A.   Where such retailer sells only bottled or canned beer, none of which is
consumed on the premises where sold, the annual license fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   B.   Where such retailer sells only bottled or canned beer which is consumed
on the premises where sold, the annual license fee shall be one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
   C.   Where such retailer sells draught beer and bottled or canned beer, or
draught beer only, the annual license fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00).
The license fee herein provided shall be paid in advance and expiration date of
the license issued as herein provided shall be one year from the date of
issuance. (Ord. 322, 9-8-1981)
5-10-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No license to sell beer at retail shall be granted except to a person of good
moral character and/or repute and nineteen (19) years of age or over; nor shall
any such license be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United
States, or who has not been a bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a
period of one year prior to the date of making application, or who shall have
been convicted for the violation of any law of Idaho or the United States
regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverage or
intoxicating liquor; provided, however, that in case the applicant is a
partnership, the requirements relative to residence shall be deemed satisfied
when any member of the partnership, or the actual manager thereof has been a
bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a period of one year prior to date
of making such application, nor shall any such license be granted to any
applicant who has not been granted a license to sell beer at retail by the
county in the event said county license such sales, nor shall any person be
permitted to receive or hold a license under this chapter for use in connection
with any business not under the personal supervision, management and control of
said person to whom said license is issued. (Ord. 270, 5-9-1973)
5-10-8: POWER TO REFUSE, REVOKE AND INSPECT:
The city council shall have the power to refuse a license to any applicant and/
or revoke a license at any time when in the judgment of said city council the
business interests and the welfare of the city and/or the inhabitants, thereof,
will be best served by the denial or revocation thereof; and for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not any licensee is conforming with the provisions of
this and other chapters of the city as well as the laws of the state of Idaho,
the police of the city shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect
the places where beer is sold under the licenses issued. (1961 Code)
5-10-9: LICENSES TRANSFERABLE:
No person shall be granted more than one license for any one year, but the
council in its discretion, may permit the location of the place of business
designated in the license to be changed, without any charge therefor.
Licenses issued under the provisions hereof may be transferred upon proper
application, provided that any proposed transferee shall meet all of the
conditions and qualifications of a licensee under this chapter. Applications
for a transfer of a license shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars
($5.00), shall contain all of the information required in a license
application, and shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and the council.
Upon approval the license shall be endorsed over to the transferee by said
licensee for the remainder of the period for which said license has been issued
and the city clerk shall note on said license the approval of the transfer by
the mayor and council. (1961 Code)
5-10-10: TO POST LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of each person to whom a license is issued under this
chapter to keep the same at all times posted in a conspicuous place in his
place of business. (1961 Code)
5-10-11: SALE IN PRIVATE RESIDENCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, beer at any
private dwelling, apartment house, lodging house, or private room used for
dwelling purposes in the city. (1961 Code)
5-10-12: SOLICITING SALES PROHIBITED:
No license shall be issued hereunder for the sale of, nor shall any person
acting under such license, sell beer by peddling or in any way soliciting
orders for the same, and no sale shall be made except in the place for which
the license has been granted, provided, however, that any licensee may accept
orders left at his place of business by a purchaser and/or consumer and make
delivery thereof. (1961 Code)
5-10-13: LIMITATIONS ON AGE PRESCRIBED:
It shall be unlawful to sell beer to or by any person under the age of twenty
(20) years. (1961 Code)
5-10-14: OPEN CONTAINER OF BEER IN OR ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR
PARKING LOTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall have an open container of beer upon any public highway, or
street or sidewalk or parking lot within the limits of the city. (Ord. 305, 6-
14-1978)
5-10-15: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensed beer dispenser within the city to sell or
to otherwise dispose of beer within the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. according to the standard of time recognized by the
city or to permit such beverages to be possessed, consumed or drunk upon the
premises under the control of such licensed dispenser of beer, with no
consumption after two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M., as allowed per Idaho Code 23-
1012(2) and 23-1012(4). (Ord. 543, 2-10-2010)
5-10-16: LOANING OF MONEY OR CREDIT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensed beer dispenser to advance money or credit
on the security of personal property pledged or deposited in said licensee's
keeping without keeping a written daily record of the following:
   A.   An accurate description of the personal property pledged or deposited.
   B.   Name, residence address and description of the person or persons from
whom said personal property is received.
   C.   The date when said personal property is received. Said record shall be
open to the inspection of any police officer of the city at all times during
regular business hours of said licensee. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 11
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
5-11-1: Purpose Of Chapter
5-11-2: License Required
5-11-3: Application For License
5-11-4: Qualifications
5-11-5: License Fee
5-11-6: Issuance Of License
5-11-7: Licenses Transferable
5-11-8: State Law Violation
5-11-9: Grounds For Revocation Of License
5-11-10: Hours Of Sale And City Option On Days Of Sale
5-11-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is passed pursuant to and under the authority of provisions of
chapter 274 of the Idaho session laws of 1947. (1961 Code)
5-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink at retail within
the corporate limits of the city after having first procured a license as
hereinafter provided. (1961 Code)
5-11-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be in writing signed and sworn to be the
applicant upon application forms furnished by the city clerk and presented to
the mayor and city council at the next regular meeting of the said council for
their approval, rejection or further consideration. (1961 Code)
5-11-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary
to obtain a license from the commissioner of law enforcement of the state of
Idaho, as prescribed, and maintain such qualifications throughout the period
for which such license is issued. The possession of a license regularly issued
by the department of law enforcement of the state of Idaho shall be prima facie
evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder.
(1961 Code)
5-11-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum of five hundred sixty
two dollars fifty cents ($562.50) per annum for the license year, within which
license year shall be from January 1 to December 31. Provided, however, that if
the license be issued for less than a full calendar year, the license fee shall
be prorated as of the actual month of issue. (1961 Code)
5-11-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon producing
evidence of the issuance of a license to the applicant by the commissioner or
law enforcement of the state of Idaho, and upon approval by the mayor and the
city council of such application, and the payment of the license fee as herein
provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell liquor
by the drink at retail within the city for such calendar year or the remainder
thereof. (1961 Code)
5-11-7: LICENSES TRANSFERABLE:
No person shall be granted more than one license for any one year, but the
council, in its discretion, may permit the location of the place of business
designated in the license to be changed, without any charge therefor.
Licenses issued under the provisions hereof may be transferred upon proper
application, provided that any proposed transferee shall meet all of the
conditions and qualifications of a licensee under this chapter. Applications
for a transfer of a license shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars
($5.00), shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council. Upon
approval the license shall be endorsed over to the transferee by said licensee
for the remainder of the period for which said license has been issued and the
city clerk shall note on said license the approval of the transfer by the mayor
and council. (1961 Code)
5-11-8: STATE LAW VIOLATION:
A violation of any of the provisions of the Idaho Code shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the commissioner of law enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence for
revocation or suspension of the license issued hereunder. (1961 Code)
5-11-9: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or conviction in any court
of a felony, or conviction in any court of a nuisance, shall be considered
adequate grounds for revocation of a liquor license; provided, however, any
charges brought against a licensee shall not be limited to the above listed
violations. (1961 Code)
5-11-10: HOURS OF SALE AND CITY OPTION ON DAYS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensed liquor dispenser within the city to sell
or to otherwise dispose of liquor within the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. according to the standard of time recognized by
the city or to permit such beverages to be possessed, consumed or drunk upon
the premises under the control of such licensed dispenser of liquor, with no
consumption after two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M., as allowed per Idaho Code 23-
1012(2) and 23-1012(4) and for the city's option on days of sale to extend
additional days to Sundays, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving as allowed by Idaho
Code 23-927. (Ord. 544, 2-10-2010)
CHAPTER 12
MILK REGULATIONS
(Rep. by correspondence dated 6-15-2001)
CHAPTER 13
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
5-13-1: Definitions
5-13-2: License
5-13-3: Fee
5-13-4: Duties
5-13-5: Records; Open For Inspection
5-13-6: Pawn Tickets; Tags
5-13-7: Application For License
5-13-8: Penalties For Violation
5-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
Every person, firm, association or corporation who in the course of business
loans money on deposit or purchase of personal property or other valuable
thing, or who deals in the purchase of personal property or other valuable
thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who
loans money secured by chattel mortgage or personal property, having possession
of the property, or any portion or part thereof mortgaged or who advertises by
use of "three ball", or pawnbroker's sign, or by advertising "unredeemed
pledges", or by using the term "uncle" or by any other expression designating
pawnbroker's business, shall, for purposes of this chapter be declared to be a
"pawnbroker". (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-2: LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, association or corporation to operate as a
pawnbroker without a license therefor, as herein provided, provided that no
such license shall be granted or issued to any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years or to any association or corporation whose managing agent is
under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-3: FEE:
The fee for the license required of every person, association or corporation
operating as a pawnbroker in the city of Kellogg shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) for each year, and said license shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which issued. (Ord. 448, 12-8-1999)
5-13-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker doing business in the city of Kellogg
to maintain at his place of business a book or other permanent record in which
shall be legibly written in the English language, at the time of each loan,
purchase or sale, a record thereof containing:
   A.   The date of the transaction;
   B.   The name of the person or employee conducting the same;
   C.   The name, age, street and house number, or, address if none, and a
general description of the dress, complexion, color hair, and facial appearance
of the person with whom the transaction is had;
   D.   The name and street and house number, or, address if none, of the owner
of the property bought or received in pledge;
   E.   The street and house number, or, address if none, of the place from
which the property bought or received in pledge was last removed;
   F.   A description of the property bought or received in pledge, which in
the case of watches shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both
the works and the case, and in case of jewelry, shall contain a description of
all letters and marks inscribed thereon, and in the case of all other personal
property the serial number of all articles so marked and any inscriptions or
identifying marks, as well as the brand or manufacturer's name;
   G.   The amount of money loaned;
   H.   The names and street and house numbers, or, address if none, of all
persons witnessing the transaction; and
   I.   The number of any pawn ticket issued therefor. (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970,
eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-5: RECORDS; OPEN FOR INSPECTION:
Such record, and all goods received, shall at all times during the ordinary
hours of business, be open to the inspection of the prosecuting authority of
the state, county and city, or any representative thereof, or of any peace
officer thereof. Said records shall be maintained and kept available for
inspection by the licensee for a period of three (3) years from the date of the
last transaction recorded therein. (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-6: PAWN TICKETS; TAGS:
Every pawnbroker shall issue numbered pawn tickets for any property received by
him as a pledge or security for a loan, which ticket shall be considered a
receipt for such property. Tags shall be attached to all such property, and
upon each tag shall be written in legible figures a number which shall
correspond to the number on the pawn ticket issued for said property. (Ord.
249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a pawnbroker's license shall be accompanied by the form of
the agreement to be signed by the persons seeking loans and also by a copy of
the certificate or ticket to be issued by the pawnbroker to persons accepting
loans. (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
5-13-8: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Every pawnbroker and every clerk, agent or employee of such pawnbroker who
shall:
   A.   Fail to make an entry of any material matter in his book or record kept
as provided for in this chapter; or
   B.   Make any false entry therein; or
   C.   Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from his place of business such
book or record for three (3) years following the date of the last recorded
transaction therein; or
   D.   Refuse to allow the prosecuting authority of the state, county or city
or his authorized representative, or any peace officer thereof, to inspect the
same, or any goods in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business; or
   E.   Fail to report forthwith to the chief of police the possession of any
property which he may have good cause to believe has been lost or stolen,
together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when, and the name
of the person whom the same was received by him; or
   F.   Remove, or allow to be removed from his place of business, except upon
redemption by the owners thereof, any property received, during the redemption
period; or (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
   G.   Receive any property from any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years, any habitual user of narcotic drugs, any habitual criminal, any person
in an intoxicated condition, any known thief or receiver of stolen property, or
any known associate of such thief or receiver of stolen property, whether such
person be acting in his own behalf or as the agent of another; or (Ord. 448,
12-8-1999)
   H.   Violate any provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city
of Kellogg having application to the business or persons herein regulated;
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine in any sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in the city jail, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 249, 9-9-1970, eff. 9-24-1970)
CHAPTER 14
RETAIL SALE OF WINE
SECTION:
5-14-1: Statement Of Purpose
5-14-2: Volume Content
5-14-3: License Required
5-14-4: Revocation Of License
5-14-5: License Not Transferable
5-14-6: Wine By The Drink
5-14-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
Whereas, the legislature of the state of Idaho in the first regular session,
41st legislature did, pursuant to house bill no. 96, 1971 Idaho session laws
chapter 156, authorize the retail sale of wine containing not more than
fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by persons other than the state liquor
dispensary, and authorizing cities throughout the state to adopt ordinances
authorizing such sale, it is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of
the mayor and council of the city to authorize issuance of retail licenses for
the sale of wine within this city pursuant to the terms and conditions of said
act. (Ord. 271, 7-11-1973)
5-14-2: VOLUME CONTENT:
From and after the day of July 1, 1971, retail sales of wine containing not
more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume shall be permitted and is
hereby authorized in the city of Kellogg, Shoshone County, Idaho. (Ord. 271, 7-
11-1973)
5-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Before any person shall engage in the retail sale of wine as defined in said
act, such person shall apply to the city for a retail wine license and shall
pay an annual fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No retail wine
license shall be issued to an applicant who does not possess the qualifications
set forth in said act. (Ord. 323, 9-8-1981)
5-14-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The retail license of any retailer who violated any of the laws of the state,
the United States, Shoshone County or this city relating to the sale of
alcoholic beverages, beer or wine shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the mayor and council of this city. (Ord. 271, 7-11-1973)
5-14-5: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No retail wine license or wine by the drink license may be transferred to
another person, including executor, administrator, or trustee in bankruptcy of
the estate of the licensee, unless the transferee shall first have obtained the
approval of the mayor and council to such transfer upon application containing
substantially the same information required of an applicant for a city retail
wine license. If the transferee possesses all of the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications for such license, the mayor and council shall approve the
transfer, which approval shall be attached and made a part of the license. The
fee for each transfer of a retail wine license shall be five dollars ($5.00),
which fee shall accompany the application for transfer. (Ord. 271, 7-11-1973)
5-14-6: WINE BY THE DRINK:
It shall be lawful to sell wine by the drink within the limits of the city at
times and places permitted by the laws of the state and ordinances of the city,
provided such wine is sold for consumption on the premises only, and provided
the retailer is in possession of current state, county and city wine by the
drink licenses. (Ord. 271, 7-11-1973)
The retailer desiring to engage in the retail sale of wine by the drink as
herein defined shall apply to the city for a retail wine by the drink license
and shall pay an annual license fee therefor in the sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00). No retail wine by the drink license shall be issued to an applicant
who does not possess the qualifications required by the state for a state wine
by the drink license. (Ord. 324, 9-8-1981)
CHAPTER 15
CATERING PERMITS
SECTION:
5-15-1: Definition Of Catering Permits
5-15-2: Requirement To Purchase
5-15-3: Fees
5-15-4: Duration
5-15-5: Use
5-15-6: Issuance
5-15-1: DEFINITION OF CATERING PERMITS:
A temporary permit to authorize issuance of an alcohol beverage catering permit
to alcohol, beer and wine licensees to serve the beverage for which they are
licensed at special events and to serve alcoholic beverages off the premises of
a licensed establishment. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
5-15-2: REQUIREMENT TO PURCHASE:
Valid State, County and City of Kellogg alcohol license is required prior to
applying for a catering permit in the City of Kellogg. The permit can only be
issued for the alcoholic beverage for which licensees are licensed, except that
craft breweries and wineries shall not be required to obtain a City of Kellogg
alcohol license. For craft breweries and wineries a valid State and County
alcohol license shall be sufficient to obtain a City of Kellogg catering
permit. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to craft breweries and
wineries. No alcohol beverage catering permit issued pursuant to this section
shall be used on a licensed premises. All requirements of the State of Idaho
for issuance of catering permits must be followed. (Ord. 588, 7-19-2017)
5-15-3: FEES:
Fees are the same as set by the State of Idaho. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
5-15-4: DURATION:
Permits can be issued for a maximum of five (5) consecutive days. (Ord. 588, 7-
19-2017)
5-15-5: USE:
Catering permits can only be issued for special events. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
5-15-6: ISSUANCE:
Catering permits will be issued by the City Clerk's Office and signed by the
City Clerk and Chief of Police. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
CHAPTER 16
SPECIAL ALCOHOL USE PERMIT
SECTION:
5-16-1: Definition Of Special Alcohol Use Permit
5-16-2: Requirement
5-16-3: Fees
5-16-4: Issuance
5-16-1: DEFINITION OF SPECIAL ALCOHOL USE PERMIT:
Special permit required for special event where alcohol will be consumed but
not sold in the city of Kellogg Memorial Park. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
5-16-2: REQUIREMENT:
Permit must be applied for through the city of Kellogg for special events to be
held in the city of Kellogg Memorial Park where alcohol will be served but not
sold. No permit shall be issued to anyone under the Idaho legal drinking age
and no one under the Idaho legal drinking age will be permitted to consume
alcoholic beverages in the city of Kellogg Memorial Park. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
5-16-3: FEES:
There will be no fee for the issuance of this special alcohol use permit. (Ord.
550, 3-9-2011)
5-16-4: ISSUANCE:
Special alcohol use permits will be issued by the city clerk's office and
signed by the city clerk and chief of police. (Ord. 550, 3-9-2011)
CHAPTER 17
SHORT TERM RENTALS
SECTION:
5-17-1: Title
5-17-2: Purpose And Application
5-17-3: Definitions
5-17-4: Authorized Agent Or Representative
5-17-5: Short Term Rental Operator Permit; Required
5-17-6: Short Term Rental Operator Permit; Application
5-17-7: Permit Granting Process
5-17-8: Operational Requirements And Standard Conditions
5-17-9: Recordkeeping Duties
5-17-10: Violations
5-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as SHORT TERM RENTALS. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-2: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the use of
residential dwellings as short term tourist home rentals that ensure the
collection and payment of hotel-motel room occupancy charge taxes (HMROCT) and
minimize the negative secondary effects of such use on surrounding residential
neighborhoods, while allowing private property owners the right to fully and
efficiently utilize their property without undue regulation or interference.
   B.   This chapter is not intended to provide any owner of residential
property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions,
covenants and restrictions applicable to the owner's property that may prohibit
the use of such owner's residential property for short term rental purposes as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICABLE LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS: Any laws, rules, regulations and codes
(whether local, state or federal) pertaining to the use and occupancy of a
privately owned dwelling unit as a short term rental.
APPLICANT: The owner of the tourist home or the owner's authorized agent or
representative.
APPLICATION FEE: The fee set by city resolution due and payable at the time the
operator applies for a short term rental operator permit.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: That person acting in the capacity of the building official
of the city of Kellogg or his/her designee.
GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY AND REGULATIONS: A document prepared by the city that
summarizes the general rules of conduct, consideration, and respect, including,
without limitation, provisions of this code and other applicable laws, rules or
regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of tourist homes.
LOCAL CONTACT PERSON: The person designated by the owner, or the owner's
authorized agent or representative, who shall be available twenty four (24)
hours per day, seven (7) days per week while the tourist home is rented, for
the purpose of: a) responding within sixty (60) minutes to complaints regarding
the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the tourist home; and b)
taking remedial action to resolve any such complaints.
MUNICIPAL NONPROPERTY TAX PERMIT: A permit issued by the city clerk/treasurer
or his/her designee that allows an individual or entity to engage in or conduct
the business of renting a tourist home within the city limits pursuant to the
provisions of ordinance 574, as it now exists, or as it is subsequently
codified or amended.
OPERATOR: The owner or the designated agent or representative of the owner who
is responsible for compliance with this chapter with respect to the tourist
home. An operator may be an individual, or some other legal entity. An operator
may operate one or more tourist homes.
OPERATOR PERMIT: The permit issued by the city of Kellogg that authorizes an
operator to manage tourist property(ies) for itself or another. Each operator
is required to possess a valid permit; a single permit may cover multiple
tourist homes. If the permit is for multiple tourist homes, the application
requirements must be met for each tourist home listed under the permit.
OWNER: The person(s) or entity(ies) that hold(s) legal and/or equitable title
to the subject tourist home.
PROPERTY: A residential legal lot of record on which a tourist home is located.
RENEWAL FEE: The fee set by city fee resolution which is due annually at the
time of renewal required by section
5-17-5  of this chapter.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: An occupant of a tourist home who is at least twenty one
(21) years of age and who is legally responsible for ensuring that all
occupants of the tourist home and/or their guests comply with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject
tourist home.
SHORT TERM RENTAL OPERATOR PERMIT: A permit that allows the use of a
residential dwelling as a tourist home pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and that incorporates by consolidation a municipal nonproperty tax
permit and any other potential licensing required by this code. A short term
rental operator permit shall constitute a zoning improvement or business
development permit for the purpose of applying these regulations.
TOURIST HOME: A residential dwelling, such as, but not limited to, a single-
family detached or multiple-family attached unit, apartment house, bed and
breakfast, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex, or any portion of such
dwellings, rented for occupancy for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes for
any continuous period not in excess of thirty (30) days. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-4: AUTHORIZED AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE:
   A.   An owner shall, or shall designate an agent or a representative to,
comply with the requirements of this chapter on behalf of the owner.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the owner shall not be
relieved from any personal responsibility or personal liability for
noncompliance with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use
and occupancy of the subject tourist home, regardless of whether such
noncompliance was committed by the owner, operator, local contact person,
responsible person, or other occupants or their guests of the owner's tourist
home. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-5: SHORT TERM RENTAL OPERATOR PERMIT; REQUIRED:
   A.   The operator of a tourist home is required to obtain a short term
rental operator permit and a municipal nonproperty tax permit from the city,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and title 1, chapter 17 of this code
respectively, before renting any privately owned residential dwelling to any
person for a period less than a monthly basis.
   B.   A short term rental operator permit shall be required to be renewed on
an annual basis. All such permits shall expire on September 30, and a new
permit shall be required to be purchased on or before October 1 in order for
the continued operation of a tourist home to remain valid.
   C.   Those tourist homes which are authorized to operate, and in operation
at the time this chapter goes into effect shall be required to obtain a short
term rental operator permit and a municipal nonproperty tax permit, however the
initial application fee shall be waived for 2015. Owners of existing authorized
tourist homes shall still be required to pay the renewal fee. (Ord. 581, 5-11-
2016)
5-17-6: SHORT TERM RENTAL OPERATOR PERMIT; APPLICATION:
   A.   The operator of a tourist home must submit the following information on
a short term rental operator permit application form provided by the city:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of the
proposed tourist home(s);
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the operator;
      3.   The name, address, and twenty four (24) hour telephone number of the
local contact person;
      4.   The address of the proposed tourist home(s);
      5.   The number of bedrooms of the proposed tourist home;
      6.   Description of parking and number of spaces available on site;
      7.   Acknowledgment of receipt and inspection of a copy of the good
neighbor policy and regulations;
      8.   Such other information as the building official or designee deems
reasonably necessary to administer this chapter.
   B.   The short term rental operator permit application shall be accompanied
by the application fee. As noted in the definition section, an operator permit
may be issued for multiple tourist homes being operated by one operator. The
information required in subsection A of this section must be provided for each
tourist home, however only one application fee shall be required per operator.
   C.   The building official, or his/her designee shall issue the short term
rental operator permit, which will incorporate a municipal nonproperty tax
permit, as provided in ordinance 574 if the applicant satisfies the
requirements of this chapter.
   D.   A short term rental operator permit application may be denied if the
applicant, or owner if they are not the same, has had a prior short term rental
operator permit for the same tourist home revoked within the past twelve (12)
calendar months.
   E.   Within fourteen (14) days of a change of property ownership, change of
operator, or any other material change in facts pertaining to the information
contained in the short term rental operator permit, the new proposed operator
shall submit an update to the short term rental operator permit, which must be
obtained prior to continuing to rent the subject unit as a short term rental.
(Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-7: PERMIT GRANTING PROCESS:
   A.   Permitting Process: Upon receipt of a completed application and receipt
of the requisite fees, the building official or his/her designee shall verify:
      1.   Number Of Bedrooms: The number of bedrooms; and
      2.   On Site Parking Required/Space Per Bedroom: The location possesses
adequate on site parking allowing for at least one parking space per bedroom up
to a maximum of three (3). All parking associated with a short term vacation
rental shall be entirely on site, in the garage, carport, and driveway or
otherwise off of the public street.
   B.   Verification: Upon verification by the building official, or his/her
authorized designee of compliance with subsections A1 through A2 of this
section, he/she shall sign the application and shall issue the permit. (Ord.
581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-8: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARD CONDITIONS:
   A.   Business Practices: The operator shall use reasonably prudent business
practices to ensure that the tourist home is used in a manner that complies
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
   B.   Maximum Number Of Occupants: The maximum number of overnight guests
occupying a tourist home shall not exceed two (2) persons per bedroom.
Additional daytime guests are allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., with the maximum daytime guests not to
exceed four (4) persons per bedroom with a maximum of twenty (20).
   C.   Appearance, Visibility Or Location: The residential character of the
outside appearance of the tourist home shall not be altered, either by the use
of colors, materials, lighting, or any advertising mechanism, other than one
sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet. The tourist home's address must be
visible from the street.
   D.   On Site Parking Required: All parking associated with a short term
vacation rental shall be entirely on site, in the garage, carport, and driveway
or otherwise off of the public street. There shall be parking maintained on
site adequate for at least one parking space per bedroom, up to a maximum of
three (3).
   E.   Noise: Occupants of the tourist home shall comply with the standards
and regulations of title 11, chapter 6 of this Code.
   F.   Renter Notification: The operator shall provide each occupant of the
tourist home with the following information prior to occupancy of the unit and/
or shall post such information in a prominent location within the unit:
      1.   A copy of the Municipal Nonproperty Tax permit.
      2.   A copy of the short term rental operator permit.
      3.   The name and phone number of the operator and the local contact
person.
      4.   The maximum number of overnight occupants and the maximum number of
daytime occupants as permitted pursuant to this chapter.
      5.   Trash pick up day and applicable rules and regulations pertaining to
leaving or storing trash on the exterior of the property.
      6.   A copy of the good neighbor policy and regulations.
      7.   Parking locations and requirements.
   G.   Availability Of Local Contact Person: While a tourist home is rented,
the local contact person shall be available twenty four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week for the purpose of responding within sixty (60) minutes
to complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of
the tourist home or their guests.
   H.   Unreasonable Noise And Disorderly Conduct: The operator and the local
contact person shall use reasonably prudent business practices to ensure that
the occupants and/or guests of the tourist home do not create unreasonable
noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate any applicable
law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject
tourist home.
   I.   Prior To Occupancy: Prior to occupancy of a tourist home, the operator
shall: 1) obtain the name, address, and a copy of a valid government
identification of the responsible person; 2) provide a copy of the good
neighbor policy and regulations to the responsible person; and 3) require such
responsible person to execute a formal acknowledgment that he or she is legally
responsible for compliance by all occupants of the tourist home and their
guests with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use
and occupancy of the tourist home. This information shall be maintained by the
operator for a period of four (4) years and be made readily available upon
request of any officer of the City responsible for the enforcement of any
provision of this Code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation
pertaining to the use and occupancy of the tourist home.
   J.   Prompt Response: The operator and/or the designated local contact
person shall, upon notification that the responsible person and/or any occupant
and/or guest of the tourist home has created unreasonable noise or
disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct, or committed violations of any
applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the
subject short term rental unit, promptly respond within sixty (60) minutes and
in an appropriate manner to immediately halt or prevent a recurrence of such
conduct by the responsible person and/or any occupants and/or guests. Failure
of the local contact person to respond to calls or complaints regarding the
condition, operation, or conduct of occupants and/or guests of the short term
rental within sixty (60) minutes and appropriate manner shall be subject to all
administrative, legal and equitable remedies available to the City. (Ord. 581,
5-11-2016)
   K.   Trash Within Public View: Trash and refuse shall not be left stored
within public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection
by the City's authorized waste hauler on scheduled trash collection days, and
shall maintain a current refuse collection subscription for the term of the
short term rental permit. The operator shall use reasonably prudent business
practices to ensure compliance with all the provisions of title 8, chapter 1 of
this Code as it now exists or is subsequently amended. (Ord. 594, 3-14-2018)
   L.   Promote Availability: The operator shall post the current short term
rental operator permit number on or in any advertisement appearing in any
newspaper, magazine, brochure, television trade paper, internet website, etc.,
that promotes the availability or existence of a tourist home in a place or
location deemed acceptable by the building official or designee. In the
instance of audio only advertising of the same, the short term rental operator
permit number shall be read as part of the advertising.
   M.   Comply With Provisions: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the
operator shall comply with all provisions of
title 1, chapter 17  of this code concerning municipal nonproperty taxes,
including, but not limited to, submission of a monthly municipal nonproperty
tax return in accordance with section
1-17-8 of this code, which shall be filed monthly even if the tourist home was
not rented during each such month.
   N.   Reasonable Accommodation: The standard conditions set forth herein may
be modified by the building official, or designee, upon request of the operator
based on site specific circumstances for the purpose of allowing reasonable
accommodation of a short term rental. All requests must be in writing and shall
identify how the strict application of the standard conditions creates an
unreasonable hardship to a property such that, if the requirement is not
modified, reasonable use of the property for a tourist home would not be
allowed. Any hardships identified must relate to physical constraints to the
subject site and shall not be self-induced or economic. Any modifications of
the standard conditions shall not further exacerbate an already existing
problem. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-9: RECORDKEEPING DUTIES:
The operator shall maintain for a period of four (4) years records in such form
as the city clerk/treasurer or his/her designee may require to determine the
amount of tourist home related tax owed to the city. The city clerk/treasurer
or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect such records at all
reasonable times. Such records shall be maintained at the operator's premises
or shall be available for delivery to the city clerk/treasurer or his/her
designee within one week after request. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
5-17-10: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Additional Conditions: A violation of any provision of this chapter by
any of the occupants, owner(s), local contact person, or the operator shall
authorize the building official or designee to impose additional conditions on
the use of any given tourist home to ensure that any future violations are
avoided, and to minimize any adverse affects on surrounding property owners.
   B.   Permit Modification, Suspension And Revocation: A violation of any
provision of this chapter by any of the occupants, owner(s), local contact
person, or the operator shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension
and/or revocation of the short term rental operator permit and/or any
affiliated licenses or permits.
      1.   The building official, or designee, shall give to the operator and/
or owner written notice of the modification, suspension or revocation of the
permit, the violation giving rise to the action, and the date and time of the
violation(s), and notice of the opportunity and process to appeal the decision
to the city council. The notices required in this section may be served
personally or by mail.
      2.   Appeals of the action by the building official may be had by filing
a request for an appeal within twenty eight (28) days of mailing, or if the
notice is hand delivered within twenty eight (28) days of delivery, with the
Kellogg city clerk. Upon receipt of an appeal (and the requisite appeal fee) a
hearing time and date will be set before the city council. The operator and/or
owner shall be given ten (10) days' written notice specifying the: a) time and
place of hearing, and b) requiring the operator and/or owner to show cause why
the short term rental operator permit should not be modified, suspended or
revoked.
      3.   If the permit is revoked, and the revocation is not subsequently
rescinded by the city council, the city clerk/treasurer or his/her designee
shall not issue a new short term rental operator permit for twelve (12) months
after revocation. During the period of time while such a permit is suspended,
revoked or otherwise not validly in effect, the use of the dwelling as a short
term rental unit is prohibited.
   C.   Notice Of Violation: The city may issue a notice of violation to any
occupant, owner(s) or operator, pursuant to this code, if there is any
violation of this chapter committed, caused or maintained by any of the above
parties.
   D.   Penalties: The city may impose a civil penalty upon any occupant, owner
(s) or operator, or pursue criminal enforcement, pursuant to the provisions set
forth in
title 1, chapter 8  of this code,
      1.   Civil Penalty: The city may impose a civil penalty upon any
occupant, owner(s) or operator, pursuant to the provisions set forth in title
1, chapter 8 of this code, including, but not limited to, the imposition of any
and all criminal penalties set forth therein if there is any violation of this
chapter committed, caused or maintained by any of the above parties. Unless
otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of an infraction shall, for
each separate violation of this chapter be subject to: a) a civil fine/penalty
infraction fine in an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
a first offense in twelve (12) months; b) for a second violation of the same
offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense, a
misdemeanor fine in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and the suspension of the permit for a term of two (2) years.
         a.   Notice And Hearing:
            (1)   Any civil penalty, administrative action, or administrative
fee imposed pursuant to the above provisions may be appealed to the city
council by filing, within thirty (30) days after receiving notice, a written
request for a hearing before the city council to contest the civil penalty,
administrative action, or administrative fee.
            (2)   The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence
shall not apply. The alleged violator may be represented by licensed legal
counsel; present oral and written evidence and cross examine witnesses.
            (3)   The city council shall issue a decision within a reasonable
time after the close of the hearing and shall notify the alleged violator in
writing of the decision.
            (4)   If the alleged violator fails to appear at a hearing or fails
to request a hearing, it shall be conclusively established that this chapter
was violated, and the civil sanctions shall apply.
            (5)   Appeals of a decision of the city council must commence
within thirty (30) days, by filing a complaint for judicial review in the
district court.
      2.   Criminal: Notwithstanding the above, operating a tourist home
without a validly issued short term rental operator permit shall be subject to
title 1, chapter 8 of this code, including, but not limited to, the imposition
of any and all criminal penalties set forth therein: a) a misdemeanor fine in
an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a first conviction
of an offense in twelve (12) months; b) for a second conviction of the same
offense within a twelve (12) month period of the date of the first offense, a
misdemeanor fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
and one year in jail.
   E.   Appeal: Any civil penalty or criminal citation shall be subject to
further actions in the courts of Shoshone County, Idaho, subject to the
procedures outlined herein.
   F.   Public Nuisance: It shall be a public nuisance for any person to
commit, cause or maintain a violation of this chapter, which shall be subject
to the provisions of
title 1, chapter 8  of this code. (Ord. 581, 5-11-2016)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIREARMS, CONCEALED WEAPONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Concealed Weapons
6-1-3: Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this chapter, it shall mean any
instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell, or bullets by the combustion
of any type of gunpowder, or compressed air or other gas, or by spring
propulsion.
(Ord. 429, 3-12-1997)
6-1-2: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
Repealed by Ordinances No. 637 to correspond with Idaho Code Title 18, Chapter
33 as amended. (Ord. 429, 3-12-1997; amd. Ord. 636, 3-12-2025)
6-1-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to discharge firearms, bow and arrow,
slingshot, or other device capable of propelling an object with sufficient
force to cause great bodily harm, within the limits of the city. Provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to police officers in the discharge
of their duties, or to acts of otherwise lawful self-defense, defense of
others, or defense of property. (Ord. 429, 3-12-1997)
CHAPTER 2
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definition
6-2-2: Vehicle Regulations During Blackout
6-2-3: Exceptions
6-2-4: Blackout To Be Observed
6-2-5: Pedestrian Traffic To Cease; Exceptions
6-2-6: Unlawful To Sound False Alarm
6-2-7: City Nor Officers Not Liable As Result Of Enforcement
6-2-1: DEFINITION:
In construing the provisions of this chapter, save when otherwise plainly
declared or clearly apparent from the contents, the following definitions shall
be applied:
AIR RAID ALARM AND BLACKOUT WARNINGS: A series of short intermittent blasts of
sirens or whistles, or both, for a duration of two (2) minutes. Air raid alarm
and blackout warnings shall also include the entire period of time between the
alarm signal and all clear signal.
ALL CLEAR SIGNAL: A continuous blast of siren or whistles, or both, for a
duration of one minute.
BLACKOUT: That period beginning immediately upon the sounding of any air raid
alarm and blackout warning during the nighttime and continuing until the all
clear signal is given, then continuing until "daytime" as herein defined.
DAYTIME: That period beginning at the time of sunrise and ending at the time of
sunset.
NIGHTTIME: The period beginning at the time of sunset and ending at the time of
sunrise.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported, propelled or drawn upon or over any street, alley, highway or
ground. (1961 Code)
6-2-2: VEHICLE REGULATIONS DURING BLACKOUT:
During the period of any air raid alarm whether in the daytime or nighttime,
and until the all clear signal is given, it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive or move any vehicle upon or along any street, alley or public highway in
the city, and it shall be the duty of every person who is in charge of an
automobile or other vehicle to immediately stop and park the same at the
nearest available place outside the lanes of traffic and to extinguish all
lights upon said vehicle, and said vehicle to remain where parked until the end
of the period of the air raid alarm or blackout; and it shall be unlawful to
double park, or to stop or park any vehicle on any bridge or the approach
thereto, or in front of any fire plug, fire exit, hospital entrance, or at the
entrance to any street or alley, or in any street intersection, or in any
street except at the curb or extreme side thereof, or in any manner so as to
obstruct, impede or hinder any fire engine, police car, ambulance or other duly
authorized emergency vehicle.
During the period of any blackout in the city, all incoming vehicular traffic
shall stop at the city limits, extinguish all vehicle lights, and remain
stationery until the blackout is ended, and no vehicle shall enter the city
during the period of any blackout. (1961 Code)
6-2-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of section
6-2-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any fire engine or fire truck, police
car, ambulance, vehicles of the armed forces of the United States of America or
Idaho state guard, vehicles used in line of duty by any duly licensed
physician, surgeon or nurse, or to any duly authorized emergency vehicle
operating in the necessary circumstances, and in all cases shall be equipped
with dim headlights and rear light coverings approved by the chief of police of
the city, and no other lights shall be used on any such vehicle. (1961 Code)
6-2-4: BLACKOUT TO BE OBSERVED:
During the period of any "blackout", as hereinabove defined, it shall be
unlawful to make or show any visible fire or light, and the same is hereby
prohibited, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to make or show, or permit to be seen, any light
from any windows, doors, openings or other place, or from any ground, room,
residence, building, sign, structure, vehicle, or other property, public or
private.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to light or strike any match or other fire, or to
smoke any pipe, cigar or cigarette, in any outdoor place or in any vehicle in
the city.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to light or use any flashlight, torch or other
light in any outdoor place or in any vehicle in the city. The intermittent use
of flashlights, vehicle lights, or any other outdoor lights is specifically
prohibited.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to burn or have lighted any lamp, flashlight,
candle, electric bulb, tube, sign, device or other light in any residence,
store, hotel, theater, barn, shed, garage or other building or any structure
whatsoever, unless within an inner room or place, and/or in such manner as
completely to shield and prevent such light from being visible in any manner
outdoors. (1961 Code)
6-2-5: PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC TO CEASE; EXCEPTIONS:
During the period of any blackout all pedestrian traffic within the city is
hereby prohibited and declared unlawful and immediately upon the sounding of
any air raid alarm pedestrians shall take shelter; provided, that this
restriction shall not apply to any firemen, police officers, members of the
armed forces of the United States of America or Idaho state guard, duly
licensed physicians, surgeons and nurses and other officially authorized
persons, if and when acting in the line of their respective duties. (1961 Code)
6-2-6: UNLAWFUL TO SOUND FALSE ALARM:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to operate a whistle, siren
or other audible device in such manner as to simulate an air raid alarm and
blackout. (1961 Code)
6-2-7: CITY NOR OFFICERS NOT LIABLE AS RESULT OF ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter is enacted for the protection, health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city, and neither the city or any lawfully authorized or
deputized individual enforcing, or aiding and assisting in the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in a suit for damages in
connection therewith. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-3-1: Purpose And Policy
6-3-2: Child On The Street At Night
6-3-3: Permitting Child To Violate Curfew
6-3-4: Violation
6-3-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The policy of the city is:
   A.   To protect children's health and welfare which includes their care,
guidance, and control;
   B.   Parents, guardians, and/or other persons having legal custody are
responsible for providing for the physical custody and control of the child and
to determine where and with whom the child shall live and to provide the child
with care, education, and discipline;
   C.   A child who is unaccompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an
adult person designated by a person having custodial rights and who is found to
be on the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, places, buildings, place of amusement, eating places, vacant
lots, and other locations unsupervised by such adult having the lawful
authority to be at such place between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weeknights and from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekends, is hereby found to be at a greater risk
for injury, becoming a victim of a crime, being involved in criminal activity,
being a danger to persons or property or otherwise being subject to danger.
(Ord. 420, 11-13-1996)
6-3-2: CHILD ON THE STREET AT NIGHT:
It is unlawful for any child being an individual who is under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age to be upon any street, highway, road, alley, park,
playground or other public places or buildings, or places of amusement, eating
establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place without being accompanied by
an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult
having custodial rights, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or
Friday morning, and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any Friday, Saturday or Sunday morning; provided,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances:
   A.   When the child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of
said minor;
   B.   When the child is returning directly home from a school activity,
school entertainment, school recreation activity or school dance;
   C.   When the child is either going directly to, or coming directly from,
his or her place of residence or place of lawful employment and/or is working
at the child's place of lawful employment;
   D.   When the child is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity for the primary purpose of the exercise of first amendment rights of
free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion;
   E.   When the child has in his or her possession the express written
permission of his/her parent or legal guardian to be in the public place for
the specific purpose stated; or
   F.   A child who is married or who is on active duty in the armed services
of the United States or otherwise legally emancipated. (Ord. 420, 11-13-1996)
6-3-3: PERMITTING CHILD TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of a child or any adult person designated by the person having legal
custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit and/or allow
said child to be upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement,
eating places, vacant lots or other locations without having designated an
adult person or said parent, guardian or other legal custodian to be with and
supervising said child between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or
Friday morning, and between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. of any Friday, Saturday or Sunday morning, except in the circumstances
set forth in subsections
6-3-2A through F of this chapter. An "adult person" within the meaning of this
section is a person over the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 420, 11-13-1996)
6-3-4: VIOLATION:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and
punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to the laws of the state of Idaho. Any
parent, legal guardian or other adult convicted of violating section
6-3-3 of this chapter for a second or subsequent time shall be fined a
mandatory minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to any other
penalties that may be imposed. (Ord. 420, 11-13-1996)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Authorization
6-4-2: Purpose And Intent
6-4-3: Definitions
6-4-4: Enforcement; Interference Prohibited; Authority Granted
6-4-5: Unlawful Acts
6-4-6: Keeping Of Wild Or Exotic Animals
6-4-7: Keeping Of Domestic Animals
6-4-8: Limits On Numbers Of Animals On Residential Premises
6-4-9: Caring For Animals
6-4-10: Cruelty To Animals
6-4-11: Restraint And Confinement
6-4-12: Restraint Of Guard Dogs
6-4-13: Harboring Or Possessing Potbellied Pig
6-4-14: Permit; Application
6-4-15: Animal Bites, Report Notice
6-4-16: Dangerous Or Nuisance Animals
6-4-17: Subsequent Attack
6-4-18: Impoundment
6-4-19: Notice To Owner And Redemption
6-4-20: Property Owners May Impound
6-4-21: Return Of Animal To Owner
6-4-22: Disposition Of Large Animals
6-4-23: Licensing Of Dogs
6-4-24: License Tags; Identification
6-4-25: Violations And Penalties
6-4-1: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the general police power and the authority
granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution and Idaho
Code section 50-319. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the residents of the City and to foster the humane treatment
of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the City. (Ord.
591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their
derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: A permit issued by the City building official allowing a
resident to exceed the usual limitations on the types, or number of animals
that can be housed on property within the City based on criteria described in
section
6-4-14 of this chapter.
ANIMAL: Any live creature, either domestic or wild, except humans or plants.
Animal includes fowl and reptiles, but shall exclude fish.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of animal diseases and
injuries.
ANIMAL NUISANCE: Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning
of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal or animals.
ANIMAL SAFETY OFFICER: Any employee or agent of the City, designated by the
Chief of Police to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and
compliance requirements established by this chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated for the temporary care, confinement and
detention of animals and for the humane euthanizing and other disposition of
animals or any facility authorized by the Chief of Police or his/her designee
to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.
AT LARGE ANIMAL: An animal, excluding cats, that is off the premises of its
owner, or if on the premises of its owner or of another, with permission, is
not on a leash or otherwise suitably contained within a fenced enclosure such
that it is under the immediate control of a person physically capable of
restraining the animal.
CRUELTY: Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or
death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper
drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe
living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in a sufficient
quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused,
such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal
veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal
training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane
method reasonably available.
DISPOSITION: Adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or
placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. "Disposition"
includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Includes dogs, cats, nonpoisonous snakes less than three feet
(3') in length, pigeons, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, confined domestic
hares and rabbits, pheasants, guinea pig, hamster, gerbil, frog, ferret, mouse,
rat, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk,
fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, nonpoisonous snakes more than three
feet (3') in length, members of the feline species other than domestic cat
(Felis domesticus), members of the canine species other than domestic dog
(Canis familiaris) or any other animal that by virtue of strength or inherent
temperament or disposition would require a standard of care and control greater
than that required for domestic animals.
GUARD OR ATTACK DOG: A dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons
or property.
HOUSEHOLD PET: Any animal or bird, which normally lives in or is kept in a
residence.
IMPOUNDMENT: The taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal
safety officer, or any authorized representative thereof.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
caring for, breeding, buying, selling, letting for hire, or training for a fee
of more than seven (7) domestic animals (household pets), excluding those less
than six (6) months of age.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong material designed to fasten over the
mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from barking or biting.
OWNER: Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or
having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights
to, any animal covered by this title. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored
if it is fed or sheltered by any person or if the person purported to be
harboring claims to have custody or responsibility for the care of any animal.
POTBELLIED PIG: A Vietnamese or Chinese potbellied pig kept for the sole
purpose of providing human companionship.
SANITARY: A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility
of disease transmission and not producing adverse health or sensory conditions
for adjoining property owners.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical,
sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. Under some
circumstances miniature horses that have met the current ADA provisions may be
included as service animals.
UNDER RESTRAINT: An animal is secured by a leash or lead under the control of a
person physically capable of restraining the animal, or securely enclosed
within the real property limits of the owner's premises.
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any dog that attacks, bites, or physically injures
human beings, domestic animals or livestock without adequate provocation, or
which, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack,
bite, or physically injure human beings, domestic animals or livestock. Such
incidents will be handled in the manner outlined in Idaho State Code 25-2810.
Any wild animal or any animal that without adequate provocation has bitten or
attacked a human being or other animal shall be prima facie presumed vicious or
dangerous.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live, nonhuman primate, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or
any other warm-blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The
term "wild animal" does not include: domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with
wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or
margays), farm animals, rodents, and captive bred species of common cage birds.
(Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-4: ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY GRANTED:
Animal safety officers and police officers of the City shall be the enforcement
officials for this chapter. These officials shall have the authority to act on
behalf of the City in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying
animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as required to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter
to interfere with an animal safety officer or other enforcement official in the
performance of his/her duties. Animal safety officers are hereby authorized to
take such actions as they deem appropriate to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public, whether expressly authorized by this section, or not.
(Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property
located within the corporate limits of the City when the keeping of such
animal, or the manner thereof, violates the provisions of this chapter, or when
the owner neglects a duty established by this chapter or carries out conduct
which this chapter labels as unlawful, or engages in activities, actions or
behavior which violates a rule of conduct or requirement of this chapter or
which creates a menace to public health or safety so as to create a nuisance to
neighboring property owners or the public at large.
   B.   Behavior and/or conditions which violate this chapter shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or
health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights
of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property;
      2.   Any animal other than domestic cats found running at large;
      3.   Any animal that makes disturbing or grunting noises, including, but
not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other
utterances which cause annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to reasonable
neighbors or reasonable others in close proximity to the premises where the
animal is kept or harbored;
      4.   Any animal, or owner thereof, that causes fouling of the air by
noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the
animal is kept or harbored inclusive of conduct which neglects to maintain,
clean or otherwise eliminate the waste which results from the containment of an
animal;
      5.   Any animal in heat (estrus) that is not confined so as to prevent
attraction or contact with other animals;
      6.   Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that
without provocation, molests, attacks, bites, menaces or otherwise interferes
with the freedom or movement of persons in a public right-of-way;
      7.   Any animal that chases motor vehicles on a public right-of-way;
      8.   Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
      9.   Any owner or caretaker of animals who causes or allows conditions
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the
number of animals maintained at a single residence or premises or because of
the inadequacy of the facilities. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-6: KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any wild or
exotic animal without the express written authorization of the Kellogg City
Council. Such authorization may be given only if it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Council that the animal will not constitute a threat to
public health or safety. The City Council may conduct a public hearing to
obtain the opinions of adjoining residents and property owners when considering
such requests. The City Council may charge an applicant for such authorization
an appropriate fee to recover the authorization processing costs incurred by
the City. Public educational institutions shall be exempt from the foregoing
authorization requirement. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-7: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any household to own, harbor, or possess more
domestic animals or types of animals other than authorized by this section or
in accordance with limitations and licensing requirements established by this
chapter, except that service animals may be allowed as required by law.
      1.   Dogs and cats, not exceeding the number limitations as set forth in
section
6-4-8 of this chapter.
      2.   For the sole purpose of a family pet or for educational purposes at
an educational institution, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, frogs,
ferrets, mice, rats, snakes and/or birds (except fowl, pigeons, chickens,
ducks, geese, turkeys) can be kept, so long as the number limitations as set
forth in section
6-4-8 of this chapter are not exceeded. It shall be the duty of all persons
owning or harboring such animals to keep and maintain such animals in a clean
and sanitary condition.
      3.   The following animals: Pygmy/miniature goats, lambs, alpaca,
potbellied pigs, American mini pigs, or rabbits may be kept on properties
containing a minimum of one-tenth (1/10) acre of securely fenced, irrigated
open space, exclusive of a home site, and maintained in compliance with this
chapter. Said fenced area shall be irrigated during the growing season to
sustain vegetation.
      4.   Chickens are permitted on any detached single-family lot in the
City. Each property is permitted a maximum of ten (10) hens. Roosters are
prohibited within the City limits. Coops and feed shall be secured to prevent
problems with mice and other pests. Coops, hutches or similar containment
structures must be kept at least thirty feet (30') from the front property
line, five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines where the chickens
are being kept, at least fifteen feet (15') from the on site residence and at
least twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residences. Additionally, the
coop shall not be attached to a shared fence. All other requirements of title
11, "Land Use Regulations," of this Code regarding setbacks and restrictions
shall also apply.
   B.   It shall be the duty of all persons owning or harboring such animals to
keep them in secure confinement to prevent them from roaming onto adjacent
lands and to maintain such animals, and the grounds upon, and facilities
within, which they are housed, in a clean and sanitary condition. Additionally,
all persons owning and harboring animals shall follow industry Best Management
Practices in raising and caring for their animals.
   C.   Animal owners are also required to comply with all requirements
regarding sanitation, nuisance and fencing/wall height as set forth in title 11
of this Code. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-8: LIMITS ON NUMBERS OF ANIMALS ON RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any household or educational institution to
keep more than three (3) dogs and more than a total of seven (7) permitted
animals (not including the 10 chickens permitted) unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, except that a litter of pups, kittens or other young animals may
be kept for a period of time not exceeding six (6) months from birth. The
restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to any properly authorized
commercial establishment where such animals are legally kept for breeding,
sale, sporting purposes, or boarding.
   B.   Kennels shall be permitted under the following conditions:
      1.   All applications for licenses to operate or maintain a kennel shall
be submitted, in writing, upon printed forms provided for such purposes by the
City Clerk. The application shall first be referred to the Police Chief. The
Police Chief or his designee, shall make an inspection of the premises where
such kennel is to be maintained and operated and shall make recommendations to
the City Council for the granting or denying of such license.
      2.   A license shall not be transferable, and shall expire on December 31
of each year. It shall not be necessary to license individual animals, but the
owner of such kennel shall pay an annual license fee; provided, however, that
all animals covered by such kennel license shall be maintained and kept within
the kennel or under leash at all times.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, use or maintain within
the City any kennel in such a manner that the same is unsanitary, nauseous,
foul, offensive, noisy or from any cause an annoyance to the community, any
family or person; the City Council, in its discretion, may revoke any kennel
license for any of the above reasons.
   C.   In order to exceed these maximum number limits and/or have any more
types/breeds of animals, the lot size must exceed one acre and the individual
must obtain an administrative permit per section
6-4-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-9: CARING FOR ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and no owner or custodian of any animal shall
allow the owner/custodian's animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public
property, street, sidewalk, public way, public play area or upon private
property other than that which is exclusively owned by the animal owner, unless
such owner or custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited
by such animal by the following method:
      1.   Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a
paper or plastic bag or other container; and
      2.   Removal of such bag or container to a waste disposal container
lawfully available to the owner for sanitary disposal of waste as permitted by
law.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring or keeping an
animal within the City shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect
and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of
others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or
offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or upon the
abutting or nearby property of others.
   C.   It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any animal shall cause or allow the existence or maintenance of
unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number
of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the
facilities. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-10: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to strike, beat, abuse, or
intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any
act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such
animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals.
   B.   No person, except a licensed veterinarian, or animal safety officer
(for humanitarian purposes) shall administer poison to any animal, or knowingly
leave any poisonous or harmful substance of any kind or ground glass in any
place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are
not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest
control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to
control insects and/or wild rodents. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-11: RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such
animal under restraint or permit such animal to run at large upon the streets
and public ways of the City or upon private property without consent of the
owner or present occupant. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section when an animal is found by an animal safety officer or police
officer while it is away from its owner (or responsible person).
   B.   Any animal, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, or other public
space, or upon private property without the consent of the owner, shall be
secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the
particular animal and be controlled by a person of sufficient age and strength
to control the animal. This shall not apply to animals prescribed by a doctor
for medical reasons or other properly trained assist animal.
   C.   No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care
and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a private or
public nuisance.
   D.   Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a building or other
enclosed area in such a manner that such female animal cannot come into contact
with another animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-12: RESTRAINT OF GUARD DOGS:
   A.   Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a
building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be
completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet (6') in height and shall be
topped with an anticlimbing device to prevent the animal from exiting the top
of the enclosure.
   B.   Such areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto
securely closed and locked, and all fences shall be properly maintained and
escape proof. Such premises shall be clearly posted to warn of the presence of
guard dogs.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or
controlled by government law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-13: HARBORING OR POSSESSING POTBELLIED PIG:
   A.   No person shall possess, own, or harbor a "potbellied pig" as defined
in this chapter unless and until obtaining a license from the Chief of Police
for such animal in accordance with this chapter. Only one potbellied pig may be
maintained or licensed at any single address or premises. Said license may be
issued upon payment of the license fee established by the City Council by
resolution and upon proving compliance with the standards established by this
Code. Any such potbellied pig shall be subject to the care and control
requirements established for animals by this chapter.
   B.   Each person desiring to license a potbellied pig for keeping in the
City shall obtain a certificate of health and qualification from a veterinarian
and allow an inspection of the animal and premises by the Chief of Police as
detailed below:
      1.   A certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying that the
animal in question is a potbellied pig, measuring no more than twenty three
inches (23") in height at the shoulders when in a normal stance, weighing no
more than one hundred twenty five (125) pounds and kept solely for human
companionship shall be obtained and submitted to the City. Further, said
veterinarian shall certify in writing that the animal in question has been
inoculated against and/or been blood tested, with negative results, for
pseudorabies and brucellosis, or any other disease or animal malady which the
USDA or the Idaho Department of Agriculture deems necessary to prevent health,
safety or general welfare concerns.
      2.   Prior to issuance of a license to possess a potbellied pig, the
license applicant shall submit plans showing the size and location of the yard
in which the potbellied pig will be allowed to exercise when not in the home
where it lives. Said plans shall include sufficient detail to indicate that
fencing materials and installation methods are sufficient to protect
neighboring land uses from intrusion. No potbellied pig, nor the maintenance
practices affecting care of such animal, shall be allowed to interfere with the
peaceful enjoyment of adjoining land uses by reason of noise, odor or
otherwise. Violation of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of the
requirements of this Code.
      3.   Any person seeking to license a potbellied pig shall allow
reasonable opportunity for inspection of the animal and of the premises where
it will be housed, prior to action by the Chief of Police.
      4.   Any person denied a license by the Chief of Police may appeal said
denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk setting forth
the basis of the appeal and stating concisely why the appeal should be granted.
The Mayor may investigate the appeal as appropriate, hold a hearing and render
a written decision concerning the requested license denial. (Ord. 591, 10-11-
2017)
6-4-14: PERMIT; APPLICATION:
   A.   An administrative permit must be obtained from the building official in
order to exceed the maximum number limits and types/breeds of animals permitted
in the City as described in this chapter.
      1.   An application for an administrative permit shall include a written
description of the requested number and types of animals, lot size information,
a site plan showing where and how the animals will be contained, and a
description of the purpose for acquiring and keeping the requested animals.
This information will allow the Administrator to evaluate the proposed
exception.
      2.   An administrative permit may be issued by the building official if
the following conditions have been met:
         a.   The lot size exceeds one acre.
         b.   The administrative permit for the proposed exception to the
number and type of animals permitted in the City would be consistent with the
general intent of this Code.
         c.   If an animal is injured or ill, or if the animal is being kept
for 4-H, educational purposes, or therapy.
         d.   Granting the administrative permit has not been demonstrated to
be detrimental to neighboring development. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-15: ANIMAL BITES, REPORT NOTICE:
   A.   Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal that bites any
person, any person bitten by such animal or any physician attending such, shall
report the same to the animal safety officer or police officer, immediately but
in no case longer than within eight (8) hours of the time of the bite or of
learning of the bite, giving his/her full name, age, and address, the
circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite, the medical
treatment given and the name and address of the owner or person having custody
or possession of the animal. The owner of the animal in question shall release,
to the animal safety officer or police officer upon request, all information
about the animal needed to complete the investigation.
   B.   It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence
of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the
animal safety officer the existence and description for such animal, the place
where sent, the name of the owner or persons having custody of the animal, if
known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-16: DANGEROUS OR NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Any animal which has been at large in excess of two (2) times in any calendar
year (except domestic cats) or which has been at large and has proven menacing
or threatening when at large may be declared a nuisance or dangerous, as
appropriate, by the animal safety officer. An animal may be designated as
dangerous even though it has not behaved in a manner severe enough to warrant
designation as a vicious animal. Upon making such a declaration, the animal
safety officer may prescribe the actions which the animal owner must take to
abate the nuisance or to protect the public from the menacing characteristics
of an animal so designated. Such restrictions may include additional fencing,
security measures, repair of containment facilities, additional supervision or
other measures intended to address the nuisance or danger involved. Such
designation may be applied for a certain designated time frame such that the
restrictions serve as a probation for the animal or animal owner in question.
Violation of any restrictions set forth in a written order of the animal safety
officer pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
subject to all penalties and enforcement measures authorized hereby. Upon
petition and demonstration of compliance with applicable requirements, the
animal safety officer may revise the designation of a vicious animal to
nuisance or dangerous status if the animal safety officer believes that such
designation will fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Any decision concerning
classification of an animal as a nuisance or dangerous may be appealed by the
animal owner in accord with the procedures established in this chapter
regarding vicious animals. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-17: SUBSEQUENT ATTACK:
Should any animal attack or bite a person or another animal, after the owner or
harborer of such animal has been notified that the animal has been declared
vicious, dangerous or nuisance, such animal shall be impounded, held for
observation and shall not be returned to its owner until the animal safety
officer can be assured that the insecurity which allowed the animal to go free
has been remedied and will remain so. If any declared vicious animal is found
at large and cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such animal may be
summarily destroyed by any police officer or animal safety officer. Failure to
maintain security for vicious, dangerous or nuisance animals shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-18: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal
safety officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to
an animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:
      1.   Any dog without a valid license tag;
      2.   Any animal at large;
      3.   Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to
the public;
      4.   Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order of the Panhandle Health District, a Kellogg animal safety officer or any
standing quarantine or confinement order of any public officer;
      5.   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care;
      6.   Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected;
      7.   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
      8.   Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or
dangerous where the City Council or animal safety officer determines that there
is a threat to public health and safety, including illegal exotic and wild
animals;
      9.   Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed;
      10.   Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in
situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been evicted
from his/her regular place of residence;
      11.   Any animal that has been declared vicious and the owner or
caretaker fails to adhere the established guidelines set forth in the vicious
animal guidelines as set forth in section
6-4-17 of this chapter.
   B.   An animal safety officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of
impoundment of an animal running at large (other than domestic cats), issue to
the owner a notice of violation which calls for payment of an animal control
fee or, in the alternative, may issue an infraction citation charging the owner
with a violation of this chapter. Any animal owner issued a notice of violation
shall pay any animal control fee established by resolution to the City within
thirty (30) days of the date the notice of violation is issued. Such fee may be
paid at the location noted on the notice of violation. In the event that such
fee is not paid within the time period prescribed, the animal safety officer or
police officer may issue a uniform citation or refer the matter to the City
Prosecutor in order to initiate misdemeanor criminal proceedings for the
underlying violation of this chapter. Such citation or complaint shall be
punishable as a criminal misdemeanor as otherwise provided by this Code. (Ord.
591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-19: NOTICE TO OWNER AND REDEMPTION:
   A.   Upon impoundment of an animal, the animal safety officer may attempt to
notify the owner by telephone or mail. If the owner is unknown or cannot be
contacted, the animal safety officer shall post written notice for three (3)
working days at the Kellogg City Hall, describing the animal and the time and
place of taking. Any notice to the owner may also include the location of the
shelter or hospital where the animal is confined, hours during which the animal
can be reclaimed, and the fees to be charged to the owner. The owner may also
be advised that the failure to claim the animal within three (3) working days
may result in the destruction or other disposition of the animal.
   B.   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay impound fees as
established by resolution of the City Council. The rates charged for any
subsequent impoundment may likewise be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   C.   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three (3) working days
shall be subject to placement for adoption in a suitable home or euthanized in
a humane manner prescribed by the City. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-20: PROPERTY OWNERS MAY IMPOUND:
Any person finding an animal at large upon his/her property may remove the same
to any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. Any person doing
so shall inform the shelter operator of the location where the animal was
captured, type of animal, and any other information which may be relevant to
locating the owner or circumstance concerning the animal. If no such shelter is
available, the property owner may humanely hold the animal in his/her own
possession and immediately notify the animal safety officer. The property owner
shall provide a description of the animal and the name of the owner if known.
(Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-21: RETURN OF ANIMAL TO OWNER:
If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at large is known or
can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal safety officer may attempt
contact with such owner and advise the owner of the location of the animal and
attempt to make arrangements to return the animal. If the animal owner is not
available, the animal safety officer may provide written notice to the
registered owner explaining who the owner must contact to reclaim the animal.
The officer may remove the animal to the nearest shelter that will accept the
animal. The ultimate responsibility for locating an impounded animal is the
owner's. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-22: DISPOSITION OF LARGE ANIMALS:
Any animal safety officer or other designated person on call who removes or
takes custody of a healthy large animal such as a horse, cow, mule or other
animal, which is not acceptable to any animal hospital or shelter, shall be
authorized to call a trucking firm or company which may convey the animal to a
farm or other appropriate facility that will accept such animals. The
disposition of any animal removed to a facility other than an animal hospital
or shelter shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were
confined in an animal hospital or shelter. Any such expenses of shelter or care
shall be the responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-23: LICENSING OF DOGS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the
age of six (6) months within the City unless such dog is licensed as provided
in this chapter.
   B.   Application: Application for such license shall be made by the owner on
a form to be provided by the City within ten (10) days after acquiring any dog
over six (6) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes six (6)
months of age; provided that any owner moving to the City for the purposes of
establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation,
and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until thirty (30) days
after establishing residence to obtain such license.
   C.   Proof Of Rabies Vaccination Required: All owners applying for a license
must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog for which
the license is being obtained has been inoculated against rabies within the
last two (2) years.
   D.   Proof Of Sterilization: Any owner claiming that his/her dog has been
spayed or neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority
that the operation has been performed.
   E.   Payment Of License Fee: A license fee shall be paid at the time of
making application. The license fee for dogs shall be established by the City
Council by resolution. Such fee may be different depending upon the altered
status.
   F.   Exemption From License Fee: License fees shall not be required for
seeing eye dogs, dogs prescribed by a doctor for medical reasons, government
police dogs or dogs belonging to a nonresident of the City (which are licensed
elsewhere) and kept within the boundaries of the City for not longer than
thirty (30) days; provided that all dogs not subject to payment of the license
fee shall at the time of entry into the City be properly vaccinated against
rabies, and while kept within the City, meet all other requirements of this
chapter. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions has the burden of proving
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog in question is
entitled to such exemption.
   G.   Penalties: Any owner of a dog over the age of six (6) months who fails
to obtain a license within the time period specified in this chapter shall be
subject to a fee set by the City Council by resolution and/or shall be subject
to prosecution for violation of this chapter as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-24: LICENSE TAGS; IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the City shall issue a
durable license tag, stamped with an identification number for the dog for
which the license has been obtained. Any license issued for the keeping of a
dog shall take effect on the date of issuance and shall be valid for the period
of time paid for and shown on the receipt issued by the licensing authority.
Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a license must wear a valid
license tag at all times when the dog is off the premises of its owner.
   B.   No person may use a license for any dog other than the dog for which
the license was issued. It shall be unlawful for any person except the licensed
owner to remove from the neck of any dog the license tag issued pursuant to
this section. It shall further be unlawful for any person to alter such tag in
any manner.
   C.   Any dog license issued in reliance of false or inaccurate information
may be revoked. Anyone who knowingly submits false information to obtain a
license or to obtain a license without paying the appropriate fee shall be
deemed to have violated this chapter and shall be subject to all potential
penalties therefor. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
6-4-25: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
      1.   Fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, that is, to do
that which is described as unlawful or to violate the requirements established
by this chapter;
      2.   Fail to comply with any lawful order of the animal safety officer or
police officer, unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 15
of this Code. Should any person be found guilty in any court of competent
jurisdiction, the court may order the animal involved to be destroyed by the
animal safety officer.
   C.   The City may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions of this
chapter and/or to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed necessary to
bring about compliance herewith.
   D.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: Any
person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a civil
citation in lieu of a uniform infraction citation and shall be assessed a civil
penalty as follows:
      1.   First violation: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within two (2) years of first violation: One
hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   Third violation within two (2) years of first violation: One hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).
      4.   Fourth and subsequent violations within two (2) years of first
violation: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   The civil citation assessment shall be payable at City Hall within thirty
(30) days from the date of issuance. No partial payments will be accepted as
full payment. If, within the thirty (30) day period following the issuance of
the City civil citation the assessment has not been paid, an infraction uniform
citation or sworn complaint may be issued for the violation of this chapter or
the rules, and the violator, if found guilty, will be fined in the appropriate
above amount for the violation plus court costs. Nothing contained herein
prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuance of a uniform infraction
citation instead of a civil citation. (Ord. 591, 10-11-2017)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: General Offense
6-5-2: False Representation
6-5-3: Resisting An Officer
6-5-4: Aid In Escape
6-5-5: Assault Or Battery
6-5-6: Unlawful Assembly
6-5-7: Open Container Of Beer, Wine, Liquor, Or Other Alcoholic Beverage In
Public Prohibited
6-5-8: Breach Of The Peace
6-5-9: Petit Larceny
6-5-10: Unlawful Use Of Utility
6-5-11: False Pretenses
6-5-12: Vagrancy (Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-13: Disorderly Conduct
6-5-14: Prostitution
6-5-15: House Of Prostitution
6-5-16: Aid To An Offense
6-5-17: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
6-5-18: Cruelty To Animals
6-5-19: Distribution Of Obscene Literature (Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-20: Sale Of Cigarettes Or Tobacco To Minors
6-5-21: Expectorating On Sidewalks Or In Public Buildings
6-5-22: Minors In Pool Halls (Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-23: Water Flowing Upon Streets
6-5-24: Deposits Of Injurious Material On Thoroughfares
6-5-25: Lug Wheels Prohibited
6-5-26: Keeping Of Junk Prohibited
6-5-27: Loudspeakers
6-5-28: Minors; Liquor Offenses
6-5-29: Malicious Injury To Property
6-5-30: Noise
6-5-31:    Camping On Public Property
6-5-1: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement within the City which is prohibited or required by State law,
insofar as such laws, are applicable to Municipal government. (1961 Code)
6-5-2: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer of the Municipality or who shall attempt to impersonate any such
officer or who shall without authority perform any official act therein on
behalf of an officer all within the limits of the City. (1961 Code)
6-5-3: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, resist, molest or
threaten to molest any officer of the Municipality in the exercise of his
official duties within the City. (1961 Code)
6-5-4: AID IN ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from
lawful confinement, or who shall assist any person to escape from the custody
of any peace officer within the City. (1961 Code)
6-5-5: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault or battery as defined by
sections 18-901 and 18-903, Idaho Code, within the City. (1961 Code)
6-5-6: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together within
the City for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing an unlawful act, and do not disburse upon the command so to do by an
officer, the persons so offending shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1961 Code)
6-5-7: OPEN CONTAINER OF BEER, WINE, LIQUOR, OR OTHER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN
PUBLIC PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall have or possess any open or opened container or
receptacle of beer, wine, liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage within the
City of Kellogg, upon any public highway, street, sidewalk, park, parking lot,
or other public place, which includes any motor vehicle, whether moving or
parked upon such place. For the purposes of this specific section, "public"
means any property owned by the state of Idaho, the city of Kellogg, or any
other political subdivision of the state of Idaho, and also includes unenclosed
privately owned property open to the general public; however, this section
shall not apply to any premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of
beer, wine, liquor, or other alcoholic beverage in question.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the
city council shall have the authority to issue permits for the possession and
consumption of beer and/or wine at the Kellogg Memorial city park located at 2
North Hill Street, and the town square located on the north end of Main Street,
and to any licensed retailer of beer and wine by the drink for private property
adjacent to the licensed premises. Said permits may be issued to political,
fraternal, civic, and other similar established groups or organizations and to
licensed retail sellers of beer and/or wine by the drink for appropriate
functions at a specified date and time. Application for such a permit shall be
made to the city council on a form approved by the council, which shall require
at a minimum, the name of the group, organization or retailer, a brief
description of the nature and purpose of the particular function, and an
estimate of the number of people expected to attend. The application shall be
signed and dated by an authorized representative of the group, organization or
retailer making the application and shall recite an acknowledgment that, if
granted the beer and wine permit, said group or organization agrees to fully
defend and indemnify the city of Kellogg and its officers and employees from
any civil liability, damage, or loss in any way resulting from issuance of the
permit. All applications shall be filed with the council at least five (5) days
prior to the date of the scheduled council meeting immediately preceding the
date of the proposed function for which application for the beer and wine
permit is being made. Applications for a beer and wine permit shall be approved
when, in a majority of the council's judgment, it is deemed to be in the
interest of the public good. (Ord. 419, 10-16-1996)
6-5-8: BREACH OF THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit a breach of the
peace, by loud or vulgar language, noisy acclamations or by doing anything that
shall be offensive to the sense or dangerous to the peace. (1961 Code)
6-5-9: PETIT LARCENY:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or attempt to
commit petit larceny as defined by title 18 chapter 46, Idaho Code. (1961 Code)
6-5-10: UNLAWFUL USE OF UTILITY:
Every person who with intent to injure or defraud makes any unauthorized use of
or connection to a distribution system for water, gas, electricity, television
signal, telephone or telegram within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1961 Code)
6-5-11: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or
merchandise under false pretenses, or who shall enter any public place and call
for refreshments, food or other articles or things and receive the same and
refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for same or satisfying the
person from whom he received the food, refreshments, goods, wares or
merchandise within the city. (1961 Code)
6-5-12: VAGRANCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-13: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow or permit or participate
in any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or
disorderly conduct within the city. (1961 Code)
6-5-14: PROSTITUTION:
An person who pursues or advertises her vocation as a prostitute, and every
person who advertises the vocation of a prostitute or solicits for a
prostitute, and every person guilty of prostitution all within the city upon
conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1961 Code)
6-5-15: HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION:
Every person who keeps or assists in the keeping of a house of ill fame or
prostitution, or who knowingly resides therein or who knowingly rents, leases
or permits any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or controlled
by him, to be used for this purpose within the city, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1961 Code)
6-5-16: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
Any person who shall in any way or manner, aid, abet, counsel, advise or
encourage any person in the commission of any offense mentioned in this
chapter, or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense, is hereby
declared to be a principal in the offense committed and is punishable as such.
(1961 Code)
6-5-17: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the limits of
the city, any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of
barbwire, or to use barbwire as a guard to any parking or parcel of land. (1961
Code)
6-5-18: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to torture or cruelly beat, starve, or
otherwise ill treat any pet or other domestic animal in his care or charge,
whether belonging to himself or any other person within the city. (Ord. 428, 3-
12-1997)
6-5-19: DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE LITERATURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-20: SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to sell or give away,
directly or indirectly, to any minor, any cigarettes or tobacco or any
compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a cigarette. (1961
Code)
6-5-21: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALKS OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any of the
sidewalks or upon the floor of any theater, public building, church, or room
used for public assemblies within the city. (1961 Code)
6-5-22: MINORS IN POOL HALLS:
(Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-23: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or allow any water used by them
for irrigation or any other purpose or to cause any water to flow into or upon
any public thoroughfare of the city. (1961 Code)
6-5-24: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in, or
upon any public thoroughfare of the city any material or substance injurious to
person or property unless in the performance of authorized duties. (1961 Code)
6-5-25: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit tractors with wheels injurious to
pavement to operate upon the public thoroughfares of the city unless the
operator of such vehicles shall first plank such streets. (1961 Code)
6-5-26: KEEPING OF JUNK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or any secondhand dealer to store or keep
any old articles or materials which may be classed as junk, adjacent to or in
close proximity to any schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds,
business buildings or residence within the city, without first providing proper
and tight buildings for the storage of the same, if compliance is not made it
is then hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1961 Code)
6-5-27: LOUDSPEAKERS:
It shall be unlawful to use within the city loudspeakers or amplified sound of
any kind such as may disturb the peace except as when specifically authorized
to do so by the chief of police. (1961 Code)
6-5-28: MINORS; LIQUOR OFFENSES:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall enter, remain in or
loiter in or about any place licensed for the sale of liquor by the drink at
retail, or for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises, except as set
forth in Idaho Code sections 23-949 and 23-1013.
Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who shall purchase, or
attempt to purchase, possess or consume alcoholic liquor shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who shall purchase, attempt
to purchase, possess or consume beer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except
as set forth in Idaho Code section 23-1023.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or dispense beer to or by
any person under twenty one (21) years of age or to sell, serve or dispense
alcoholic liquor to or by any person under twenty one (21) years of age, proof
of which for every resident of this State shall be a valid driver's license or
an identification card issued by the State of Idaho, Department of Law
Enforcement. (Ord. 430, 3-12-1997; amd. Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
6-5-29: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
Every person who maliciously injures or destroys any real or personal property
not his own is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 254, 1-19-1971; amd. Ord. 431, 3-
12-1997)
6-5-30: NOISE:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in acts of building construction, site
development, use of heavy equipment for earthmoving or installation of public
works, or other construction activities which involve use of concussion,
compression, power tools, or which produce bothersome illumination, noise,
dust, or similar undesirable environmental effects onto adjoining residential
properties, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on one day and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the succeeding day of the week.
Decibel readings, measured at the complainant's property line, shall be no
greater than fifty five (55) dB during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and no greater than forty five (45) dB during the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., regardless of
the source of the sound, to include but not be limited to, other equipment,
vehicles, music, etc. Every person who violates this section shall be guilty of
an infraction on the first offense and may be punished as provided in title 1,
chapter 15 of this Code, and each subsequent violation within one hundred
eighty (180) days shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 601, 12-12-2018)
6-5-31: CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Definitions.
 
           a.   Setting up or remaining on a site for the purpose of establishing or
           maintaining a temporary or permanent place of dwelling, lodging, residence, or
           living accommodation, or otherwise being in or adjacent to a tent or sleeping
CAMPING:   bag, or atop and/or covered by materials such as bedroll, blanket, cardboard,
           newspaper, or the like, or inside some temporary shelter.
           b.   Utilizing a tent or other temporary structure for the storage of personal
           belongings.
TEMPORARY  Recreational vehicle, camper, tent, tarp, trailer, lean-to, vehicle, or other
STRUCTURE: non-permanent assembly.
 
   B.   Uses Restricted.
      1.   No person shall, as above described, camp, reside or occupy, in any
manner or fashion, whether within a closed vehicle, van, camper, trailer or
within a tent or other temporary movable structure or other contrivance, on any
city street or public property within the City of Kellogg.
      2.   Reserved for additional restrictions.
   C.   Exceptions.
      1.   Persons receiving an Event or Activity Request, Facilities
Reservation, or other permits that allow camping on public property from the
City of Kellogg Clerk's Office.
      2.   Uses commonly accepted to be associated with the use of a public
park on a temporary basis, during normal hours of operations, in conjunction
with the recreational use of such park or pavilion.
   D.   Fines and Penalties.
      1.   A first violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second or subsequent violation shall
be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of no less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day there
is a violation shall constitute a separate violation/offense.
(Ord. 629, 9-16-2024)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED COOLERS AND CONTAINERS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Unlawful Act Defined
6-6-1: UNLAWFUL ACT DEFINED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling, or other structure under his or its
control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid,
snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside,
without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device or by
first fastening, bolting or locking the same in such a manner that it is
impossible to open the same by the use of the hands. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 7
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Nuisances Defined
6-7-2: Rubbish On Streets, Alleys Or Sidewalks
6-7-3: Obstructions On City Sidewalks
6-7-4: Offensive Matter
6-7-1: NUISANCES DEFINED:
Anything which is injurious to health or which is indecent, or an obstruction
to the free use of property, or unlawfully obstructs free passage or use in the
customary manner of any street, alley or sidewalk or public park, or injures
any street or alley, or disturbs the peace and quiet within the city is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. (1961 Code)
6-7-2: RUBBISH ON STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall wilfully or negligently throw, dump,
store or deposit upon any sidewalk, street, alley, or public place, or any
portion thereof, within the city any glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, barbed
wire, boards, or any other substance or material which would be likely to
injure any animals, vehicle or person traveling thereon, or which obstructs or
impedes the free passage of pedestrians or public travel upon such sidewalk,
street, alley, or public place, or any portion thereof, shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter. (1961 Code)
6-7-3: OBSTRUCTIONS ON CITY SIDEWALKS:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to place any
display signs, merchandise, or other obstructions in such a manner that
restricts the unobstructed portion of any city sidewalk to less than five feet
(5') in width. (Ord. 439, 4-14-1999)
6-7-4: OFFENSIVE MATTER:
It shall be unlawful within the city, for any person, firm or corporation to
place upon any property, or to allow to remain upon any property within his or
its control any matter which is injurious to health. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 8
PARADES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Permit Required
6-8-2: Time And Route
6-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before a parade of any nature is conducted upon the streets of the city a
permit shall be obtained from the city clerk, for which no fee is charged.
(1961 Code)
6-8-2: TIME AND ROUTE:
In order that authorities of the city may take proper steps for the protection
of participants in a parade and to properly control traffic a representative of
the group or organization planning on holding a parade shall at the time of
application for a permit for same give the city clerk information as to the
date of the parade, time of day, nature of the parade and the route planned.
(1961 Code)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Fire Limits Designated
7-1-2: Restrictions Governed By Building Code As Adopted
7-1-1: FIRE LIMITS DESIGNATED:
All those portions of the city of Kellogg, Idaho, commonly known and designated
as follows:
East One-Half (E 1/2) of Block Twenty-two (22), West One-half (W 1/2) of Block
Twenty- three (23), East One-half (E 1/2) of Block Twenty-nine (29) all of
Blocks Twenty-eight (28), and Thirty-five (35) of the City; all of Blocks One
(1), Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), and Six (6) of Sinclair's Addition
to the City; All of the Bitner Tract, which is adjoined on the East by Block
One (1) of Sinclair's Addition and on the West by Blocks One (1) and Three (3)
of Weber's Addition to the City; All of Block Three (3) of Tract C and all that
portion of Tract C which has a frontage along Station Avenue for a distance of
two hundred fifty (250) feet and is bounded on the East by Division Street;
that tract or parcel of ground which extends East a distance of three hundred
fifteen (315) feet from the intersection of Station Avenue with the East side
line of Division Street and having one hundred twenty-seven and ninety four one
hundredths (127.94) of frontage on Division Street; Lots One (1), Two (2),
Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), Six (6), Seven (7), Eight (8), and Nine (9) in
Block One (1) of Brown's Addition to the City; and commencing at the Northwest
corner of the Division Street Bridge, thence westerly along the course of the
Coeur d'Alene River, a distance of two hundred (200) feet; thence northerly
parallel with Division Street to the south line of Mullan Avenue; thence
easterly on the south line of Mullan Avenue to the west line of Division
Street; thence southerly along the west line of Division Street to the
northwest corner of the Division Street Bridge; and commencing at the point of
intersection of the north line of Railroad Avenue with the east line of
Division Street; thence east a distance of one hundred fifteen (115) feet to a
point; thence northerly to the southeast corner of Lot Fourteen (14) in Block
Eight (8) of Rutter's Third Addition to the City; thence along the southerly
side line of Lot Fourteen (14) of Block Eight (8) of Rutter's Third Addition to
the East line of Division Street; thence southerly along the east line of
Division Street to the point of intersection of the north line of Railroad
Avenue with the east line of Division Street; Lots Nine (9), Ten (10), Eleven
(11), Twelve (12), Thirteen (13) and Fourteen (14) in Block Eight (8) of
Rutter's Third Addition to the City; Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four
(4), Five (5), Six (6), Seven (7), Eight (8), Nine (9), Ten (10), Eleven (11),
Twelve (12), Thirteen (13), Fourteen (14), in Block Four (4) of Rutter's Third
Addition to the City; the northerly one-half of Block Five (5) and Six (6), of
Rutter's Third Addition to the City and the southerly one-half of Block One (1)
and Two (2) and all of Block Three (3) of Rutter's Third Addition to the City;
all of Block Seven (7) and Eight (8) of Rutter's First Addition to the City;
and commencing at a point one hundred fifteen (115) feet northerly of the
intersection of the west line of Division Street with the northerly line of
Cameron Avenue; thence Westerly on a line parallel to Cameron Avenue to the
northwest corner of Lot Twelve (12) in Block Ten (10) of Sunnyside Addition to
the City; thence along the westerly line of Block Ten (10) and Seventeen (17)
of Sunnyside Addition to the City; to a point one hundred fifteen (115) feet
southerly of the south of Cameron Avenue; thence easterly parallel to the south
line of Cameron Avenue to the point of intersection with the west line of
Division Street; thence northerly along the west line of Division Street to the
point of intersection of the west line of Division Street with the north line
of Cameron Avenue; are hereby established and designed as the fire limits of
the City.
(1961 Code)
7-1-2: RESTRICTIONS GOVERNED BY BUILDING CODE AS ADOPTED:
Construction, alteration and moving of buildings within the fire limits of the
city shall be restricted as outlined in the building code as in this code
adopted. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Time Of Filing
7-2-3: Permit Required For Retail Sales
7-2-4: Permit Required For Public Display Or Other Event Using Fireworks
7-2-5: Authorized Dates For The Sale And Use Of Fireworks
7-2-6: Temporary Fireworks Stands; Short Term Storage
7-2-7: General Prohibitions
7-2-8: Exceptions
7-2-9: Liability Of Parents Or Guardians
7-2-10: Enforcement
7-2-11: Penalties; Injunctions
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, these terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION: The city of Kellogg and the Shoshone County fire
district no. 2.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or
detonation. Fireworks include items classified as common or special fireworks
by the United States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulations of
the United States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G
or UN 0336 1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety
flares, toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy
guns or toy cannons, party poppers, pop-its or other devices which contain
twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain or less of explosive substance.
LOCAL CHARITABLE GROUP: Any Silver Valley based group who are in support of
local charitable causes.
NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains,
sparklers, smoke devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and
not to travel outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit sparks or
other burning material which land outside a twenty foot (20') diameter circle
or above a height of twenty feet (20'). Nonaerial common fireworks do not
include firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products.
PERMIT: An authorization given by the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to
this code.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS: Any fireworks designed primarily for display and classified
as special fireworks by the United States bureau of explosives or designated as
UN 0335 1.3G.
WHOLESALE: Sale of fireworks to a retailer or wholesaler. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-2: TIME OF FILING:
   A.   The 4th Of July application for a permit to sell nonaerial common
fireworks shall be filed with the city clerk on or before April 1 of the
calendar year for which the permit is sought.
   B.   The December 31 application for a permit to sell nonaerial common
fireworks shall be filed with the city clerk on or before December 1 of the
calendar year for which the permit is sought. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR RETAIL SALES:
The local authority having jurisdiction shall require a permit for the retail
sale of nonaerial common fireworks.
   A.   The applications shall be on a form approved by the authority having
jurisdiction and shall include the name and address of the applicant, the
primary location of the group, each location at which fireworks are to be
stored and the applicant's Idaho sales tax seller's permit number, if
applicable.
   B.   A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property-casualty
insurance providing coverage of up to one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for personal injury and property damage may be required at the
time of application.
   C.   The authority having jurisdiction may assess a fee for issuing a permit
under this section, which shall not exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   D.   The permit shall be issued if the application is complete and in
compliance with applicable law, shall be valid for the period issuance and
shall be nontransferable.
   E.   The permit required under this section may be revoked if the permittee
violates any provisions of this chapter. A permit revocation proceeding shall
comply with the provisions of title 39 (health and safety), chapter 26
(fireworks) of Idaho Code. The conviction of violation of the aforesaid Idaho
Code or any provision of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its
agents, employees, or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to
revoke and deny any subsequent application for a permit.
   F.   The permit shall be displayed in public view at each location listed on
the permit application.
   G.   Only local charitable groups may apply for a permit for the retail sale
of nonaerial common fireworks. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-4: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY OR OTHER EVENT USING FIREWORKS:
The authority having jurisdiction may, at its discretion, issue a permit for
public display or other events in the following circumstances:
   A.   After determining that the public display will be supervised by a
qualified person and will not constitute an unreasonable hazard to persons or
property. Appropriate National Fire Protection Association or international
fire code provisions may be used as guidance for this determination.
   B.   After determining that sales and use of fireworks outside the normal
sales period provided in section
7-2-5 of this chapter, or proposing the use of fireworks in addition to
nonaerial common fireworks will not constitute an unreasonable hazard to
persons or property.
   C.   An application for a permit for public display or other event shall
require the applicants to provide the name and address of the applicant, the
primary location of the business, each location at which fireworks are to be
sold and stored, and the applicant's Idaho sales tax seller's permit number, if
applicable.
   D.   On a form approved by, and containing the information reasonably
requested by, the authority having jurisdiction.
   E.   The permit shall be nontransferable, shall list the specific date or
dates upon which the display or event shall occur and the types of fireworks
and uses that will be allowed.
   F.   A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property-casualty
insurance providing coverage of up to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage shall be required at the time of
application for public display of special fireworks. The certificate of public
liability shall name the city of Kellogg and Shoshone County fire district no.
2 as additional insured.
   G.   The authority having jurisdiction may assess a fee for issuing a permit
for public display under this section, which shall not exceed one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00). There shall be no fee for the issuance of a
permit for any event other than a public display event.
   H.   Alteration of fireworks may be performed by a person in possession of a
valid public display permit.
   I.   Only local charitable groups may apply for a permit for public display
or other events. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-5: AUTHORIZED DATES FOR THE SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS:
   A.   Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail and used beginning at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23, and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight July 5.
   B.   In addition beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 26
and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1.
   C.   The authority having jurisdiction may at its discretion extend each
period of sales by not more than five (5) days.
   D.   Fireworks may be sold and used at any time in compliance with permits
issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-6: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS; SHORT TERM STORAGE:
   A.   Fireworks Stands Provisions: Retail sales of nonaerial common fireworks
shall be allowed only from within a temporary fireworks stand unless the
authority having jurisdiction finds appropriate circumstances justifying
reasonable variance from strict compliance with this section. An existing
permanent building which was used for the retail sale of fireworks in 1996 may
continue to be used for that purpose if the building meets or exceeds the
standards for temporary buildings established by this section and is operated,
insofar as it is applicable, as provided by this section. Temporary fireworks
stands shall be subject to the following provisions:
      1.   A stand shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any
building or within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest fuel dispensing
device.
      2.   A stand shall meet the minimum structural stability requirements for
temporary buildings as required by the building department.
      3.   A stand shall meet the minimum requirements for temporary buildings
for all lighting circuits or other electrical equipment used in conjunction
with the operation of the stand as required by applicable state codes.
      4.   A stand shall have two (2) exits, each a minimum of thirty inches
(30") wide at each end of the stand or as near the ends as is practical in a
mobile home conversion. One additional door is required for each thirty two
feet (32') of rear wall in excess of thirty two feet (32'). All doors shall
open outward from the stand and shall be kept unlocked and unlatched during the
hours of operation and free and clear of supplies and materials at all times.
      5.   A stand shall have at least two (2) fire extinguishers with a 2A
minimum rating, in good working order, with a current inspection tag in place,
placed near the exits in a visible and readily accessible manner.
      6.   "No smoking within 25 feet" signs shall be prominently displayed on
all four (4) sides of the stand. Smoking shall not be permitted inside the
stand.
      7.   A stand shall not be erected before May 5 nor remain up after July
20 for the first sales period; nor shall it be erected before December 7 or
remain up after January 16 for the second sales period. The premises on which
the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris no later
than July 20 or January 16, respectively.
      8.   The fireworks stand operator shall not permit the discharge of
fireworks within twenty five feet (25') of the stand. The stand operator shall
not allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around the stand causing a fire
nuisance.
      9.   Only noncombustible waste containers shall be permitted within the
stand.
      10.   Fireworks shall not be left in the stand when it is not open for
business unless the stand is locked or secured. If fireworks are not stored in
the stand, they shall be stored in compliance with subsection B, "Short Term
Storage", of this section.
      11.   Notice as provided by the authority having jurisdiction cautioning
each person purchasing fireworks of the prohibitions, liabilities and penalties
incorporated in this chapter shall be posted at all retail locations.
      12.   The authority having jurisdiction may charge a onetime inspection
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for inspection of a temporary fireworks
stand.
   B.   Short Term Storage:
      1.   Short term storage facility may be used for storage of nonaerial
common fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days prior to, and fifteen (15)
days after, any authorized retail sales date. The authority having jurisdiction
shall be notified of the address or location of all short term storage
facilities when fireworks will not be stored in a temporary fireworks stand. If
the short term storage facility is not within the boundaries of the
jurisdiction having issued the retail sales permit the permittee shall notify
the authority having jurisdiction where the storage is to take place.
      2.   Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it
is locked or otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand, truck, trailer, or
other vehicle. A truck, trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage
must remain at least twenty five feet (25') from the stand during any time the
stand is open for business, but may abut the stand when it is closed. A truck,
trailer, or vehicle used for short term storage must be at least twenty five
feet (25') from any other inhabited building. Short term storage may occur in a
locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container,
which is detached from an inhabited building and contains no open flames,
including heating and lighting sources. The authority having jurisdiction may,
in its discretion, allow short term storage to occur in an attached garage with
a one hour fire wall separating the garage from any inhabited area. (Ord. 552,
3-9-2011)
7-2-7: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except in compliance with this chapter,
to:
   A.   Alter any fireworks.
   B.   Throw any fireworks from, into, or at a moving vehicle or at any
person.
   C.   Sell or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this chapter.
   D.   Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based
on the vegetative conditions during the current fire season as determined by
the county commission or authority having jurisdiction, provided that notice of
such areas is given in advance. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-8: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to and shall not prohibit:
   A.   The use of flares, noisemakers or signals designed and used for the
purpose of protecting the public;
   B.   The use of blank cartridges; and
   C.   The use of flares or noisemakers designed and labeled specifically for
pest control purposes and approved by the Idaho department of fish and game.
(Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-9: LIABILITY OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS:
The parents, guardians or other persons having custody or control of a minor
shall be liable for damage caused by the use of fireworks by the minor. (Ord.
552, 3-9-2011)
7-2-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The Kellogg police department, Shoshone County fire district no. 2, or other
law enforcement agencies of the state shall enforce this chapter. (Ord. 552, 3-
9-2011)
7-2-11: PENALTIES; INJUNCTIONS:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any rules issued
hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the existence or use of
any other penalty or remedy, any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter or any of the rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter may, upon
application to or with written consent of the authority having jurisdiction, be
enjoined in the manner provided by law from continuing the violation. Fireworks
being used in violation of this chapter may be confiscated by law enforcement
or the authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2011)
CHAPTER 3
TRANSPORTATION OF INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definition Of Terms
7-3-2: Certification Of Tank Vehicles
7-3-3: Attendance Of Vehicles
7-3-4: Protection Against Static Electricity Charges
7-3-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
CLASS I FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Liquids having a flash point below twenty five
degrees Fahrenheit (25°F) closed cup tester, as example, ether, gasoline and
benzol.
CLASS II FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Liquids having a flash point above that of class I
and below seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) closed cup tester, as example,
alcohol and amyl acetate.
TANK VEHICLE: Any truck, trailer or semitrailer that is used for the
transportation of flammable liquids in bulk quantity. (1961 Code)
7-3-2: CERTIFICATION OF TANK VEHICLES:
All tank vehicles used for the transportation of class I or class II flammable
liquids in bulk quantity exceeding one hundred (100) gallons shall be inspected
by the fire official, and unless certified by him as to their compliance with
this chapter they shall not be operated within the municipality; provided, that
this certification shall not be required for such vehicles bearing the license
of approval of the interstate commerce commission. (1961 Code)
7-3-3: ATTENDANCE OF VEHICLES:
No tank vehicle transporting flammable liquids in bulk of class I or II shall
be left unattended on any street, alley, drive-in or parkway of the city;
provided, that this shall not be construed to prevent a driver from momentary
absence from his vehicle in connection with delivery of his load except during
the time of actual discharge of liquid at which time some responsible person
must at all times be present at such vehicle and providing further, that the
fire official, may upon request grant permission for the parking or storage of
such vehicles in areas or places designated by him and for such periods of time
as may be set. (1961 Code)
7-3-4: PROTECTION AGAINST STATIC ELECTRICITY CHARGES:
All tank vehicles used in the distribution of flammable liquids and operated
upon the street or alleys of the city shall have the tank, chassis, axles and
springs adequately bonded to prevent the accumulation of static electric
charges. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 4
INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Application
7-4-2: Classification
7-4-3: Approvals
7-4-4: Class I And II Liquids
7-4-5: Storage And Handling Of Class I Liquids In Buildings
7-4-6: Storage And Handling Of Class II Liquids In Buildings
7-4-7: Storage Rooms
7-4-8: Storage Of Fuel Oil In Buildings
7-4-9: Drawing Liquids From Containers
7-4-10: Smoking Prohibited
7-4-11: Aboveground Storage Limited
7-4-12: Underground Storage Limited
7-4-13: Construction Of Tanks
7-4-14: Setting Of Tanks
7-4-15: Venting Of Tanks
7-4-16: Emergency Pressure Reliefs
7-4-17: Distinctive Markings
7-4-18: Piping
7-4-19: Valves At Tanks And Pumps
7-4-20: Tank Filling And Filling Connections
7-4-21: Fire Extinguishers
7-4-22: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Containers
7-4-1: APPLICATION:
This chapter applies to all liquids having a flash point below one hundred
eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) closed cup tester. The flash point
shall be as determined by the Tagliabue closed cup tester. (1961 Code)
7-4-2: CLASSIFICATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, flammable liquids are classified as follows:
Class I: Liquids having a flash point below twenty five degrees Fahrenheit
(25°F) closed cup tester. Example: ether, gasoline, naphtha and benzol.
Class II: Liquids having a flash point above that for class I and below seventy
degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) closed cup tester. Example: alcohol and amyl acetate.
Class III: Liquids having a flash point above that for class II and below one
hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) closed cup tester. Example:
kerosene and fuel oil. (1961 Code)
7-4-3: APPROVALS:
Before any flammable liquid tank or piping is covered from sight, the
installation shall be inspected and approved by the clerk or his designated
agent. The clerk may prohibit the sale or use of any heating or lighting
appliance using flammable liquids which has not been tested by the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., or some other competent authority, and found to be properly
safeguarded against fire hazard. (1961 Code)
7-4-4: CLASS I AND II LIQUIDS:
Class I and II liquids shall not be kept or stored in any building used as a
place of public assembly except in laboratories for experimental purposes.
In establishments where class I and II liquids are used in manufacturing,
cleaning or other process, the clerk or his designated agent shall require such
preventive and protective measures as will reasonably safeguard life and
property against fire. (1961 Code)
7-4-5: STORAGE AND HANDLING OF CLASS I LIQUIDS IN BUILDINGS:
Class I liquids shall not be kept inside of buildings except in sealed
containers and approved safety cans of not more than one gallon capacity each,
provided that, in rooms conforming herein in this chapter described, safety
cans up to ten (10) gallons in size may be used, and in garages and
manufacturing plants, the clerk may permit the use of approved portable wheeled
tanks where the nature of the business requires such storage. Systems with
arrangements for discharging class I liquids inside of buildings shall have
discharge outlets located only in rooms conforming to this chapter. (1961 Code)
7-4-6: STORAGE AND HANDLING OF CLASS II LIQUIDS IN BUILDINGS:
Class II liquids shall not be kept inside of buildings except in sealed
containers or approved safety cans of not over five (5) gallons, capacity of
each, or in closed rooms, barrels or tanks. Containers of class II liquids of
over five (5) gallon capacity shall not be used to fill other containers inside
buildings unless in a room conforming to this chapter. (1961 Code)
7-4-7: STORAGE ROOMS:
Rooms for the storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be constructed
with walls, floors and ceilings, have a fire resistance rating of not less than
one hour; provided that where, in the opinion of the clerk, the hazard is more
than moderate, based upon a consideration of the quantity and nature of the
liquids involved and the extent of mixing operations together with the
construction, a fire resistance rating of not less than two (2) hours shall be
required.
Door openings to the room shall be equipped with approved automatic or self-
closing fire doors and shall have sills raised at least six inches (6") above
the room floor. (1961 Code)
7-4-8: STORAGE OF FUEL OIL IN BUILDINGS:
The storage of class III liquids in buildings in connection with oil burning
equipment shall be in accordance with the following:
Tanks of not over two hundred seventy five (275) gallons capacity each and
having an aggregate capacity not in excess of five hundred fifty (550) gallons
may be installed without enclosures. Other tanks shall be completely enclosed
with a heat insulation equivalent to reinforced concrete not less than eight
inches (8") in thickness with at least a six inch (6") space on sides between
tank and concrete insulation filled with sand or well tampered earth, and with
twelve inches (12") of sand on top of tank, either between tank and concrete
slab or above concrete slab. (1961 Code)
7-4-9: DRAWING LIQUIDS FROM CONTAINERS:
Flammable liquids shall not be drawn or handled in the presence of any open
flame or fire. Except as permitted below, flammable liquids shall be drawn from
tanks at points inside buildings only by pumps or other methods approved by the
clerk or his designated agent. Draw off pipes terminating inside buildings
shall have a valve at the discharge end when delivery is by gravity; the
shutoff valve should preferably be of the automatically closing type and, in
addition, an emergency valve shall be provided. Draw off devices for class I
and II liquids shall not be located on floors below grade.
Any approved domestic type all burner may be supplied by gravity from a tank of
two hundred seventy five (275) gallons maximum capacity. A second tank may be
provided if connected by an approved three-way valve so that not more than two
hundred seventy five (275) gallons can be discharged at any one time.
The clerk or his designated agent may permit gravity flow of flammable liquids
in manufacturing or jobbing plants where the nature of business requires it.
(1961 Code)
7-4-10: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
Smoking or the carrying of matches or other smoking material in rooms where
flammable liquids are handled is prohibited. Suitable "No Smoking" signs shall
be displayed. (1961 Code)
7-4-11: ABOVEGROUND STORAGE LIMITED:
The storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks shall be
controlled as to capacity and location by rules established by the zoning
commission. (1961 Code)
7-4-12: UNDERGROUND STORAGE LIMITED:
Underground tanks shall have the top of the tank not less than two feet (2')
below the surface of the ground, except that, in lieu of the two foot (2')
cover, tanks may be buried under twelve inches (12") of earth and a cover of
reinforced concrete at least five inches (5") in thickness, which shall extend
at least one foot (1') beyond the outline of the tank in all directions,
concrete cover to be placed on a firm, well tampered earth foundation. Where
necessary to prevent floating, tanks shall be securely anchored or weighted.
Where a tank cannot be entirely buried, it shall be covered over with earth to
a depth of at least two feet (2') with a slope on a all sides not steeper than
one and one-half feet (1 1/2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
For liquids with a flash point below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F),
underground tanks having a capacity in excess of five hundred fifty (550)
gallons shall be at least ten feet (10'), and tanks having a capacity in excess
of two thousand (2,000) gallons shall be at least twenty feet (20') from every
building, the lowest floor, basement, cellar or pit which is below the top of
the tank. (1961 Code)
7-4-13: CONSTRUCTION OF TANKS:
The design and construction of tanks shall conform to generally accepted good
practices and shall be approved by the clerk. Tanks labeled by the
Underwriters' Laboratories and tanks conforming to the standard generally
accepted good practice. (1961 Code)
7-4-14: SETTING OF TANKS:
   A.   Tanks shall be set on firm foundations. Tanks located inside buildings
and exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallon capacity shall be
supported independently on the floor construction. Outside aboveground tanks
more than one foot (1') above the ground shall have foundations and supports of
masonry or protected steel, except that wooden cushions may be used.
   B.   No combustible materials shall be permitted under or within ten feet
(10') of any outside aboveground storage tank. Electric motors, unless of
approved explosion proof type, and internal combustion engines shall not be
placed beneath tanks or elsewhere within the line of vapor travel. (1961 Code)
7-4-15: VENTING OF TANKS:
   A.   An opening galvanized iron vent pipe arranged for proper draining, or
an automatically operated vent shall be provided for every tank which may
contain flammable vapor. The lower end of the vent pipe shall not extend
through the lip into the tank for a distance of more than one inch (1").
   B.   Vent openings for class I and II liquids, and vent openings or vent
pipes exceeding two inches (2") for class III liquids shall be provided with
approved flame arrestors and shall be of sufficient area to permit escape of
air or vapor during the filling operation. Vent openings, except those
automatically operated shall not be less than one inch (1") in diameter.
Arrestors shall be accessible for examination and repair. Vent pipes shall be
provided with weatherproof hoods and terminate outside of buildings twelve feet
(12') above top of pipefill; or, if tight connection is made in filling line,
to a point one foot (1') above the level of the top of the highest reservoir
from which the tanks may be filled, and if possible, not less than three feet
(3'), measured horizontally and vertically, from any window or other building
openings. Where a power pump is used in filling storage tanks and a tight
connection is made to the fill pipe, the vent pipe shall be no smaller than the
fill pipe. (1961 Code)
7-4-16: EMERGENCY PRESSURE RELIEFS:
With the exception of vertical cone roof tanks hauling a roof slope less than
two and one-half inches (2 1/2") in twelve inches (12") and in which the
strength of the joint between the roof and shell, all aboveground tanks shall
have some form of relief for preventing the development of excessive internal
pressure in case of explosure fire surrounding the tank. The method of relief
shall be acceptable to the clerk or his duly designated agent. (1961 Code)
7-4-17: DISTINCTIVE MARKINGS:
Portable containers for class I and II liquids shall be painted red (entire
container or conspicuous band or stripe) and be conspicuously lettered black,
"Dangerous -- Keep Lights and Fire Away". (1961 Code)
7-4-18: PIPING:
   A.   Piping used for flammable liquids shall be standard full weight,
wrought iron, steel or brass pipe or approved copper tubing, for working
pressures in excess of one hundred (100) pounds per square inch extra heavy
fittings shall be used. No pipe or tubing less than one-half inch (1/2")
internal diameter shall be used. Outside piping shall be protected against
mechanical injury.
   B.   Piping carrying class I and II liquids, unless without joint or
connections shall not extend through any room which contains any open light or
fire. (1961 Code)
7-4-19: VALVES AT TANKS AND PUMPS:
   A.   Where tanks are aboveground, there shall be a valve located near the
tank in each pipe. In case two (2) or more tanks are cross connected, there
shall be a valve near each tank in each cross connection.
   B.   Pumps delivering to or taking supply from aboveground storage tanks
shall be provided with valves on both suction and discharge pumps, and in
delivering to tanks a check valve to prevent flow of liquid from tank to pump.
(1961 Code)
7-4-20: TANK FILLING AND FILLING CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Deliveries of flammable liquids of class I and II shall be made
directly to the storage tank through the filling pipe by means of a hose or
pipe between the filling pipe and the barrel, tank wagon or tank car from which
such liquid is being drawn.
   B.   The end of the filling pipe for underground storage tanks for class I
and II liquids shall be carried to a location outside of any building, but not
within five feet (5') of any entrance door, or cellar opening; this filling
pipe shall be closed by a screw cap. (1961 Code)
7-4-21: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Where flammable liquids are kept, used or handled, a quantity of loose
noncombustible absorbents, such as dry sand or ashes, together with pails or
scoops, and chemical extinguishers or other extinguishing devices or material
shall be provided in such quantities as may be directed by the clerk. (1961
Code)
7-4-22: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS CONTAINERS:
Nonportable containers for the storage of liquefied petroleum gases (propane
and butane are the principal constituents) shall be construed in accordance
with section 8 of the boiler code of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE HAZARD INSPECTION AUTHORIZED
SECTION:
7-5-1: Fire Official May Inspect
7-5-2: Hazard To Be Removed Upon Order
7-5-3: Misdemeanor To Fail To Remove Hazard
7-5-4: Serving Of Order
7-5-1: FIRE OFFICIAL MAY INSPECT:
Authority is hereby given to the fire official to inspect or cause to be
inspected by fire officers, as often as may be necessary, all buildings,
premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings,
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any laws
of the city affecting the fire hazard. (1961 Code)
7-5-2: HAZARD TO BE REMOVED UPON ORDER:
Whenever an officer shall find in any building, upon any premises or other
place, combustible matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary
accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any other highly inflammable
materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operation of the
officers, or egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be
removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the
owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to appeal within
twenty four (24) hours to the mayor, who shall within five (5) days review such
order and file his decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or
modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant.
(1961 Code)
7-5-3: MISDEMEANOR TO FAIL TO REMOVE HAZARD:
Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within ten (10) days
after said appeal shall have been determined, or, if no appeal is taken, then
within ten (10) days after the service of the said order, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1961 Code)
7-5-4: SERVING OF ORDER:
The service of any such order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises
to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such
occupant personally or by delivering same to and leaving it with any person in
charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises,
by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance
of the said premises. Whenever it may a necessary to serve such an order upon
the owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and
leaving with said person a true copy of the said order, or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of the office making the order, by mailing him
such copy to the owner's last known post office address. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
7-6-1: Adoption Of Fire Code
7-6-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
Effective January 1, 2015, the international fire code, 2009 edition, prepared
by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted in its entirety. (Ord. 572,
12-10-2014)
CHAPTER 7
LIFE SAFETY CODE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Adoption Of Life Safety Code
7-7-1: ADOPTION OF LIFE SAFETY CODE:
There is hereby adopted that certain life safety code known as the life safety
code, 1976, of the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof,
and as the same shall be amended, revised, compiled and published from time to
time, three (3) copies of which have been and now are filed in the office of
the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein. (Ord. 313, 8-8-1979)
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Department Of Sanitation
8-1-2: Superintendent Of Public Works
8-1-3: Duties Of Superintendent
8-1-4: Definitions
8-1-5: Containers
8-1-6: Garbage And Refuse Separate
8-1-7: Disposal Of Other Items
8-1-8: Contract Or Franchise For Garbage Collection
8-1-9: Disposal To Use Sanitary Fill
8-1-10: Unlawful To Burn Garbage
8-1-11: Charges
8-1-12: Fees
8-1-13: Unlawful To Place Garbage In Public Place
8-1-14: Unlawful To Haul Garbage Through Streets
8-1-15: Mandatory Subscription
8-1-16: Unlawful To Collect Garbage For Hire Without Contract, Franchise Or
License
8-1-1: DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION:
There is hereby established a department of sanitation in the city of Kellogg.
(1961 Code)
8-1-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The superintendent of public works shall be appointed by, and work under the
general supervision of the mayor. (1961 Code)
8-1-3: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The duties of the superintendent of public works shall be as follows:
   A.   To supervise the operation of the department.
   B.   To enforce the provisions of this code and perform such other and
further duties as may be assigned to him by the mayor.
   C.   To make a complete and adequate report on the first day of each month
on matters pertaining to the department.
   D.   To propose rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions
of this code for the approval of the mayor and council. Such rules and
regulations when approved, shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk.
(1961 Code)
8-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: Shall be interpreted to mean all putrescible wastes except sewage but
excluding recognizable industrial byproducts.
REFUSE AND TRASH: Shall include all waste materials. (1961 Code; amd. Ord. 272,
12-5-1973, eff. 1-1-1974)
8-1-5: CONTAINERS:
No garbage or refuse shall be permitted to accumulate except in covered
containers approved by the superintendent of public works. Such containers
shall be of strong, not easily corrodible, rodentproof metal, each with two (2)
handles and tight fitting covers which shall be in place at all times except
when removed for filling or emptying. (1961 Code)
8-1-6: GARBAGE AND REFUSE SEPARATE:
The superintendent may require that garbage and one or more types of refuse
shall be disposed of in separate containers. (1961 Code)
8-1-7: DISPOSAL OF OTHER ITEMS:
Boxes, papers, tree cuttings and all odd articles shall be crushed and/or
bundled in lengths not to exceed five feet (5') and not to exceed fifty (50)
pounds in weight, except articles in special hauls. (1961 Code)
8-1-8: CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION:
Collection of garbage and refuse for a fee or for hire may be made by the
sanitation department or a contract may be let for an exclusive franchise for
the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. (Ord. 272, 12-5-1973, eff.
1-1-1974)
8-1-9: DISPOSAL TO USE SANITARY FILL:
The disposal of all garbage and refuse shall be at the city dump by the
sanitary landfill method under the supervision and upon approval by the
superintendent. (1961 Code)
8-1-10: UNLAWFUL TO BURN GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage or refuse; except that
waste paper, boxes, brush, grass, weeds and cuttings from trees, lawns and
gardens may be burned except during fire seasons when a special permit must
first be obtained from the fire official. (1961 Code)
8-1-11: CHARGES:
All charges for the removal of garbage shall be collected by the city clerk and
turned over to him to the treasurer. (1961 Code)
8-1-12: FEES:
A schedule of fees for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall
be determined by proper resolution of the council and filed with the clerk.
Said fees may be altered at any time by resolution of the council. (1961 Code)
8-1-13: UNLAWFUL TO PLACE GARBAGE IN PUBLIC PLACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any manner garbage or refuse of
any nature in a lane, alley, street or other public place within the city or
upon private property unless contained in covered containers approved by the
superintendent of public works. (1961 Code)
8-1-14: UNLAWFUL TO HAUL GARBAGE THROUGH STREETS:
Garbage and refuse shall be hauled by the garbage and refuse collection and
disposal system herein established. It shall be unlawful for any other person
to haul garbage or refuse through or over the public streets of the city or to
bury or cremate such garbage or refuse. (Ord. 334, 4-11-1984)
8-1-15: MANDATORY SUBSCRIPTION:
All occupied premises including residence and business premises within the city
shall be required to subscribe to and make use of the garbage and refuse
collection and disposal system herein established. In the event of delinquent
garbage charges under this chapter and under the schedule of rates herein
authorized, the owner or proprietor of the premises shall be held liable and
responsible for the amount of such delinquency whether such owner or proprietor
be the actual occupant of said premises or not. (Ord. 334, 4-11-1984)
8-1-16: UNLAWFUL TO COLLECT GARBAGE FOR HIRE WITHOUT CONTRACT, FRANCHISE OR
LICENSE:
No person shall collect, transport or dispose of garbage or other refuse for
hire within the city limits who has not contracted with the city to provide
such service and who does not possess a license or franchise from the city and
no person shall be granted such contract, permit or license who is not capable
of complying with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 272, 12-5-1973, eff.
1-1-1974)
CHAPTER 2
WEEDS, BUSHES, TREES, AND PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Terms Defined
8-2-2: Conditions Unlawful
8-2-3: Initiation Of Complaints
8-2-4: Inspection Of Premises
8-2-5: Notice To Abate
8-2-6: Owner To Abate Violation
8-2-7: Penalty For Failure To Abate Violation
8-2-8: Appeal, Time Limits For Filing, And Decision
8-2-9: Abatement Of Violations By City And Collection Of Costs
8-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this
chapter, unless the context of their use indicates otherwise:
ABATEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement between the City and the person in charge of
the nuisance property in which such person agrees to promptly take all Iawful
and reasonable actions, which shall be set forth in agreement, to abate the
nuisance within a specified time.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
   1.   A property on which nuisance activity is observed on three or more
occasions during any sixty (60)-day period or on which nuisance activity is
observed on seven or more occasions during any twelve (12)-month period;
   2.   Any abandoned property where nuisance activity exists.
PROPERTY NUISANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity that offends common sensibilities and
sense by way of extreme noise, light, or odor; the storage of lumber, metal,
plastic, paper, cardboard, or other scrap material deposited in such a place
and manner as to constitute a hazardous attraction; accumulation of unused or
unlicensed vehicles or machinery.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle, including parts thereof, from which the
engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed or on which the engine, wheels
or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. Inoperable
motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations.
NUISANCE TREE OR SHRUB: Any woody perennial plant which is allowed to grow in
such a manner as to obscure any traffic visibility, any traffic sign, or
encroach into a municipal public right of way in such a manner as to create a
hazard to those using the right of way, or the existence of any dead or dying
tree or shrub which creates a hazard to public safety or public property.
VEGETATIVE LITTER: Scattered accumulation of dead portions of plant materials.
VEHICLE: Any device designed to move or propel persons or property or to be
drawn upon a highway or street not including a device designed to be propelled
or moved by human power, such as wagons, tricycles, bicycles (excluding
motorized bicycles), or to be used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WEED: All uncultivated, unmown grasses, annual plants, perennial plants,
noxious weeds, and all other rank uncultivated vegetation over eight inches
(8") tall, other than trees, shrubs, and cultivated plants, flowers and
agricultural products.
(Ord. 555, 5-9-2012; amd. Ord. 638, 4-9-2025)
8-2-2: CONDITIONS UNLAWFUL:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or any agent or
representative of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any
occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land or any part thereof in the city to
allow, permit or maintain on any such lot or land or any adjacent municipal
public right of way, the growth of weeds or unmown grass or the accumulation of
overgrown weeds, grass, brush, nuisance trees or shrubs, whether dead or
living. Allowing the unmanaged growth or accumulation of weeds (noxious or
otherwise) or grass over eight inches (8") in height or the accumulation of
overgrowth of weeds, grass, brush or trees is declared to be a violation of
this chapter. The owner of real property is ultimately responsible for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   All weeds, unmown grasses, brush piles and vegetative litter, with the
exception of an actively operated compost pile not generating nuisance odors,
on any private property within the city are hereby declared to be a violation
of this chapter.
   C.   Any tree, shrub or other plant material or any dead or dying tree or
shrub located on private property in the city which overhangs or intrudes over
or upon any public street, alley, avenue, roadway, sidewalk, traffic
intersection visibility triangle or traffic sign to such an extent that it
interferes with the safety of the traveling public or is a hazard or hindrance
to public safety or use of public property is declared to be a violation of
this chapter.
   D.   The accumulation and/or storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, or parts thereof, or the keeping, storage,
or accumulation of building materials, unused furniture and appliances, junk,
trash, or debris on any property, outside an entirely enclosed structure,
creates a condition tending to reduce the value of surrounding private property
in the vicinity and/or promotes blight and/or deterioration, and/or creates
fire hazards and/or constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and/or safety of minors, or is a harborage for rodents and/or insects
injurious to the health, safety and/or general welfare of the public, and is,
therefore, a public nuisance within the meaning of Idaho Code section 50-334.
These conditions on private property within the city are hereby declared to be
a violation of this chapter. The owner of real property is ultimately
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Pursuant to authority vested by Idaho Code sections 50-317, 50-334, or
its successor, and article XII, section 2, of the Idaho constitution, any
owner, lessee, occupant or any agent or representative of any such owner,
lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel
of land shall be responsible for immediately remedying any conditions that
violate the requirements of this chapter. Upon notice to the owner, the city is
empowered to abate such violation by causing the cutting and removal of trees,
weeds and grass and the removal of rubbish, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, or parts thereof, building materials, unused
furniture and appliances, junk, trash, or debris upon and from private property
within the city and the parking within the curbing abutting the same, and to
assess the cost thereof against the private property so cleared and that which
is adjacent to the parking/landscape strip between the sidewalks and the curb
and any alley so cleared pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-317, or its
successor. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, nothing addressed
hereby shall preclude the city from acting upon conditions that constitute a
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code and pursuing abatement as
provided thereby. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012)
8-2-3: INITIATION OF COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a weed, brush pile, vegetative litter, nuisance tree or
shrub, or public nuisance complaint by filing a written complaint with the city
clerk or by reporting such matters to the Kellogg police department. The city
clerk shall forward all such complaints to staff members assigned
responsibility for enforcement of this chapter by the mayor and city council.
(Ord. 555, 5-9-2012)
8-2-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Kellogg police department may determine by inspection whether such
accumulation or growth or pile of weeds, brush or growth or abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, or parts thereof, building
materials, unused furniture and appliances, junk, trash, or debris constitutes
a violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere
with any authorized staff members or agent making an inspection permitted under
this section. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012)
8-2-5: NOTICE TO ABATE:
   A.   Notice of Nuisance Property: Whenever the Kellogg police department or
authorized agent finds that a violation does exist pursuant to any provisions
of this chapter, he or she may initiate enforcement by giving notice by
certified and first class mail, addressed to the last known address of the
owner of record or by personally serving the notice upon the owner of record,
and if there is more than one owner of record, by such mail or personal service
to any one of such owners. In the event the owner of the property is unknown or
his or her whereabouts is unknown, notice shall be given by a combination of
first class mail and certified mail based upon the records of the county
assessor. Such notice shall specify the violations required to be abated and
the manner and time limits by which the owner of the property is required to
achieve compliance.
   In the event said owner and/or occupant fails to abate within the time
period specified in the notice, the Kellogg police department or authorized
agent shall take appropriate action to issue a misdemeanor citation as outlined
in section
8-2-7 of this chapter to said property owner, lessee, occupant or any agent or
representative of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any
occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land or any part thereof in the city.
In the event the owner of the property is unknown or his or her whereabouts is
unknown, law enforcement shall take appropriate action to obtain a criminal
complaint and issuance of a criminal summons, or arrest warrant where the
whereabouts are unknown.
   B.    Second Report: If two or more nuisances have occurred on the same
property during any one hundred eighty (180) day period, or upon the receipt of
a second notice within one hundred eighty (180) days from the first notice,
penalties will be as outlined in section
8-2-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012; amd. Ord. 610, 7-8-2020)
8-2-6: OWNER TO ABATE VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the owner of private property whose use constitutes a
violation of this chapter to cut, trim, or remove such accumulations or growth
immediately upon receipt of notice from the city, in no case less than the time
frame stated in the notice, which shall provide at least five (5) days for
performance unless the city grants an extension, upon reasonable grounds. (Ord.
555, 5-9-2012)
8-2-7: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO ABATE VIOLATION:
Any owner or other person notified to cut, trim, or remove weeds, brush piles,
vegetative litter or nuisance tree or shrub growth or remove abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, or parts thereof,
building materials, unused furniture and appliances, junk, trash, or debris
from their property, and who shall fail to do so and abate such violation
within the time specified in the notice, as outlined above in section
8-2-5 of this chapter. The first non-compliance offense will be deemed an
infraction with an associated fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). If
two (2) or more nuisances have occurred on the same property during any one
hundred eighty (180) day period, or upon the receipt of a second notice within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the first notice, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days in jail or both a fine and imprisonment. In addition to any other
penalty, the city may recover its costs of abatement, including attorney fees
and costs as outlined in section
8-2-9 of this chapter. Every day such violation continues after the date
specified in the notice shall constitute a separate and distinct offense,
punishable by a lawfully appropriate penalty. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012; amd. Ord.
610, 7-8-2020)
8-2-8: APPEAL, TIME LIMITS FOR FILING, AND DECISION:
If the property owner receiving notice to abate a violation of this chapter
contests the determination that a violation of this chapter exists, a written
appeal of the notice shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days
from the date of posting, mailing, or personal service of the required notice
to abate a violation. At the regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of
the city council, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty six (26)
days thereafter, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such
appeal. Any decision of the city council thereupon rendered shall be final and
conclusive. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012)
8-2-9: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS BY CITY AND COLLECTION OF COSTS:
In any case where a person required under this chapter does not abate the
violation, the city, through its own personnel, contractor and/or agents, may
enter upon the premises to cut, trim or remove weeds, brush piles, vegetative
litter or nuisance tree or shrub growth, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, or parts thereof, building materials, unused
furniture and appliances, junk, trash, or debris and abate such violation. The
total cost of the abatement shall be billed to the owner of the property for
payment. In the event payment is not made within sixty (60) days or if the
owner or whereabouts of the owner is not known, the cost of abatement may be
certified by the city clerk and forwarded to the county treasurer for inclusion
in the county property tax assessment pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008.
Pursuit of abatement by the city shall not preclude prosecution of violations
of this chapter. (Ord. 555, 5-9-2012)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Remove Snow And Ice
9-1-2: Notice To Be Given
9-1-3: Upon Failure To Comply, City To Remove
9-1-1: REMOVE SNOW AND ICE:
Owner, tenants, occupants of any premises within the city abutting or adjoining
any public sidewalk shall remove all snow and ice from any such sidewalk. (1961
Code)
9-1-2: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
It shall be the duty of the city to notify any owner, tenant or occupant of
property herein described to remove or otherwise correct the objectional matter
herein legislated against, which notice shall be sent by registered mail to the
last known address of such owner, tenant or occupant, notifying him that he has
a period of twenty four (24) hours from and receipt of such notice within which
to correct or otherwise remove the objections set forth in said notice. (1961
Code)
9-1-3: UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY, CITY TO REMOVE:
Upon failure of the owner, tenant or occupant of said premises to comply with
the terms and conditions of said notice, then and in that event the city shall
have the right to remove such snow and ice and assess the cost thereof against
the premises abutting the sidewalks. Such assessment to be certified to the
county assessor or other proper county official having charge of the making of
the assessment roll, and such assessment to be placed on the assessment roll
and collected in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected. (1961
Code)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
SECTION:
9-2-1: Trees To Be Trimmed
9-2-2: Hedges And Shrubbery
9-2-3: Injury To Trees Or Shrubbery
9-2-4: Trees Outside Property Line
9-2-1: TREES TO BE TRIMMED:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees
on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging the sidewalks, streets or
alleys, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or
public travel. (1961 Code)
9-2-2: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/
or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the city. (1961
Code)
9-2-3: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons, not the owner
thereof, or without lawful authority so to do, to wilfully injure, deface,
disfigure or destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, or to
injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant, growing, standing, or being
either on private ground or any street, parking, public park or place within
the city. (1961 Code)
9-2-4: TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINE:
The mayor and city council of the city are hereby given full and complete
control over all trees growing within the confines of the city limits which are
outside the property lines of the respective lots, plots and tracts. (1961
Code)
CHAPTER 3
LANDING OF AIRCRAFT
SECTION:
9-3-1: Landing Prohibited
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-1: LANDING PROHIBITED:
Aircraft shall be prohibited from landing within the city except in an
emergency. (Ord. 325, 11-12-1981)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
AIRCRAFT: Any machine heavier than air supported for flight by dynamic action
of air upon its surfaces, and which is used for transportation of persons or
property in the air.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen occurrence or condition or act of God, creating or
causing, mechanical failure or damage to the aircraft or creating a life
threatening situation to persons aboard the aircraft.
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit an aircraft from landing within
the city to preserve life of a person or persons or to protect property. (Ord.
325, 11-12-1981)
CHAPTER 4
STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Excavation
9-4-2: Deposits On Roads, Streets And Highways
9-4-1: EXCAVATION:
In order to maintain or improve the sewer system, water system and underground
utilities, it is sometimes necessary to excavate within the public streets and
alleys of the city.
   A.   Any person cutting any surface of a street or alley shall notify the
city clerk prior to performing such work, pay the necessary fees and obtain a
right of way permit. In the event of any emergency, the responsible party may
respond and shall notify the city clerk within twenty four (24) hours.
   B.   Notification to the clerk shall include the date, street address and
number of square feet involved in the surface of each excavation. The city
clerk shall keep accurate records containing the foregoing information.
   C.   The street or alley shall be restored to a condition as good or better
than the condition prior to excavation or cutting of the surface by the person
causing the excavation. All work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner
within ninety (90) days of the date the surface was disturbed. (Ord. 573, 1-14-
2015)
9-4-2: DEPOSITS ON ROADS, STREETS AND HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Secured Loads: No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, road
or highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, covered or loaded as to
prevent: 1) any of its contents or load from dropping, sifting or leaking, and
2) the possibility of any of its contents or load from blowing, spilling or
otherwise escaping therefrom.
   B.   Improper Disposal:
      1.   No person shall throw or deposit nor shall the registered owner or
the driver, if such owner is not present in the vehicle, aid or abet in the
throwing or depositing upon any road, street or highway any bottle, can,
garbage, construction debris, yard waste or any substance likely to injure or
damage traffic using the roadways.
      2.   No person shall place, deposit or dump any rocks, refuse, garbage,
yard waste, construction debris, snow, ice, brush, limbs, stumps or dirt in or
on any road, street or highway, including any portion of the right of way
thereof, without the consent of the state or local agency having jurisdiction
over the road, street or highway.
   C.   Remedies:
      1.   Any person who drops, dumps, deposits, places or throws, or causes
or permits to be dropped, dumped, deposited, placed or thrown upon any road,
street or highway any material described in the preceding subsection shall
immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
      2.   If such person fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C1
of this section, the governmental agency responsible for the maintenance of the
road, street, or highway on which the material has been deposited may remove
such material and collect, by civil action, if necessary, the actual cost of
the removal operation in addition to any other damages authorized by law from
the person made responsible under subsection C1 of this section.
   D.   Penalties: Violation of this section or any part thereof shall be a
misdemeanor subject to punishment to the maximum allowed by Idaho Code. (Ord.
483, 3-12-2003)
TITLE 10
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PARKING METER REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 431, 3-12-1997)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions Of Words Or Phrases
10-2-2: Traffic Administration
10-2-3: Enforcement And Obedience To Traffic Regulations
10-2-4: Traffic Control Devices
10-2-5: Speed Regulations
10-2-6: Turning Movements
10-2-7: One-Way Streets And Alleys
10-2-8: Special Stops Required
10-2-9: Miscellaneous Driving Rules
10-2-10: Public Conveyances
10-2-11: Pedestrians' Rights And Duties
10-2-12: Method Of Parking
10-2-13: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Specified Places
10-2-14: Stopping For Loading Or Unloading Only
10-2-15: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Restricted Or Prohibited On Certain
Streets
10-2-16: Regulating The Kinds And Classes Of Traffic On Certain Highways
10-2-17: Violations And Penalties
10-2-18: Definitions
10-2-19: When Police May Remove Parked Cars; Costs
10-2-20: Removal Of Unidentified, Stolen, Wrecked Or Abandoned Motor Vehicles
And Charges Therefor
10-2-21: Enforcement Of City's Lien On Properties Impounded By Police
Department
10-2-22: Proof Of Ownership; Appeal; Redemption After Sale
10-2-23: Method Of Advertisement And Sale
10-2-24: Adoption Of Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws
10-2-25: Loitering Prohibited
10-2-26: Skateboards, Bicycles, And Toy Vehicles
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS OR PHRASES:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose
of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
ALLEY: That thoroughfare which intersects blocks at the rear of the lots of
said blocks or transverses blocks between regularly established streets.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Fire vehicles (fire patrol), police vehicles, and
such ambulances and emergency vehicles of the municipal departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the mayor or motor
vehicles of the chief of police.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over twenty inches (20") in
diameter.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street, or roadway.
CROSSWALK:
   A.    That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalk on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
   B.    Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE (E-BIKE): A bicycle equipped with fully operable
pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that
meets one (1) of the following criteria:
   A.   "Class 1 electric-assisted bicycle" means an electric-assisted bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and ceases when the rider stops pedaling or when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   B.   "Class 2 electric-assisted bicycle" means an electric-assisted bicycle
equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle and
that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   C.   "Class 3 electric-assisted bicycle" means an electric-assisted bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and ceases when the rider stops pedaling or when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty-eight (28) miles per hour.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of the two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles, or the area which within vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Every vehicle that is self-propelled, and for the purpose of
titling and registration meets federal motor vehicle safety standards as
defined in section 49-107, Idaho Code. Motor vehicle does not include vehicles
moved solely by human power, electric personal assistive mobility devices,
personal delivery devices, electric-assisted bicycles, and motorized
wheelchairs or other such vehicles that are specifically exempt from titling or
registration requirements under title 49, Idaho Code as amended.
MOPED: A limited-speed motor-driven cycle having wheels less than twenty (20)
inches in diameter and:
   A.   Motorized propulsion that is not capable of propelling the vehicle at a
speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour on level ground, whether two (2)
or three (3) wheels are in contact with the ground during operation. If an
internal combustion engine is used, the displacement shall not exceed fifty
(50) cubic centimeters and the moped shall have a power drive system that
functions directly or automatically without clutching or shifting by the
operator after the drive system is engaged; or
   B.   Two (2) wheels or three (3) wheels with no pedals, which is powered
solely by electrical energy, has an automatic transmission, a motor which
produces less than two (2) gross brake horsepower, is capable of propelling the
device at a maximum speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on level
ground and, as originally manufactured, meets federal motor vehicle safety
standards for motor-driven cycles. A moped is not required to be titled and no
motorcycle endorsement is required for its operator.
A moped does not include an electric-assisted bicycle.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider, designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground or designed to travel on two (2) wheels in contact with the ground which
is modified by the addition of two (2) stabilizing wheels on the rear of the
motor vehicle, that meets the federal motor vehicle safety standards as
originally designed, and includes a converted motorbike, but does not include a
motor-driven cycle, a motorbike, a tractor, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a
moped.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
mountain standard time.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body
or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
PARK: When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary
rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the road.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STOP: When required means complete cessation of movement.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: When prohibited means any stopping or standing of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purpose of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by
law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are
erected as provided in this act.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
either singly or together while using any public thoroughfare for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
TRAFFIC DIVISION: The traffic division of the police department, or in the
event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used
herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department.
VEHICLES: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary tracks or rails. (1961 Code; amd. per
correspondence dated 5-2-2003; Ord. 642, 11-12-2025)
10-2-2: TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Police Administration: There is hereby established within the police
department a traffic division to be under the control of the chief of police or
an officer appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police.
   B.   Duty Of Traffic Division: It shall be the duty of the traffic division
with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to
enforce all street traffic regulations, to make arrests for traffic violations,
to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the engineer and other officers
in the administration of traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
upon said division by this chapter and the traffic regulations.
   C.   Records Of Traffic Violations:
      1.   The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a
record of all violations of the traffic regulations of which any person has
been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such
alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least
a five (5) year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period.
      2.   All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall
be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
      3.   All such records and reports shall be public records.
   D.   Traffic Division To Investigate Accidents: It shall be the duty of the
traffic division, assisted by other police officers to investigate traffic
accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged
with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
   E.   Traffic Accident Studies: Whenever the accidents at any particular
location becomes numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the
traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining
remedial measures.
   F.   Traffic Accident Reports: The traffic division shall maintain a
suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards
referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall
be available for the use and information of the traffic engineer.
   G.   Drivers Files To Be Maintained:
      1.   The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain
a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and
complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under
the name of the driver concerned.
      2.   Said division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with
frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the
reasons thereof, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to
prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked.
      3.   Such records shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period
and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least
the most recent five (5) year period.
   H.   Traffic Division To Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report: The traffic
division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the
mayor. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters as follows:
      1.   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
      2.   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police;
      3.   The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic
safety activities;
   I.   Traffic Division To Designate Method Of Identifying Funeral
Processions: The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other
identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to
identify, the vehicles in funeral processions.
   J.   Emergency And Experimental Regulations: The chief of police is hereby
empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the
traffic regulations and to make and enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
(1961 Code)
10-2-3: ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Authority Of Police And Fire Officials:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or
such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street
traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.
      2.   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned
by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event
of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions
may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
      3.   Fire officials, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist
the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
   B.   Required Obedience To Traffic Regulations: It is a misdemeanor for any
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
chapter.
   C.   Obedience To Police And Fire Officials: No person shall wilfully fail
or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or
fire official.
   D.   Persons Propelling Push Carts Or Riding Animals To Obey Traffic
Regulations: Every person propelling any push cart or driving any animal drawn
vehicle, or riding an animal upon a roadway, shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter, except those which by their very nature can have no
application. (1961 Code)
   E.   Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates, And Similar Devices Restricted: (Rep.
by Ord. 404, 4-12-1995)
   F.   Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations: The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it
shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute.
   G.   Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
      2.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
         a.   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this act;
         b.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or a stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         c.   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;
         d.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
      3.   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds
audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, except that
an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
      4.   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   H.   Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle when operated as an
authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell:
   The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer;
      2.   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the highway.
   I.   Immediate Notice Of Accident: The driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an
apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more shall immediately by the
quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police
department.
   J.   Written Reports Of Accident: The driver of a vehicle which is in any
manner involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or
total property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more
shall, within five (5) days after such accident, forward a written report of
such accident to the police department, or a copy of any report he is required
to forward to the state. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable
when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while
such driver was present thereat.
   K.   When Driver Unable To Report:
      1.   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required herein and there was another
occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such
occupant shall give or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver.
      2.   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written
report of an accident as required herein and such driver is not the owner of
the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall
within five (5) days after learning of the accident make such report not made
by the driver.
   L.   Written Accident Reports Confidential: All written accident reports
made by drivers, owners, or occupants of vehicles involved in accidents as
required herein shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and
shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other
governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention
purposes, except that the police department may disclose the identity of a
person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or
when such person denies his presence at such accident. No such report shall be
used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident
except that the department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or
claims to have, made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate
showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police
department solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the
requirements that such a report be made to the department. (1961 Code)
10-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices: The traffic division
shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and
as required under the traffic regulations to make effective the provisions of
said regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
regulations or to guide or warn traffic.
   B.   Manual And Specifications For Traffic Control Devices: All traffic
control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the state highway commission. All signs and signals
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be
uniform as to type and location. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official
traffic control devices.
   C.   Obedience Of Official Traffic Control Devices: The driver of any
vehicle and the motorman of any bus shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this chapter.
   D.   When Traffic Devices Required For Enforcement Purposes: No provision of
this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is
not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are
required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or
in place.
   E.   Traffic Control Signal Legend: Whenever traffic is controlled by
traffic control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution", or "Stop" or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows,
the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
      1.   Green alone or "Go":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited
herein, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at
such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at
the time such signal is exhibited.
         b.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
      2.   Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go"
signal:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red
or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
         b.   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
         c.   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway until
the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
"Walk" signal.
      3.   Red alone or "Stop":
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is
shown alone.
         b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
"Walk" signal.
      4.   Red with green arrow:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the same.
         b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
"Walk" signal.
      5.   In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
      6.   Pedestrian Control Signals: Whenever special pedestrian control
signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place such
signals shall indicate as follows:
         a.   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by
the drivers of all vehicles.
         b.   Wait Or Don't Walk: No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the wait signal is showing.
   F.   Flashing Signals: Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal
is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular
traffic as follows:
      1.   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      2.   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
      3.   Railroad Grade Crossings: This section shall not apply at railroad
grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade
crossings shall be governed by the rules herein set forth in this chapter.
   G.   Display Of Unauthorized Signs, Signals, Or Markings:
      1.   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
      2.   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
      3.   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
      4.   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause to be removed without notice.
   H.   Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices Or Railroad Signs Or
Signals: No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or
any part thereof.
   I.   Authority To Establish Play Streets: The traffic division shall have
authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place
appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect
the same.
   J.   Play Street: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business
or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
   K.   Traffic Division To Designate Crosswalks And Establish Safety Zones:
The traffic division is hereby authorized to:
      1.   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as he may deem necessary;
      2.   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places
as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
   L.   Traffic Lanes:
      1.   The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon
the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
      2.   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1961 Code)
10-2-5: SPEED REGULATIONS:
   A.   Speed Laws Applicable: The traffic laws regulating speed of vehicles
shall be as this chapter hereby declares and determines upon the basis of
engineering and traffic investigation. Certain speed regulations shall be
applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall
be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess
of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
   B.   Speed Limit On Certain Streets: It is hereby determined upon the basis
of engineering and traffic investigation that the speed limits upon every
street designated herein shall be as herein stated, which speeds so declared
shall be effective when signs are erected upon every street designated herein
giving notice of the speed limit so declared thereat.
   Speed limits are hereby declared to be twenty five (25) miles per hour on
the streets of the city of Kellogg except where otherwise posted.
   C.   Regulation Of Speed By Traffic Signals: The traffic division is
authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the
movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at
variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at
intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (1961
Code)
10-2-6: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections: The driver of
a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
      1.   Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
      2.   Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such
centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection
the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn
shall be made in that portion of the intersection of the left of the center of
the intersection.
      3.   Left Turns On Other Than Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection,
as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
   B.   Authority To Place And Obedience To Turning Markers:
      1.   The traffic division is authorized to place markers, buttons, or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
      2.   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
   C.   Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs: The traffic division is
hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
   D.   Obedience To No Turn Signs: The driver of any vehicle shall not turn
such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a
business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless
such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(1961 Code)
10-2-7: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Authority To Sign One-Way Streets And Alleys: Whenever any regulations
designate any one-way street or alley the traffic division shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective
unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful
traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   B.   One-Way Streets And Alleys: Upon those streets and parts of streets
proclaimed by proper resolution of the council, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   C.   Authority To Restrict Direction Of Movement On Streets During Certain
Periods:
      1.   The traffic division is hereby authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof.
The traffic division may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used
by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of
the roadway.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of such markings, signs, barriers, or other devices so placed in
accordance with this chapter. (1961 Code)
10-2-8: SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED:
   A.   Through Streets Designated: Those streets and parts of streets
proclaimed by proper resolution of the council are hereby declared to be
through streets for the purpose of this section.
   B.   Authority To Erect Stop Signs: Whenever the council, by resolution
designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the traffic
engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street
intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described
and designated as such, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled
at all times by traffic control signals provided, however, that at the
intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall
be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by
the traffic division upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
   C.   Intersections Where Stop Required: The traffic division is hereby
authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard
exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall
stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, shall also erect a
stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; provided, said, traffic
division may, in his discretion, establish "Yield Right of Way" signs at such
intersections as it is deemed advisable. Such signs shall indicate that an
intersection may be entered without stopping if no vehicles are approaching
along the street whereon the "Yield of Right of Way" signs control entering
traffic.
   D.   Signs To Bear The Word "Stop": Every stop sign erected shall bear the
word "Stop" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in height and such sign
shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal
illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by
efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be
located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection, or if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
   E.   Vehicles To Stop At Stop Signs: When stop signs are erected as herein
authorized at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a
vehicle shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or in the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a
police officer or traffic control signal.
   F.   Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The driver of a vehicle
within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk
or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, driveway, yielding the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching
on said roadway.
   G.   Stop When Traffic Obstructed: No driver shall enter an intersection or
a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed.
   H.   Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Railroad Train:
      1.   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet
(15') from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he
can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         a.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         b.   A crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman gives or continues
to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         c.   A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand
five hundred feet (1,500') of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from
such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to
such crossing, in an immediate hazard;
         d.   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity of such crossing.
      2.   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (1961 Code)
10-2-9: MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES:
   A.   Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited: The driver of any vehicle other
than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive into or
park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer
to a fire alarm.
   B.   Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire department when laid to be used at any fire or alarm of fire,
without the consent of the fire department official in command.
   C.   Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession: No driver of a vehicle
shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated as required in this chapter.
   D.   Drivers In A Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and
shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
   E.   Funeral Processions To Be Identified: A funeral composed of a
procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such
other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division.
   F.   When Permits Required For Parades And Processions: No funeral,
procession, or parade containing persons or vehicles, shall occupy, march, or
proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief
of police and such other regulations as are set forth.
   G.   Vehicles Shall Not Be Driven On Sidewalk: The driver of a vehicle shall
not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
   H.   Limitations On Backing: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same
unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering
with other traffic.
   I.   Riding On Motorcycles: A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only
upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not
carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designated to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2)
persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear side of the
operator's seat.
   J.   Clinging To Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle upon a roadway. (1961 Code)
10-2-10: PUBLIC CONVEYANCES:
   A.   Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles: No person shall board or alight
from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
   B.   Unlawful Riding: No person shall ride any vehicle upon any portion
thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or
two (2) persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
   C.   Railroad Trains Not To Block Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of
any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such
manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period
of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall not
apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop within an intersection
or a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers.
   D.   Bus Stops:
      1.   Authority is vested in the traffic division to designate bus stops
at such locations and in such number as may be necessary and of the greatest
benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop shall be designated
by appropriate signs.
      2.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such bus at any place for the
purpose of taking on or discharging passengers other than at a bus stop so
designated as provided herein, except in case of emergency.
      3.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle at an authorized bus
stop so designated as provided herein, or between the right curb and any such
stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop
thereat for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the discharge of
passengers or the pick up of passengers then in readiness at the curb. (1961
Code)
10-2-11: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Pedestrians Subject To Traffic Control Signals: Pedestrians shall be
subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in this chapter, but
at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to
the restrictions stated herein.
   B.   Pedestrians' Right Of Way In Crosswalks:
      1.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
the curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. A pedestrian's
right of way in a crosswalk is modified under the condition and as stated
herein.
      2.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
   C.   Pedestrians To Use Right Half Of Crosswalk: Pedestrians shall move,
whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalk.
   D.   Crossing At Right Angles: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any
place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk.
   E.   When Pedestrians Shall Yield:
      1.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
      2.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right
of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
      3.   The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the
conditions stated herein when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at
certain designated places.
   F.   Prohibited Crossing:
      1.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   G.   Obedience Of Pedestrians To Railroad Signals:
      1.   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being closed, or is being opened.
   H.   Pedestrians Walking Along Roadway:
      1.   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
      2.   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along or
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway
or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
   I.   Pedestrians Soliciting Rides Or Business:
      1.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
      2.   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway.
   J.   Drivers To Exercise Due Care: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this chapter every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon
observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(1961 Code)
10-2-12: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Standing Or Parking Close To Curb: No person shall stand or park a
vehicle in a roadway other than parallel, except where marked otherwise, with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the
curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Permit For Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To The Curb:
      1.   The traffic division is authorized to issue special permits to
permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such
permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate
any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
   C.   Lights On Parked Vehicles:
      1.   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed upon such
parked vehicle.
      2.   Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a
business or residence district during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour
after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front
of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the rear.
      3.   Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-13: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required:
      1.   No owner or operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle
to stop, stand or park, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
         a.   On a sidewalk;
         b.   In front of a public or private driveway;
         c.   Within an intersection;
         d.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
         e.   On a crosswalk;
         f.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         g.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal; stop sign or yield sign; or traffic control signal located at the side
of a roadway;
         h.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the traffic division has indicated a different length by signs or
markings;
         i.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;
         j.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
         k.   Alongside or opposite any street obstruction or excavation when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         l.   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
         m.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         n.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit stopping;
         o.   In any active road and sewer construction zone between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through
Saturday. Violators may be towed but not before effort is made to contact the
registered owner of the vehicle in violation.
      2.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. 583, 7-13-2016)
   B.   Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic: No owner or operator of a vehicle
shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park upon a street, other
than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic.
   C.   Parking In Alleys: No owner or operator of a vehicle shall allow or
cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park in an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no owner or
operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park
within an alley, in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property.
   D.   Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited: No owner or operator of a
vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stand, stop or park upon any
roadway for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
      2.   Washing, greasing, painting or otherwise repairing such vehicle,
except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
      3.   Leaving vehicle on street that is in disrepair.
         a.   Any vehicle in disrepair shall be tagged for forty eight (48)
hour removal.
         b.   Any vehicle not moved off the street after the forty eight (48)
hour period shall be towed.
         c.   Definition of "disrepair" includes, but is not limited to, any
vehicle unable to start/move under its own power, including a vehicle with a
flat tire(s).
      4.   Any vehicle inhibiting snow removal.
         a.   Any vehicle inhibiting snow removal shall be tagged for forty
eight (48) hour removal.
         b.   Any vehicle not moved off the street after the forty eight (48)
hour period shall be towed.
   E.   Parking Adjacent To Schools:
      1.   The traffic division is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
      2.   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either
side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no owner
or operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or
park in any such designated place.
   F.   Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets:
      1.   The traffic division is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the
width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
      2.   When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow
streets as authorized herein, no owner or operator of a vehicle shall allow or
cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park upon any such street in violation of
any such sign.
   G.   Standing Or Parking On One-Way Streets: The traffic division is
authorized to erect signs upon the left hand side of any one-way street to
prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place,
no owner or operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stand or
park upon such left hand side in violation of any such sign.
   H.   Standing Or Parking On One-Way Streets And Roadways: In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to
one direction upon any such roadway, no owner or operator of a vehicle shall
allow or cause the vehicle to stand or park upon the left hand side of such
one- way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking.
The traffic division is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
   I.   No Stopping, Standing Or Parking Near Hazardous Or Congested Places:
      1.   The traffic division is hereby authorized to determine and
designate, by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in
length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
      2.   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein no owner or operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the
vehicle to stop, stand or park in any such designated place.
(Ord. 397, 1-12-1994; amd. Ord. 583, 7-13-2016; Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
10-2-14: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY:
   A.   Traffic Engineer To Designate Curb Loading Zones: The traffic division
is hereby authorized to determine the location of passengers and freight curb
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable.
   B.   Permits For Curb Loading Zones: The traffic division shall not
hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zones upon special request of any
person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for
two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The traffic division upon
granting a permit and issuing such signs shall collect from the applicant and
deposit in the treasury a service fee of five dollars ($5.00) per year or
fraction thereof and there may be general regulations imposed by conditions
upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value
thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of
misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end
of one year.
   C.   Standing In Passenger Curb Loading Zone: No owner or operator of a
vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park for any purpose
or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours
when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and
then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
   D.   Standing In Freight Curb Loading Zone: No owner or operator of a
vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick
up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
   E.   Traffic Division To Designate Public Carrier Stop And Stands: The
traffic division is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, and
bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor
vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall
determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and
every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be
designated by appropriate signs.
   F.   Stopping, Standing And Parking Of Buses; Regulations:
      1.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated.
      2.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated,
except in case of an emergency.
      3.   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen inches (18") from the
curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede
the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   G.   Restricted Use Of Bus Stands: No owner or operator of a vehicle shall
allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park in a designated bus stop,
other than a bus in a bus stop, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle
may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. 397, 1-12-1994)
10-2-15: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS:
   A.   Application Of Section: The provisions of this section prohibiting the
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary
to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or official traffic control devices.
   B.   Regulations Not Exclusive: The provisions of this section imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
   C.   Parking Signs Required: Whenever by this chapter any parking time limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty
of the traffic division to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no
such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place
at the time of any alleged offense. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-16: REGULATING THE KINDS AND CLASSES OF TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Load Restrictions Upon Vehicles Using Certain Streets: When signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross
weight in excess of the amounts specified.
   B.   Restrictions Upon Use Of Streets By Certain Vehicles:
      1.   The Traffic Division is hereby authorized to determine and designate
those heavily traveled streets, upon which shall be prohibited the use of the
roadway by motor driven cycles, bicycles, horsedrawn vehicles, or other
nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
      2.   When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Of City Code An Infraction: Any owner or operator of a
vehicle violating any of the traffic or parking violations set out in this
chapter or chapter 4 of this title shall have committed an infraction unless
other penalty is provided by State law, and, upon being found to have violated
a provision of said chapters, shall be penalized as allowed by State law and
this Code. (Ord. 397, 1-12-1994)
   B.   Penalties: Any owner or operator of a vehicle found to have violated
any provision of this chapter or of chapter 4 of this title shall be assessed a
fine for each separate violation in accordance with the City's adopted fee
resolution. A schedule of fees shall be determined by proper resolution of the
Council and filed with the Clerk. Said fees may be altered at any time by
resolution of the Council.
   C.   Enforcement: Any police officer or other person(s) designated by the
City or Chief of Police observing any violations of this title shall be
authorized to issue a ticket describing such violation and the charge assessed
for the violation to the owner or operator of the vehicle standing, stopped or
parked in violation of said chapters. The members of the Police Department or
other person(s) designated by the City or Chief of Police are authorized to
refrain from instituting a prosecution charging the person with an infraction
or, where applicable, a misdemeanor if such person pays the charge herein
assessed to the City cashier within ten (10) days of the violation. The owner
and operator of any vehicle found to be stopped, standing or parked in
violation of this chapter or chapter 4 of this title shall be deemed to have
received the ticket issued if the officer or other authorized person secures a
copy of the ticket to the vehicle's windshield or other conspicuous place. Any
ticket issued pursuant to said chapters of this Code shall set out the date,
time, location and nature of the violation, as well as the vehicle's license
plate number and state of registration. Any such ticket shall also indicate the
amount of the fine for the alleged violation, and the time within which the
fine must be paid to avoid issuance of a summons. (Ord. 594, 3-14-2018)
   D.   Payment Of Fines: The payment of the fine specified on any ticket
issued pursuant to this chapter or
chapter 4 of this title shall be deemed a conclusive admission of the alleged
violation. All such payments shall be made to the Kellogg City Clerk and
deposited into the City's General Fund.
   E.   Procedure Upon Contest Of Ticket: In the event the owner or operator of
a vehicle found stopped, standing or parked in violation of this chapter or
chapter 4 of this title contests the violation alleged in the ticket orally or
in writing to the Kellogg Police Department, the issuing officer or other
authorized person shall have the following discretionary options:
      1.   Dismissal of the ticket;
      2.   Deferred prosecution of the violation; or
      3.   Prosecution of the violation.
   Nonpayment of the specified fine within the time period specified on the
ticket shall be deemed a contest of the ticket.
         a.   Deferred Prosecution: In the event the issuing officer or other
authorized person elects to defer prosecution of the violation, the officer or
other person shall notify the ticketed person either orally or in writing that
prosecution has been deferred for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days.
If the officer or other authorized person does not initiate prosecution of the
ticket as hereafter specified within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
violation, the ticket shall be dismissed.
         b.   Prosecution Of Ticket: In the event the issuing officer or other
authorized person elects to prosecute the violation alleged on the ticket, a
uniform citation or a complaint and summons shall be served on the person named
on the ticket, and thereafter proceeded upon as with any other infraction
offense under Idaho law. Any uniform citation or complaint may also specify and
charge additional separate violations of this code or state law. (Ord. 397, 1-
12-1994)
10-2-18: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall specifically apply to sections
10-2-13 through
10-2-17 of this chapter, and to chapter 4 of this title.
ALLOW; ALLOWS: The owner(s) of the vehicle constructively consents to and is
responsible for the actions of the operator of his or her vehicle, whether or
not present at the time or aware of the violation. However, the owner(s) will
not be deemed to have "allowed" a vehicle to be operated in violation of this
code if:
         A. The vehicle was stolen at the time of the operation;
         B. The vehicle was the subject of a written lease agreement at the
time of the violation and the owner provides a true and accurate copy of the
lease agreement to the Kellogg police department prior to trial or entry of
default judgment; or
         C. The registered owner has sold the vehicle to a third party prior to
violation and provides the Kellogg police department with a true and accurate
copy of the bill of sale prior to trial or entry of default judgment.
CAUSE; CAUSES: The operator's act of stopping, standing or parking the vehicle
at the time of the violation, and it shall not be a defense that the operator
did not know that he or she was committing a violation of this code.
OPERATOR: The person or persons operating, driving, steering or otherwise
guiding the vehicle at the time of the violation.
OWNER: The registered owner of the vehicle as reflected in the records of the
state motor vehicle department for the state in which the vehicle is registered
at the time of violation.
TICKET: Any uniform, serial numbered form approved by the chief of the Kellogg
police department, and includes an Idaho uniform citation.
VEHICLE: All motorized and nonmotorized vehicles typically used for the
transportation of one or more persons over public roads. (Ord. 397, 1-12-1994)
10-2-19: WHEN POLICE MAY REMOVE PARKED CARS; COSTS:
If at any time a vehicle is parked in a prohibited place or at a time when
parking is prohibited where parked, for a period of ten (10) minutes or more
and such vehicle is obstructing the free movement of traffic or is causing a
traffic hazard, or is directly interfering with the maintenance or care, or
emergency use of the streets, and the person in charge cannot be immediately
located, or if located, fails, neglects, or refuses to move said vehicle at
once, or where a motor vehicle is parked in a parking meter area and is in
violation as herein set forth, for a period of one hour, the police department
may in its discretion in addition to the penalty provided therefor remove or
cause to be removed, said vehicle keeping it in its custody or under its
control at such place as may be designated by the police department until the
owner or his authorized agent applies for same and has paid a reasonable cost
for removing and storing said vehicle which costs shall be assessed and
collected by the police department, and said costs and expenses shall be a lien
in favor of the city on said car; provided, that when any such motor vehicle is
interfering with the maintenance or emergency use of the streets, but not
otherwise violating this chapter then the police department may, in its own
discretion remove said motor vehicle or other vehicle and care for the same,
and may in its own discretion deliver the same to the owner without any cost or
charge for such removal or storage. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-20: REMOVAL OF UNIDENTIFIED, STOLEN, WRECKED OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
AND CHARGES THEREFOR:
The police department is hereby authorized in its discretion, in addition to
any penalty that may be provided therefor, to remove an unidentified, stolen,
wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property, as herein
defined, found upon any public street or property and shall keep the same in
its custody and control at such place as may be designated by said police
department until redeemed by the owner thereof, as herein provided; and all
such unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or other
personal property which now is in the possession shall be subject to the actual
cost of removal or tow in from the public place, and a storage charge of fifty
cents ($0.50) per day as long as the same is in possession and custody of said
department.
"Unidentified motor vehicle or other personal property" as used in this chapter
is hereby defined to be such motor vehicle or other personal property where
ownership thereof cannot be ascertained.
"Stolen motor vehicle or other personal property" is hereby defined to be that
property which the police department has reasonable grounds to believe to be
stolen.
"Wrecked motor vehicle or other personal property" is hereby defined to be one
damaged by accident or any cause, and left upon the streets or public place
unattended.
"Abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property" is hereby defined to be an
automobile or personal property which remains upon the streets or other public
property for a period longer than forty eight (48) hours, the owner of which
cannot be located or the owner refuses to remove the same.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a motor vehicle
or other personal property, to leave or abandon the same upon the streets or
public places as in this chapter provided. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-21: ENFORCEMENT OF CITY'S LIEN ON PROPERTIES IMPOUNDED BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT:
All motor vehicles and other personal property impounded or heretofore
impounded by the police department and unredeemed by the owner thereof for a
period of forty five (45) days shall thereafter be subject to sale by the chief
of police to the highest bidder for cash as hereinafter provided, and the
proceeds of said sale shall be applied first, to all removal and storage
charges accumulated against each article, which shall be deposited with the
treasurer and the balance of said sum, if any, shall be deposited with the
treasurer and shall be kept in a separate fund for a period of one year from
the date of receipt, and if at the end of said year the former owner of said
property has not made satisfactory proof of claim as hereinafter provided, then
the balance of said proceeds of sale shall be credited to the general fund.
(Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-22: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP; APPEAL; REDEMPTION AFTER SALE:
Any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded property as in this
chapter provided, shall make written application therefor to the police
department and shall furnish to said department such additional proof as may be
required to establish said ownership. If he shall present to said department
said proof of his ownership of said impounded property prior to the date of
actual sale thereof pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, then the
property itself shall be delivered to said owner under the conditions herein
provided; but if said property has been sold, then said department shall
endorse its findings of ownership with a copy of the written application
addressed to the clerk, and said owner may present said application and
findings to said clerk, and if presented within one year after said sale, then
such balance of the proceeds of sale, after deductions as in this chapter
provided, shall be paid to said owner.
Any appeal from the removal, storage and publication costs, if any, assessed by
the police department as provided in this chapter shall be in the same manner
as provided by law. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-23: METHOD OF ADVERTISEMENT AND SALE:
Whenever the chief of police shall in his discretion decide to offer impounded
properties for sale, he shall make a complete and detailed list of said
properties to be included in a publication notice of said sale. Said notice of
publication of sale shall be published at least three (3) times in a newspaper
of general circulation, said publication to be at least five (5) days before
said sale. Said bids when received shall be accepted or rejected as to each
separate item of property, and only cash bids shall be acceptable to the chief
of police. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-24: ADOPTION OF IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
It is hereby declared the intent of the governing body of the city of Kellogg
to aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in
traffic regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such
jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by the
cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the
state.
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations
for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of the city that certain
code, identified as the 1959 revised edition, Idaho motor vehicle laws, more
particularly title 49, Idaho Code, published by the department of law
enforcement, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho legislature,
or amended by the governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length
herein.
Three (3) copies of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, together with any revisions
or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in his
office for use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 252, 1-19-1971)
10-2-25: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter on or about or near any city street
adjacent to a state highway within the limits of the city. (Ord. 308, 12-13-
1978)
10-2-26: SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, AND TOY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To ride or operate or cause to be operated any skateboard, roller
skates, human powered scooters, or other toy vehicles on any sidewalk or street
specified in subsection F of this section, within the city of Kellogg, Idaho.
   B.   Bicycles shall not be operated on any sidewalk of any street specified
in subsection E of this section in the city of Kellogg, Idaho, and shall not be
parked on any sidewalks in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the movement
of pedestrians, motor vehicles, or other vehicles, or to cause damage to trees,
shrubs, other plants, or other property. Bicycles may be operated pursuant to
all laws applicable to motor vehicles on all city streets and public parking
lots.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any
posted non-motorized pathway or sidewalk. This includes any vehicle which is
self-propelled by electric power generated by means other than active pedaling
by the operator.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the mayor and/or city council
from allowing bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, or human powered scooters,
or other toy vehicles to serve as exhibits or demonstrations. Such exhibits or
demonstrations shall be by permit only.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of
bicycles on sidewalks for law enforcement purposes by any law enforcement
agency.
   F.   The prohibitions specified in subsections A and B of this section apply
to the following streets and adjacent sidewalks within the city of Kellogg,
Idaho:
      Division Street: From Portland Avenue north to Railroad Avenue.
      Hill Street: From McKinley Avenue north to Railroad Avenue.
      Main Street: From Idaho Avenue, including the Kellogg town square, south
to two hundred feet (200') past Market Avenue.
      Market Avenue: From Main Street east to alley between Main and Division
Streets.
      McKinley Avenue: From Division Street west to Hill Street.
      Portland Avenue: From Main Street east to Division Street and Southside
west to alley between Main and Second Streets.
   G.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction, which shall
be punished in accordance with Idaho Code 49-1503 and Idaho infraction rule 9.
(Ord. 404, 4-12-1995; amd. Ord. 642, 11-12-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DRUNK AND NEGLIGENT DRIVING
SECTION:
10-3-1: Drunk Driving And Driving Under Influence Of Narcotics
10-3-2: Negligent Or Reckless Driving
10-3-1: DRUNK DRIVING AND DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF NARCOTICS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle of any type on the
public thoroughfare within the city limits while under the influence of any
kind of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic drugs. It shall be presumed that
such operator is under the influence of intoxicating liquor if chemical
analysis of the operator's blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance,
shows 0.08 percent or more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood or
equivalent at the time of such vehicle operation. This presumption shall not
limit other competent evidence of drunkenness. Any person convicted under this
section shall be subject to the provisions of section 49-1102, Idaho Code
relating to refusal to submit to chemical analysis of the blood and section 50-
1109, Idaho Code relating to surrender of operator's license to drive. (1961
Code; amd. per correspondence dated 5-2-2003)
10-3-2: NEGLIGENT OR RECKLESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle of any type on any
public thoroughfare in a negligent or reckless manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger any person or property. (1961 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Evasion Unlawful
10-4-3: Parking Space To Be Marked
10-4-4: Seasonal Parking Limitations
10-4-5: Implementation And Maintenance Of Traffic Control Devices
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
   It is the purpose of this chapter to alleviate traffic and parking
congestion caused by owners and operators of vehicles who allow or cause their
vehicles to stand, stop or park for unreasonably long periods of time upon the
most congested streets of the city, which thus impedes the flow of traffic.
(Ord. 396, 1-12-1994; amd. Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
10-4-2: EVASION UNLAWFUL:
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a vehicle to allow or
cause the vehicle to be in violation of this chapter for the purpose of evading
any time limit prescribed herein.
(Ord. 396, 1-12-1994; amd. Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
10-4-3: PARKING SPACE TO BE MARKED:
   The chief of police shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or
street designating the parking space and each vehicle shall park within said
lines or markings. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such
line or marking, or park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be
entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings.
(Ord. 267, 2-7-1973, eff. 2-15-1973; amd. Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
10-4-4: SEASONAL PARKING LIMITATIONS DURING:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any recreational
vehicle, camper or trailer on any public street, park, avenue, alley or public
way in the City between November 1 through March 31. Violation of this section
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
10-2-17 of the Kellogg Municipal Code.
   B.   Overnight Parking: Between November 1 and March 31, no owner or
operator of a vehicle shall allow or cause the vehicle to stop, stand or park
on any street specified by signs, markings, and other indicators posted by the
city, except for those vehicles operated by law enforcement, emergency response
vehicles, and those directed by law enforcement.
(Ord. 614, 11-11-2020; amd. Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
10-4-5: IMPLEMENTATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   When, by this chapter, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is
prohibited on designated streets or parts of streets, city personnel shall
erect and maintain appropriate signs or traffic markings giving notice thereof,
and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs or traffic
markings are in place at the time of any alleged violation.
   City personnel are authorized to place and maintain appropriate signs or
traffic markings to indicate standing or parking regulations, and such traffic
markings shall designate the zones and shall have the meanings set forth in
this subsection:
   A.   Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time.
   B.   Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking except as designated by
appropriate signs or traffic markings.
   C.   When appropriate signs or traffic curb markings have been erected or
placed according to this subsection, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 634, 2-12-2025)
TITLE 11
LAND USE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purposes
11-1-3: Legal Authority
11-1-4: Applicability
11-1-5: Minimum Requirements
11-1-6: Compliance Required
11-1-7: Buildings Previously Permitted Or Under Construction At Time Of
Adoption Of This Title
11-1-8: Certificate Of Occupancy Or Zoning Compliance Required
11-1-9: Information Required For Zoning Or Building Permits
11-1-10: Principles Of Interpretation
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the LAND USE REGULATIONS OF KELLOGG, IDAHO. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-2: PURPOSES:
The purposes of these regulations are to be consistent with the Kellogg
comprehensive plan, to separate land uses that might be incompatible with one
another and to endeavor to assure public services sufficient to support land
uses that are allowed. The purposes must be implemented in the community as it
exists, rather than "on a clean slate". Changes of zoning and methods chosen
for implementation should fulfill the purposes stated above and the policies
set forth in the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-3: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to authority granted by title 67, chapter 65,
Idaho Code (Local Land Use Planning Act); and article 12, section 2 of the
Idaho Constitution as currently comprised or as subsequently amended. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
This title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all land and the use
thereof, within the jurisdictional boundaries of Kellogg, Idaho. Lands owned by
the government of the United States of America shall be governed hereby only to
the extent provided by Federal law. Lands owned by the State of Idaho shall be
governed hereby to the extent allowed by State law. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-5: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title
conflict with the express requirements of any other locally adopted ordinance,
the ordinance providing the greatest measure of protection for the public
health, safety, and general welfare shall prevail. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-6: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any building or structure to be moved,
erected, remodeled, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt within the corporate limits
of Kellogg, Idaho contrary to the provisions of this title.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any yard, open space, building, structure, or
land to be used for any purpose not permitted by this title, unless such use
has been lawfully established prior to enactment of this title.
   C.   Any use not permitted by the provisions of this title is prohibited.
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-7: BUILDINGS PREVIOUSLY PERMITTED OR UNDER CONSTRUCTION AT TIME OF
ADOPTION OF THIS TITLE:
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been lawfully issued
or for which a completed application has been accepted prior to the effective
date of this title may be completed and used in accordance with the plans,
specifications, and permits on which said building permit was granted, if
construction is commenced and inspections are requested within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the issuance of said permit, and if construction is
diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-8: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to occupy or use any building or premises, or part of building
or premises created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy and/or a
certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. It is unlawful to establish
any land use on lands within the City unless a certificate of zoning compliance
has been issued. The Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period of time, not exceeding nine (9) months, to allow for
completion of weather- dependent work or improvements. Certificates of
occupancy or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Administrator or designee authorize only the use
and/or arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments, and not other uses or arrangement. The Building and Planning
Department shall maintain records of certificates of occupancy and certificates
of zoning compliance. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018; amd. Ord. 608, 3-11-2020)
11-1-9: INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR ZONING OR BUILDING PERMITS:
An application for a permit governed by this title shall address the
information necessary to determine compliance with this title and other
applicable provisions of law. The Administrator is authorized to establish
administrative procedures, develop application forms, and administer the
permitting process as necessary to demonstrate compliance with this title and
applicable provisions of State law. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-1-10: PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION:
Provided that the context does not give rise to practical difficulties,
interpretations of certain zoning ordinance language and certain standards will
usually be applied in the following manner:
   A.   Buildings Across Parcel Description Lines: Provided legal and
contiguous parcels of record are owned by the same property owner(s), building
(s) that have been developed across property lines shall merge the properties
into one parcel for the determination of zoning standards.
   B.   Fences And Wall Height Measurement: Maximum fence and wall height shall
be measured from the finished grade at the property line. That portion of a
wall or fence functioning as a retaining wall shall not be counted in
determining overall fence or wall height.
   C.   Yard Orientation On Through Lots: On through lots, where public road
frontage at both ends exists, either line may be designated by the
Administrator as the front yard; however, the predominate orientation of
existing structures and the presence of street access limitations on that block
shall determine the front of the structure.
   D.   Setback Encroachments: Setbacks shall not be less than the minimum
dimension specified in the specific section, except for cornices, canopies,
eaves, or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor
space within the building may extend into a required side, front or rear yard
setback no more than three feet (3'). Setbacks will be measured from the
property line to the foundation of the structure. A minimum of five feet (5')
separation is required between adjacent building overhangs, canopies, etc.
Paved, uncovered parking is generally allowed in setback areas, unless other
restrictions provide to the contrary.
   E.   Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following shall apply:
      1.   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerline of street or highway right-of-way lines, streams, lakes or other
bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary. Where
the zoning boundary follows a railroad right-of-way, such boundary shall be
deemed to be located in the center of the right-of-way, unless otherwise
clearly designated.
      2.   Where zone boundaries approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be the boundaries.
      3.   Where zone boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines
or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of
highways, such zone boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and
at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no
distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on the official zoning map. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Administrator - Designation
11-2-2: Administrator - Responsibility And Authority
11-2-3: Coordination With Other Departments
11-2-4: Fees
11-2-5: Appeal Of Decisions By Administrator
11-2-1: ADMINISTRATOR - DESIGNATION:
This title shall be administered by the Kellogg building official or his/her
designee(s), or other City staff person or consultant appointed by the Mayor
and endorsed by the City Council. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-2-2: ADMINISTRATOR - RESPONSIBILITY AND AUTHORITY:
For the purposes of this title, the Administrator shall have the following
responsibility and authority:
   A.   Advise interested persons regarding land use regulations and
subdivision ordinance provisions.
   B.   Notify the public and interested media as required by law.
   C.   Advise applicants regarding required applications and ordinance
compliance.
   D.   Administer and issue land use and development permits, notifications
and similar administrative duties.
   E.   Investigate possible violations of this title and take the actions
necessary and appropriate to remedy such violations.
   F.   Assist the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council in
implementing the provisions of this title.
   G.   Any employee or agent designated by the Mayor of Kellogg may act on
behalf of Kellogg concerning any matter or proceeding arising out of this
title. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-2-3: COORDINATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
The Administrator is directed to coordinate with other jurisdiction departments
and public agencies concerning all permits which may be required by this title
and by previously or subsequently adopted laws. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-2-4: FEES:
The City Council will establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses and for matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this title requiring investigations, advisory reports, inspections, legal
advertising, postage, and other expenses. The schedule of fees will be
available in the Office of the Administrator, and may be altered or amended
only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have
been paid in full, no application shall be deemed complete for processing
pursuant to this title. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-2-5: APPEAL OF DECISIONS BY ADMINISTRATOR:
Any administrative decision made by the Administrator may be appealed to the
Kellogg City Council. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall clearly set
forth the legal basis upon which the appeal is brought. The party to whom the
appeal is made shall establish procedures appropriate to the question
presented. After considering information that the appellate decision-maker
deems necessary and appropriate, it shall render a written decision setting
forth the rationale for the conclusion reached. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Interpretations Of Terms Or Words
11-3-2: Meaning Of Terms Or Words
11-3-1: INTERPRETATIONS OF TERMS OR WORDS:
   A.   Words used in the singular in this title include the plural and words
used in the plural include the singular. The present tense includes the future
and the future tense includes the present.
   B.   As used in this title, words importing the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter.
   C.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement; the word "may" is a
permissive requirement. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-3-2: MEANING OF TERMS OR WORDS:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the
context, words and phrases defined in this section shall have the following
meanings:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An additional dwelling unit subordinate and incidental
to the main residential use.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot, which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. An accessory
structure shall be permitted on an adjoining lot if both lots are under same
ownership.
ADMINISTRATOR: The Kellogg building official or his/her designee, or other City
staff person or consultant appointed by the Mayor and endorsed by the City
Council.
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: An area of land surrounding the community where growth and
development may occur in the future. A process and procedure for an area of
City impact is provided in Idaho Code 67-6526. An area of City impact is
determined by both the County and the City.
ASSISTED CARE HOME: A home which provides personal care, room and board to more
than one but not more than eight (8) adults not related by blood or marriage to
the operator in a family setting. Also included is any place or institution,
which operates or maintains facilities for providing convalescent or long term
care, or both.
AUTOMOTIVE IMPOUND YARDS: Outdoor secured storage for temporary placement of
vehicles.
BARRIER: Any physical structure, material or mechanism which breaks the pathway
between contaminants and human receptors within the institutional controls
program of the Bunker Hill superfund site, including, but not limited to,
walls, floors, ceilings, soil, asphalt, concrete, or other structure or
covering which separates contaminates from contact with people or keeps
contaminates in place.
BIKEWAY: A designated multi-use path for pedestrians and bicycles, or a
designated lane within street rights-of-way established for use by bicycles.
BUFFER: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants,
berms, fences, or walls. The purpose of a buffer is to provide visual
separation from incompatible land uses.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the top
of building walls for gable, and hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The edge or side of a building nearest a lot line. The line
facing the front lot line is the front building line.
CAMPGROUND: A lot or parcel where defined spaces or areas are sold, rented,
leased, used, or designed for the purpose of temporary lodging in structures
and/or vehicles designed for recreation or travel.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A certification, similar to a Certificate of
Occupancy, issued by the Administrator that authorizes the recipient to
establish a land use in accordance with the requirements of this title.
COMMERCIAL COACH: A factory built prefabricated assembly designed for
commercial occupancy, and has been issued a commercial coach certificate of
approval by the State of Idaho. Such unit has wheels attached for
transportation, which may be removed on site when connected to the required
utilities and may be set on a foundation approved by the Idaho "Manufactured
Home Installation Standards Manual".
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission appointed by the Mayor and
endorsed by the City Council.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted within a district, other than a principally
permitted use allowed by right, requiring approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and a permit.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property, or in any combination thereof. Condominiums may be
of residential or nonresidential nature, both newly constructed or conversions
of existing construction, and including multi-unit structure or single unit
structures.
DAYCARE: The provision of supplemental care and supervision for non-related
children or adults on a regular basis less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
This term is not intended to include baby sitting services of a casual,
nonrecurring nature. "Home daycare" is providing care and supervision to no
more than five (5) children or adults at one time. Children of the provider,
under the age of thirteen (13), shall be considered needing care and included
in the child limit.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement used to calculate the number of dwelling units
per acre of land.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A residential building containing two (2) or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of 100-year frequency.
FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS: Urban roadway improvements consisting of curbing,
sidewalk, utilities, street lighting, storm drainage facilities, street trees,
landscaping, irrigation and paving, developed to current design and
construction standards.
GRADE: The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GREEN SPACE: A planned open space following guidelines established by the
community that has determined cultural, ecological, and recreational values for
such space. Green space may include parks, trail systems, natural areas,
ecological preserves, etc.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation conducted within a dwelling unit or residential
accessory buildings.
INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS PROGRAM (ICP): A locally enforced set of regulations
designed to insure the integrity of clean soil and other protective barriers
placed over contaminants left in place throughout the Bunker Hill Superfund
Site.
JUNKYARD: A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled. The
term "junkyard" shall not be construed to include the above described uses if
conducted entirely within an enclosed building; or recycling collection
centers, pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of
used furniture and household equipment; used cars in operable condition; used
or salvaged machinery in operable condition; or the processing of used,
discarded, or salvaged materials as a minor part of manufacturing operations.
LANDSCAPING: Aesthetically pleasing space using ground cover, shrubs, trees,
building materials, or a combination thereof.
LOT: A parcel of land established by a subdivision plat filed pursuant to Idaho
law.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory built assembly designed for residential occupancy.
Such housing is built on a permanent chassis and has wheels attached for
transportation, which are removed on site when connected to the required
utilities and set on a foundation approved by the Idaho "Manufactured Home
Installation Standards Manual". Such housing is manufactured on or after June
15, 1976, and is certified as meeting the manufactured housing construction
safety standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY: Any site, lot, or tract of land upon which ten
(10) or more manufactured homes may be sited. The manufactured housing
community may feature either fee simple land sales or land leased or rented by
the homeowner.
MOBILE HOME: A factory built residential structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, and which is built on a
permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation.
MODULAR STRUCTURE: A factory built prefabricated assembly designed for
residential/commercial occupancy where all prefabricated construction and all
materials conform to the requirements of the International Building Code and
has been issued a certificate of approval. Such housing does not contain a
permanent chassis frame and must be mounted on a permanent foundation or a
building component, and is transported to the site by flatbed trailer.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure, or use of land, which does not
conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated.
NURSING CARE FACILITY: A facility maintained for the purpose of providing
extended care and medical supervision other than a hospital.
OPEN SPACE: An area, substantially undeveloped, which may or may not be open to
the public. Open space may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, utilities, and any other
approved recreational or support facilities.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: A bond, surety, cash or an irrevocable letter of credit
provided to the City by a developer in an amount set by ordinance for
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and
specifications within a time prescribed.
PERMIT: Written authorization to perform work or establish a land use under
this title.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development process, provided for by ordinance that
allows for flexibility in the application of regulations and standards for
consideration provided by a developer.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: A building or facility that is used to provide utility
type services for the community.
PUBLIC USES: Buildings and/or land areas established for and open for use by
the public.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Usually refers to public land on which a street or alley is
built, or privately owned land upon which railroad tracks are located.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits within which a building or
structure may be located.
SHORT TERM RENTAL (TOURIST HOME): A residential dwelling, such as, but not
limited to, a single-family detached or multiple-family attached unit,
apartment house, bed and breakfast, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex,
or any portion of such dwelling rented for occupancy for dwelling, lodging, or
sleeping purposes for any continuous period not in excess of thirty (30) days.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the
ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, structures may include any type of building, wall, fence, or
sign.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A residence, (which may be a mobile home or RV) that is
located on the same lot as a residence under construction or undergoing
substantial repair or reconstruction.
VARIANCE: As defined within Idaho Code section 67-6516 or its successor.
ZERO LOT LINE: A lot line with no setback. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
KE4   11-4.txt ()
CHAPTER 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS -
ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP
SECTION:
11-4-1: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-4-2: Effect Of Zoning
11-4-3: Residential Zones
11-4-4: Commercial Zones
11-4-5: Industrial Zones
11-4-6: Planned Unit Development
11-4-7: Public Uses
11-4-8: Official Zoning Map
11-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
In order to classify, regulate, restrict, and segregate the uses of lands and
buildings from incompatible uses, to allow uses where public infrastructure is
sufficient to support such uses, to regulate and restrict the height, bulk and
construction of buildings, to regulate the dimensions and area of yards and
other open spaces around buildings and uses, to implement the policies of the
comprehensive plan, and to regulate the intensity of land use and the density
of residences, the zoning districts set forth herein are established and shall
be applied as depicted upon the adopted official zoning map of the
jurisdiction. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-2: EFFECT OF ZONING:
The regulations for each district set forth by this title are minimum
regulations and shall apply to each type of land use, except as otherwise
provided. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the
regulations specified in these regulations for the zoning district in which it
is located. No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to
provide for greater height or bulk, accommodate, or house a greater number of
residential units, or to occupy a greater percentage of lot area than allowed
by this title. No yard area or lot existing at the time of passage of this
title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth in this title. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
title shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth in this title.
Uses and structures lawfully existing on the date of adoption of this title may
continue so long as they are not changed in ways that conflict with provisions
of this title. No aspect of nonconformity may be expanded contrary to the
provisions of this title, except by means of variance or special exception. The
uses allowed by zoning districts are exclusive. Only land uses authorized by
this title or by administrative application of provisions of this title may be
established in the land use zones depicted on the official zoning map. The
descriptions of types of land use zones addressed by this title are intended to
explain, in general terms, how zones will be applied to implement the
comprehensive plan. The specific entries in the use and bulk and placement
matrices are intended to identify specific uses that fit within the general
descriptions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-3: RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Residential (R) zones are intended to provide a living environment that
supports a place for families and individuals to live with limited adverse
influence from commercial or industrial activity and to permit other accessory
uses that are associated and compatible with residential use. Certain
residential zones may be established that allow higher residential densities,
and hence higher activity levels, but always with the goal of enjoyment of a
residential environment. Residential zones are primarily applied in the areas
designated residential in the Comprehensive Plan. Permitted uses, conditionally
permitted uses and lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall
comport with the standards set forth in the zoning matrix contained in this
title. A primary distinction between low density and higher density residential
neighborhoods should be the ability of community infrastructure to accommodate
higher levels of activity without creating undue congestion, without unduly
stressing utility systems that support development and without compromising the
quality of public facilities available to provide public service. Class A
manufactured homes are allowed to be used for single-family residential
purposes within all residential zoning districts.
   A.   The following residential districts are hereby established. Each of
these districts is designed and intended to secure for the persons who reside
there a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live,
sheltered from incompatible and disruptive activities that properly belong in
nonresidential districts:
      1.   R-S Residential/Suburban: This district is designed to accommodate
low density, single-family residential and suburban type development in areas
within the City's planning jurisdiction that are not yet appropriate for
development of higher densities or more intensive use.
      2.   R-1 Single-Family Residential: This district is designed primarily
to accommodate single-family detached residential uses at medium densities in
areas served by public water and sewer facilities. Two-family residences are
allowed only through a planned unit development.
      3.   R-2 Multi-Family Residential: This district is designed to
accommodate single-family detached and two-family detached and two-family
attached dwelling units.
      4.   R-3 Multi-Family Residential: This district is designed primarily to
accommodate higher density multi-family, manufactured housing community, and
neighborhood business developments. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-4: COMMERCIAL ZONES:
Commercial (C) land use zones are intended to support uses that include retail
sales and services for households and traveling consumers by allowing a variety
of retail, professional, or service businesses. Businesses involving the
manufacture, processing, or fabrication of goods or providing service or repair
to commercial products or equipment are not generally permitted unless
activities can be conducted within buildings that can thrive in the midst of
commercial infrastructure. Commercial zones are to be applied in areas
identified by the text and mapping of the Comprehensive Plan as being suitable
for commercial business, primarily addressing lands located near arterial and
collector streets. Residential uses may be allowed within commercial zones by
special use permit when the presence of housing will not compromise present or
future commercial uses or when the housing environment within the commercial
zone will not be unsuitable for residential occupancy by virtue of congestion,
environmental factors, or activity levels. Uses permitted by right in the
industrial zone may be conditionally allowed in certain commercial zones by
special use permit so long as no industrial activities or processes are
conducted outdoors or in a manner that creates adverse environmental effects.
   A.   The following districts are hereby established to accomplish the
purposes and objectives set forth as follows:
      1.   C-B Central Business: This district is designed to accommodate a
wide variety of commercial activities, particularly those that are pedestrian
oriented, that will result in the most intensive and attractive use of the
City's Central Business District. No off street parking is required.
      2.   C-1 Office/Professional: This district is designed to accommodate a
mixture of less intensive commercial activities, such as office, clerical,
research, services, etc., and multi-family residential uses. Such areas will
generally constitute transition or buffer zones between major arterial rights-
of-way or more intensively developed commercial areas and residential
districts.
      3.   C-2 General Commercial: This district is designed to accommodate the
widest range of commercial activities. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-5: INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
The industrial zones permit light industrial uses such as warehousing,
assembly, processing and light manufacturing as permitted uses and
conditionally allows heavy industrial uses such as fabrication, manufacturing,
refining and processes that produce external effects such as noise, emissions,
outside activities by special use permit. The industrial zones are primarily
applied in areas designated suitable for industrial development by the text and
future land use map of the Comprehensive Plan. Residential uses may only be
established in an industrial zone if subordinate and accessory to a primary
industrial use and should be permitted only by a conditional use permit.
   A.   The following districts are hereby established to accommodate uses
engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating,
painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment:
      1.   M-1 Light Industrial: This district is designed to accommodate
industrial and manufacturing activities that can be accomplished entirely
within an enclosed building and can provide a buffer between commercial/
residential districts and more intensive manufacturing developments.
      2.   M-2 Industrial: This district is designed to accommodate the widest
range of industrial and manufacturing activities. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A planned unit development (PUD) is an overlay district that, when approved,
may overlay in any of the community's zoning districts. This district overlay
is designed to guide major developments of land and structures to achieve a
measure of choice and flexibility in development pattern within the confines of
the regulations contained in this title. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-7: PUBLIC USES:
Land uses to be established by public agencies may be permitted in accordance
with the land use tables adopted as part of this title. Any such use shall be
subject to provisions of State and Federal law. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-4-8: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The zones established in this title shall be applied as depicted on the
Official Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated into this title by reference
as it exists today or as modified by the text of subsequent amending
ordinances. The Administrator shall maintain the Official Zoning Map to reflect
changes made by the City Council from time to time and shall depict such
changes on the Official Zoning Map. Each change shall be documented at the time
the map is modified, including reference to the ordinances authorizing changes.
A register of such changes including descriptions of the lands affected thereby
shall be maintained by the Administrator throughout the duration of the
existence of the Official Zoning Map, until it is superseded by a replacement
zoning map. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE TABLES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Adoption Of Land Use Tables - Purpose
11-5-2: Interpretation Of Land Use Tables
11-5-3: Table Of Uses
11-5-1: ADOPTION OF LAND USE TABLES - PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify permitted and conditionally
permitted land uses within Kellogg in order to foster compatibility with uses
in the same land use designations and to promote a measure of protection
against the intrusion of the effects of incompatible land uses. The use of land
is characterized by the activity for which the building, improvements, or lot
is designed, configured, conducted, occupied, or maintained. A land use that
will not operate for more than thirty (30) days in any calendar year should be
considered a temporary use, subject to the requirements governing temporary
uses. Unless a temporary use permit has been approved pursuant to ordinances of
the City, establishment of any land use will be presumed to require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-5-2: INTERPRETATION OF LAND USE TABLES:
Matrix-style land use tables that address allowable uses and building bulk and
placement standards are made part of this title and shall be interpreted
consistent with the principles and rules set forth in this section.
   A.   If the letter "P", for "permitted", appears in the box at the
intersection of a column and a row, the use is allowed in that classification,
subject to the development and operational requirements of this and other
applicable provisions of this title.
   B.   If the letter "C", for "conditionally permitted", appears in the box at
the intersection of a column and a row, the use is conditionally allowed in
that classification, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit and subject
to the development and operational requirements of this and other applicable
provisions of this title. The responsibility of demonstrating that a special
use permit request is appropriate rests with the applicant.
   C.   Uses not designated as permitted (P) or conditionally permitted (C) are
prohibited. If neither a "P" or "C" appears in the box at the intersection of a
column and a row, the use is prohibited in the zoning classification.
   D.   The land use tables in this section indicate whether a specific use is
allowed in a zone classification. Specific uses are divided among multiple
tables, each of which represents a broad category of land uses.
   E.   Any proposed use not listed in the table may be classified by the
Administrator as a permitted use (P), conditional use (C), or prohibited, based
on the listed use(s) to which the proposed use is most similar. If the
Administrator determines that the proposed use is not similar to any use in the
table, the proposed use shall not be permitted. The Administrator may use the
land based classification system (LBCS) as a basis for comparing the nature of
a proposed or identified use. The determination of the Administrator may be
appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided herein.
   F.   LBCS codes are provided for many land uses and can aid in categorizing
of proposed land uses by the Administrator. The American Planning Association
can be accessed on the internet for an explanation of LBCS codes, and
additional help in categorizing land uses. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-5-3: TABLE OF USES:
Land Use Category R-S R-1 R-2 R-3 C-B C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2 LBCS
Land Use Category                      R-S R-1 R-2 R-3 C-B C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2 LBCS
Residential uses:                                                  
 Private household, 1 unit per        P   P   P   P   P   -   -   -   -   1101
  structure
 Duplex, 2 units per structure        -   -   P   P   C   C   C   -   -   1102
 Multi-family, 3 or more units per    -   -   -   P   C   C   C   -   -   1103
  structure
 Class A manufactured home            P   P   P   P   -   -   -   C   C   1113
 Class B manufactured home            -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   1114
 Class C manufactured home            -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   1115
 Manufactured housing community       -   -   -   C   -   -   -   -   -    
 Accessory dwelling unit              P   P   P   P   P   P   P   -   -   1130
  Accessory residential support use
 (i.e., garage, shed, pool,           P   P   P   P   -   -   -   P   P   1199
  greenhouse, shop)
 Single-family incidental to a        -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P    
  commercial or industrial use
 Single-family incidental to a        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   -   -    
  religious use
 Home occupation                      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   -   -    
Accommodations and group living:                                   
 Congregate living, group homes       P   P   P   P   C   C   C   -   -   1220
 Nursing homes                        -   -   C   C   P   P   P   -   -   1230
 Residential care facilities          C   C   C   C   P   P   C   -   -   1230
 Short term rental                    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   -   -   1320
 Hotel, motel                         -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   1330
General sales or services:                                         
 Retail store                         -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2102
 Postal services and packaging        -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P    
 Outdoor vendor spaces/farmers'       -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C    
  market or stands
 Neighborhood shopping center         -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2106
 Destination shopping center          -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2107
 Automobile/light truck/ RV           -   -   -   -   -   P   P   C   C   2111
  dealership
 Mobile home/manufactured housing     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   C   C   2112
  dealership
 Motorcycle/ATV dealer                -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2113
 Auto service station (full service   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   C   C   2116
  with garage bays)
 Car lot/used car dealership          -   -   -   -   -   P   P   C   C   2118
 Hardware/home improvement center     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2122
 Lawn and garden supplies/feed store  -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2123
 Lumberyard/building materials store  -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2126
 Discount store                       -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2128
 Durable consumer goods sales and     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2130
  service
 Grocery store/ supermarket           -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2151
 Convenience store                    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2152
 Specialty food/health food store     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2153
 Pharmacy/drugstore                   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2170
 Auto supply stores                   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -    
 Automotive repair services           -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -    
 Automatic car wash                   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2171
 Self-service car wash                -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2172
 Automobile or marine service center  -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   2174
 Heavy equipment repair               -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -    
 Service garage/paint shop/detailing  -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   2175
 Bank/savings institution             -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2210
 Branch bank (drive-up facility)      -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2211
 Car rental agency                    -   -   -   -   -   P   P   -   -   2331
 Tractor/heavy trucks/trailer,        -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   2332
  dealership/leasing
 Recreational or consumer goods       -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2333
  rental
 Leasing commercial/ industrial       -   -   -   -   -   C   P   -   -   2334
  machinery and equipment
 Professional, scientific, and        -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -    
  technical services
 General office buildings (1 to 4     -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2401
  stories)
 General office buildings (5+         -   -   -   -   C   P   P   C   C   2402
  stories)
 Veterinary office                    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   -   2418
 Full service restaurant              -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2510
 Cafeteria/limited service            -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   -   2520
  restaurant/ delicatessens
 Drive-in restaurant                  -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2521
 Fast food restaurant                 -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2522
 Bar/tavern/lounge                    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2540
 Parking lot (uncovered)              -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2650
 Parking garage (covered)             -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   2660
 Municipal animal shelter/pound       -   -   -   -   -   C   C   P   P   2721
 Kennel/boarding services/dog daycare -   -   -   -   C   C   C   P   C   2722
  Retail/office/
 residential combination (minimum 2   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   2800
  separate uses per structure)
 Building, developing, and general    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P   7100
  contracting services
Industrial and manufacturing uses:                                 
 Food and beverage manufacturing      -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3110
 Bakery products manufacturing        -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   3114
 Beverage products manufacturing      -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3115
 Clothing manufacturing               -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3131
 Leather and allied products          -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3140
  manufacturing
 Wood products manufacturing, except  -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3210
  lumber mills
 Sawmill                              -   -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   3215
 Millwork/veneer/ plywood             -   -   -   -   -   C   C   P   P   3216
  manufacturing
 Furniture and related products       -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3230
  manufacturing
 Plastic manufacturing                -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3324
 Industrial chemical manufacturing    -   -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   3325
 Gypsum/plaster/ concrete products    -   -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   3334
  manufacturing
 Cut stone and stone products         -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   3335
  manufacturing
 Primary metal manufacturing          -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   3340
 Steel fabrication                    -   -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   3342
 Machinery manufacturing              -   -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   3350
 Instrument/high technology           -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   3353
  manufacturing
 Electrical equipment/ appliance/     -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   3360
  components manufacturing
 Miscellaneous manufacturing          -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   3400
 Salvage yard/recycle center          -   -   -   -   -   C   C   C   C   3519
Warehouse and storage uses:                                        
 Mini-storage warehouse/self- storage -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   2321
 Construction equipment storage       -   -   -   -   -   C   C   P   P    
  facility
 Automotive impound yards             -   -   -   -   -   C   C   C   P    
 Warehouse distribution/storage       -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3610
  facility
 Warehouse - retail combination       -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3630
 Warehouse - office combination       -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3640
 Cold storage warehouse               -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   3660
 Transit warehouse/ truck terminal    -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   3670
Transportation uses:                                               
 Air freight transportation           -   -   -   -   -   C   C   P   P   4112
 Airport support establishment        -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   4113
  Local transit center - bus, special
 needs, and other motor vehicles      C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   4133
  stations
  Special purpose transit
 transportation (including scenic,    -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   4136
  sightseeing, etc.)
 Taxi and limousine service staging   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   4137
  facility
 Towing and other road and ground     -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   4138
  services staging facility
 Truck and freight transportation     -   -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   4140
  services
 Courier and messenger services       -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   4160
Communication uses:                                                
 Publishing                           -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   4210
 Newspapers, books, periodicals, etc. -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   4211
 Radio and television broadcasting    -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   4231
 Cable networks and distribution      -   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   4232
 Wireless telecommunications          C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P   4233
 Information services and data        -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   4240
  processing industries
 Libraries and archives               -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P   4242
Utility and utility services:                                      
 Wireless communication (towers/      C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C    
  antennas)
 Electric power                       C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   4310
 Hazardous waste collection and       -   -   -   -   -   -   C   C   C   4341
  storage facility
 Hazardous waste treatment and        -   -   -   -   -   -   C   C   C   4342
  disposal
 Septic tank and related storage and  -   -   -   -   -   C   C   P   P    
  distribution services
Arts, entertainment, tourism, and                                  
recreation:
 General arts and tourism             -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   5000
 Conference or convention center      -   -   -   -   C   P   P   C   -    
 Community centers                    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   -    
 Performing arts or supporting        -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   5100
  establishment
 Theater, dance, or music             -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   5110
  establishment
 Movie theater                        -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   5112
 Museums and other special purpose    -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   -   5200
  recreational institutions
 Art gallery                          -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   5211
 Historical or archeological          -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   -   5220
  institution
 Games arcade establishment           -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   5320
 Miniature golf establishment         -   -   -   -   P   P   C   -   -   5340
 Fitness, recreational sports, gym,   -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   -   5370
  or athletic club
 Golf course                          C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   5374
 Indoor shooting or archery range     -   -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P    
 Driving range                        -   -   -   -   -   P   P   C   -   5376
 Municipal (sports complex/arena/     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
  playing field)
 Camps, camping, and related          -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   5400
  establishments
 Travel trailer (RV) park             -   -   -   -   -   C   P   C   C   5410
Education uses:                                                    
 Nursery and preschool                C   C   C   C   P   P   C   -   -    
 Elementary school                    C   C   C   C   C   P   C   -   -   6110
 Middle school                        C   C   C   C   C   P   C   -   -   6121
 High school                          C   C   C   C   C   P   C   C   -   6122
 Adult education services             -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   C   6123
 Colleges and universities            -   -   -   -   C   P   P   C   C   6126
 Technical, trade, and other          -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   6130
  specialty schools
Public administration uses:                                        
Public safety:                                                     
 Courts                               -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -    
 Fire and rescue                      C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P    
 Emergency response                   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   P   P   6410
 Public safety training facility      C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P   6430
 City facilities                      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Health and human service:                                          
 Ambulatory or outpatient care        -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -    
  services
 Clinics                              -   -   -   -   C   P   P   -   -   6510
 Medical and diagnostic laboratories  -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   -   6511
 Nursing, supervision, and other      -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   -   6513
  rehabilitative services
 Hospital                             -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   -   6520
 Child and youth services             -   -   -   -   P   P   P   -   -   6530
 Child daycare, commercial (more than -   -   -   -   P   P   P   C   C   6561
  5 children)
 Child daycare, home (up to 5         P   P   P   P   C   C   -   -   -   6562
  children)
 Services for elderly and disabled    -   -   -   C   C   P   P   -   -    
 Religious institutions               C   C   C   C   P   P   P   C   C   6566
Death care services:                                               
 Funeral homes and services           -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P    
 Cremation services and cemeteries    -   -   -   -   C   P   P   P   P   6710
Mining and extraction establishments:                              
 Metals (silver, lead, etc.)          -   -   -   -   -   -   -   C   C    
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and                                 
hunting:
 Commercial crop production           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
 Commercial greenhouse, nursery, and  -   -   -   -   P   P   P   P   P   9100
  floriculture
 Cattle feedlot establishment         -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   9140
 Hog and pig farm                     -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   9312
 
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018; amd. Ord. 608, 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 6
BULK AND PLACEMENT TABLE
SECTION:
11-6-1: Bulk And Placement Table Purpose
11-6-2: Bulk And Placement Table Delineation
11-6-1: BULK AND PLACEMENT TABLE PURPOSE:
Bulk and placement tables provide specific requirements for maximum height of
structures, minimum yard requirements, minimum lot width, and minimum lot area.
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-6-2: BULK AND PLACEMENT TABLE DELINEATION:
                 Minimum Yard Requirements                        Minimum Lot
District Maximum                                      Minimum Lot Area Per
         Height  Front Rear Interior Side Street Side Width       Dwelling Unit
                   Minimum Yard Requirements                   Minimum Lot
District   Maximum            Interior             Minimum Lot Area Per
           Height  Front Rear Side     Street Side Width       Dwelling Unit

R-S        35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         75'         12,500 sq.
                                                               ft.
R-1 (SF)   35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         4,500 sq. ft
R-2 (SF)   35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         4,500 sq. ft.
R-2 (DPX)  35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         7,000 sq. ft.
R-3 (SF)   35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         4,500 sq. ft.
R-3 (DPX)  35'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         7,000 sq. ft.
R-3 (other 45'     15'   15'  5'       10'         30'         2,400 sq. ft.
MF)
C-B        65'     0'    n/a  0'       n/a         n/a         n/a
C-1        45'     0'    0'   0'       0'          n/a         n/a
C-2        65'     0'    0'   0'       0'          n/a         n/a
M-1        85'     10'   0'   0'       10'         n/a         n/a
M-2        85'     10'   0'   0'       10'         n/a         n/a
 
   A.   Table Notes:
      1.   The height of a building shall be the vertical distance measured
from the mean elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to
the highest point of the building.
      2.   All buildings over thirty five feet (35') in height require review
and approval from the fire district that such building is designed to provide
adequate access for firefighting personnel; or from the building inspector that
the building is otherwise designed or equipped to provide adequate protection
against fire.
      3.   Chimneys, church spires, elevator shafts, flagpoles and antennas,
and similar structural appendages, not intended as places of occupancy or
storage, are exempt from the district height regulations. Heating and air
conditioning equipment, solar collectors, and similar equipment, fixtures, and
devices are exempt from district height regulations and shall be set back from
the edge of the roof a minimum distance of one foot (1') for every foot by
which they extend above the roof surface of the building to which they are
attached.
      4.   Residential uses, existing or proposed, in commercial or industrial
zones shall use the appropriate requirements specified for residential uses.
      5.   Open porches, platforms, terraces and steps no higher than the first
floor elevation may extend into the front or rear yard a distance of not more
than six feet (6'); and into the side yard not more than two and one-half feet
(2.5').
      6.   Chimneys, eaves, cornices, and similar ornamentation, may extend no
more than two and a half feet (2.5') into the required yard.
      7.   Accessories structures may be constructed to within five feet (5')
of the rear yard. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018; amd. Ord. 608, 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC HEARINGS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Public Hearings - Purpose
11-7-2: Public Hearing - When Required
11-7-3: Public Hearing Notice
11-7-4: Alternative Public Hearing Notification
11-7-5: Public Hearing Procedures - Required
11-7-6: Decisions By The Planning And Zoning Commission And City Council - Form
11-7-7: Appeals
11-7-8: Reconsideration
11-7-1: PUBLIC HEARINGS - PURPOSE:
Public hearings are distinguished from ordinary public meetings by expressly
allowing active public participation in the planning and zoning process. The
purpose of the public hearing process is to gather information from the public
concerning issues relevant to making a decision concerning particular issues
and requests. Public hearing opportunities are governed by public hearing
procedures adopted by resolution of the City Council and are subject to
management by the Chairman of the meeting at which the public hearing occurs.
Public hearing procedures provide general guidelines and may be varied in order
to allow orderly decision-making that respects the interests of all parties
concerned with a proposal or request. Legislative hearings are conducted to
obtain general public comment about proposals to change planning and zoning
law. Quasi-judicial hearings address site specific applications for permits or
approvals and must maintain due process protections for all with qualified
interests. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-2: PUBLIC HEARING - WHEN REQUIRED:
The purpose of a public hearing is to give potentially affected persons an
opportunity to offer oral testimony in support of or in opposition to an
application or proposal. The resultant opinions and evidence submitted create
part of the record upon which the decision-makers must base their decisions.
Any of the following planning and zoning activities will be required to hold a
public hearing or hearings in accordance with the applicable requirements of
State law. If any provision of this title conflicts with State law, provisions
of State law shall prevail.
   A.   Zoning Ordinance Text And Map Amendments And Zoning District Overlays:
These procedures require a mandatory public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission and an optional public hearing before the City Council. The
City Council shall render decisions concerning zoning ordinance text and map
amendments either by passing an amending ordinance or declining to do so.
   B.   Variances: Variances require a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall render decisions
concerning variance applications, subject to appeal to the City Council.
   C.   Conditional (Special) Use Permits: Conditional use permits require a
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The commission shall
render decisions concerning special use permit applications, subject to appeal
to the City Council.
   D.   Planned Unit Development (PUD): PUD permits require one public hearing
before the Planning and Zoning Commission and an optional public hearing before
the City Council. PUD permits are to be decided by the City Council after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   E.   Zoning Designation Upon Annexation: Zoning upon annexation requires
public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
The City Council shall decide zoning designation(s) upon annexation after a
Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation has been received and the City
Council has conducted its hearing. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-3: PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE:
Prior to any required public hearing, notice shall be provided as required by
law. The jurisdiction will administer provision of public notice at the
applicant's expense. The applicant may be required to supply an ownership
report prepared by an Idaho-licensed title company containing all current
property owners in order to provide required notice. Any such obligation shall
conform to the administrative direction provided by the Administrator. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-4: ALTERNATIVE PUBLIC HEARING NOTIFICATION:
When public hearing notification is required for two hundred (200) or more
property owners or purchasers of record and for Comprehensive Plan and zone
ordinance text amendments, the alternative procedure for official notice
provided in Idaho Code 67-6511, or its successor, shall be given. The applicant
shall bear the cost of alternative public hearing notice as determined by the
Administrator. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-5: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES - REQUIRED:
Public hearing procedures shall be established by resolution of the City
Council consistent with State law.
   A.   For public hearings associated with changes to the comprehensive plan,
amending the zoning map, amending the subdivision or related ordinances, or
considering changes to other land use ordinances for which a hearing is
required by State law, there shall be at least one public hearing required,
such hearing(s) to be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission, with an
additional hearing to be conducted by the City Council upon its decision to do
so.
   B.   For public hearings concerning conditional use permit applications,
variances, planned unit developments, there shall be one public hearing
required, such hearing to be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
City Council may schedule an additional public hearing concerning such matters
if jurisdiction for a decision, by appeal or otherwise, comes to the City
Council. Such hearing is optional based upon the discretion of the City
Council. Whenever Idaho Code authorizes the use of a hearing examiner, the City
Council may approve a resolution or motion authorizing use of a hearing
examiner as an alternative to the Planning and Zoning Commission whenever it
deems such use to be appropriate. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-6: DECISIONS BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL -
FORM:
All decisions made by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council shall
be made in a manner and form consistent with the requirements of Idaho law.
Decisions that are deemed quasi-judicial shall identify the standards and
criteria, relevant facts and provisions of law that lead to the conclusion
reached. In recognition that such requirements may change from time to time by
virtue of judicial decision and legislative enactment, decision-makers are
referred to relevant provisions of State law for guidance in shaping decisions
required by this title. All decisions that are deemed legislative decisions by
requirements of State law shall be undertaken in the same manner that
legislative decisions are typically made. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-7-7: APPEALS:
An appeal is a request challenging the propriety of a land use decision or
interpretation of the zoning ordinance by the Administrator, the Planning and
Zoning Commission or a hearing examiner if one should be employed. Fees
governing appeals must be paid and the legal basis for appeals must be stated
in writing before an appeal will be deemed accepted for consideration. Appeals
will follow the procedures specified below. An appeal that has not been
perfected by payment of fees or statement of issues may be dismissed in the
sound discretion of the City Council.
   A.   Appeals of final decisions made by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or hearing examiner shall follow procedures established by City Council
resolution. Any such appeal shall include the specific legal basis for appeal
and the result sought through the appellate process. Employing whatever
procedures it deems appropriate in accordance with its procedures resolution,
the City Council will render a written, reasoned decision that will be
communicated to the appellant and/or applicant as required by law.
   B.   Appeals of decisions made by the Administrator shall use procedures
established by City Council resolution. Any such appeal shall include the
specific legal basis for appeal and the result sought through the appellate
process. Employing whatever procedures it deems appropriate in accordance with
the City Council's procedures resolution, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the City Council will render a written, reasoned decision that will be
communicated to the appellant and/or applicant as required by law. (Ord. 595,
6-13-2018)
11-7-8: RECONSIDERATION:
Reconsideration is a procedure by which an applicant or other affected person
seeks to have a final decision-maker revisit the outcome or rationale of a
quasi-judicial land-use decision. Any applicant or affected person seeking
judicial review of compliance with the provisions of this section must first
seek reconsideration of the final decision within fourteen (14) days. Such
written request must identify specific deficiencies in the decision for which
reconsideration is sought. Upon reconsideration, the decision may be affirmed,
reversed or modified after compliance with applicable procedural standards. A
written decision shall be provided to the applicant or affected person within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration or the request is
deemed denied. A decision shall not be deemed final for purposes of judicial
review unless the process required in this subsection has been followed. The
twenty eight (28) day time frame for seeking judicial review is tolled until
the date of the written decision regarding reconsideration or the expiration of
the sixty (60) day reconsideration period, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 595,
6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 8
PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-8-1: Amendment Of Zoning Map
11-8-2: Amendment Of The Text Of The Land Use Regulations
11-8-1: AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP:
The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission or hearing examiner, may amend, by ordinance, the boundaries of the
zoning district classifications of lands in accordance with applicable
provisions of Idaho Code and this title. Amendments to the zoning map should
generally be in accordance with goals and policies of the Kellogg Comprehensive
Plan.
   A.   Any application for a zoning map amendment or to apply zoning upon
annexation shall include the information required by the application forms
supplied by the Administrator, the information required by State law and
information otherwise required by this title or by the Administrator,
commission, hearing examiner, or City Council. In addition to information
required by the application form, an application to change zoning district
boundaries shall provide a description of the amendment or zoning requested
along with a statement that describes the rationale for the request, how it
would better implement the Comprehensive Plan, and the public purpose that
would be achieved by amendment of the zoning map. All applications for zoning
map amendments or zoning upon annexation shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or to the designated hearing examiner, which shall recommend
action to the City Council who may adopt, modify, or reject the proposed
amendment.
   B.   Upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning map, the
City Council shall explain its rationale for doing so, making reference to
ordinance standards and comprehensive plan policies relied upon in evaluating
the application and stating the reasons for approval or denial. An amendment,
if approved, shall be implemented by the passage of an ordinance or as
otherwise required by law. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-8-2: AMENDMENT OF THE TEXT OF THE LAND USE REGULATIONS:
The City Council may amend or repeal the regulations, restrictions and/or
zoning classifications that are made applicable by this title. Proposals to
change the text of land use regulations (zoning ordinance) shall follow the
procedures set forth in the Local Land Use Planning Act. Such proposals may be
initiated by the City Council, by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a
petition from a resident or landowner within the City. A non-site-specific
amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance is a legislative action subject
to procedural standards applicable to legislative action. In the interest of
procedural economy, any request to amend the text of the zoning ordinance,
except one that originates from the City Council or Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall first be referred to the City Council before initiating the
hearing procedure. If the City Council determines, based upon the face of a
request for amendment transmitted to it, that it does not wish to entertain a
particular request, the request may be returned to the requestor and shall not
move forward unless the party proposing the request agrees to pre-pay all
estimated costs of processing the request to its conclusion. In such instance
any procedural time limits established by local law shall be deemed suspended
and the request shall be considered as time allows.
   A.   The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
and Zoning Commission or hearing examiner, may amend, by ordinance, the text of
this title in accordance with applicable provisions of Idaho Code and the
City's Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Any application for a zoning ordinance text amendment shall address the
questions posed by the application forms supplied by the Administrator, the
information required by State law and information otherwise required by this
title or by the Administrator, commission, hearing examiner, or City Council.
In addition to information required by the application form, an application to
change the text of the zoning ordinance shall provide a description of the
amendment requested along with a statement that describes the rationale for the
request, the proposed text of the amendment, how it would better implement the
Comprehensive Plan, and the public purpose that would be achieved by amendment
of the zoning ordinance. All applications for zoning ordinance text amendments
shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission which shall recommend
action to the City Council, who may adopt, modify, or reject the proposed
amendment. An amendment, if approved, shall be implemented by the passage of an
ordinance. A non-site-specific amendment of the text of the zoning ordinance is
a legislative act committed to the sound discretion of the City Council. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 9
PERMITS AND APPROVALS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Conditional (Special) Use Permits
11-9-2: Planned Unit Development (PUD)
11-9-3: Variance
11-9-4: Temporary Use Permits
11-9-5: Site Plan Review Process
11-9-6: Administrative Permits
11-9-7: Home Occupation Permits
11-9-8: Sign Permits
11-9-9: Expiration Of Permits
11-9-1: CONDITIONAL (SPECIAL) USE PERMITS:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and a framework of
procedures for consideration of requests for conditional use permits.
Conditional uses are not permitted by right in a particular zoning district but
may be authorized following a public hearing provided that they comply with the
standards established by the ordinance. "Conditional use" as used in this title
is the same as "special use" referenced in Idaho Code section 67-6512, as such
code provision exists at the time of enactment of this title. A conditional use
permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another, nor shall it be
considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other conditional use
permits in similar locations or circumstances. As its name implies, a
conditional use permit may be issued subject to performance or compliance with
conditions as outlined in this title and as addressed by the specific proposal
or application and as found necessary by the decision makers.
   A.   Procedures: Conditional use permit requests require a public hearing
before the Planning and Zoning Commission (hearing examiner) following
appropriate procedures. Notice shall comply with legal requirements established
by Idaho Code. Any decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be
appealed to the City Council by an affected person within no more than fourteen
(14) days after the final written decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission has been rendered. Any such request to appeal must be signed by the
appellant and received by the Administrator within the time constraints
established by this title. An appeal not timely filed shall be dismissed.
Failure to appeal a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City
Council shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies pursuant
to this title.
   B.   Application Required: A completed conditional use permit application
shall be submitted to the Administrator which shall include, among other
matters addressed by the application form, a description of the use proposed,
the manner of implementation of the proposed use including information about
appearance, materials to be used and configuration, how it would be compatible
with infrastructure and land uses, present and future, and why the proposal
would be in the public interest and not unduly burden or hamper the delivery of
services or the public.
   C.   Hearing And Standards Of Decision: As its schedule and agenda allow the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing and shall
consider testimony and other evidence and review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposed conditional use. In considering a conditional
use request, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach appropriate
conditions to mitigate impacts and to ensure conformance with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan and applicable provisions of this title. An application for
a conditional use permit may be approved as presented, conditionally approved,
or denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon determining the following:
      1.   Whether the proposed conditional use would/would not conform with
the purposes and express terms of the applicable zoning district in which it
would be located.
      2.   Whether the proposed use constitutes an allowable conditional use as
established by this chapter for the zoning district involved; and complies with
all other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the jurisdiction and
the State.
      3.   Whether the proposed conditional use as presented will/will not be
compatible with the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general and
with present or future land uses in the vicinity of the proposal.
      4.   Whether the proposed special use will/will not further positive
development of the vicinity in accordance with relevant policies set forth in
the comprehensive plan and land use ordinances.
   D.   Conditions: When granting a conditional use permit, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may attach conditions and requirements specific to the
proposal including, but not limited to:
      1.   Minimizing conflicts with present or future development.
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
      3.   Controlling the duration of development.
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly.
      5.   Controlling the location and setbacks of development.
      6.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in the zoning ordinance for uses permitted outright. Such more-restrictive
standards may include but not be limited to: additional setbacks, requiring
development within time limitations, height restrictions, additional
landscaping or screening, lighting restrictions, signage restrictions,
selection of building or hardscape materials, location of site accesses,
location of site features, prescribing site layout, circulation or grading,
restricting hours of operation or activity, design limitations, circulation
limits for vehicles or pedestrians, control of site drainage or area wide
drainage patterns, prescribing specific use limitations and such other features
of use or site development as may be needed to enhance compatibility with use
of surrounding lands and public facilities.
   E.   Written Decision Required: Whenever granting or denying an application
for a conditional use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render
its decision in writing.
   F.   Permits And Progress Required: Unless expressly allowed to the contrary
by the terms of a conditional use permit, if permits for development of a
requested conditional use have not been issued within six (6) months of the
date of granting a conditional use permit or if development of the approved
special use has not commenced with sustained effort to complete development
within one year after granting approval of the conditional use permit, the
conditional use permit shall become null and void, unless the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council, whichever gave final approval, has granted
an extension, such extension not to exceed twelve (12) months upon a showing of
good cause by the applicant. An extension to the permit may only be granted if
applied for in writing to the City Clerk prior to the date of expiration and if
the approving body finds, upon review of the record, that an extension is
warranted due to unique and unforeseeable circumstances outside the control of
the applicant.
   G.   Violation - Revocation Or Penalty: Any conditional use that operates in
violation of the requirements or conditions established for a conditional use
permit, pursuant to this chapter, may be revoked and the use restricted,
suspended, and/or be subject to penalties for violation of this title. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-2: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD):
A planned unit development (PUD) is a process that allows a measure of design
flexibility by permitting variation of the distribution of land use density,
variation of building placement standards, individual lot area, lot frontage
requirements, access requirements, and variation of other performance standards
required within a zoning district or combination of zoning districts when a
development is planned in its entirety and when the variations can be
demonstrated to benefit the development for those who will reside and conduct
business affairs within the proposed development and for the community in
general. The intent of the PUD process is to allow innovation in design that
should prove superior to compliance with standard development requirements that
are not the product of site-specific integrated design.
   A.   A combination of residential, commercial, or industrial land uses may
be permitted within a PUD. Any such mixed use planned unit development must
follow the same procedures as those required for a change of zoning district
boundaries.
   B.   Proposed uses and manner of implementation of such uses may be
permitted within a PUD, upon finding that the proposal:
      1.   Provides internal or external benefits that would not be achievable
through compliance with the normally required zoning standards and regulations.
      2.   Is and will be compatible with surrounding land uses, both existing
and future.
      3.   Furthers compliance with the goals and policies found within the
Kellogg Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   A PUD that includes residential land use must provide open space of not
less than ten percent (10%) of the gross land area designated for residential
land use within project boundaries for the benefit of residents of the project
or for benefit of the community in general. The location and design of common
open space should be practical and usable for outdoor activities. Common open
space provided in a PUD may be held and maintained privately for the use of
owners or residents within the development, and/or may be designated as open
for shared public use. Public utility rights-of-way and easements are generally
not acceptable for common open space unless such land or rights-of-way are
unimpaired as a trail or other similar benefit to the PUD or public. Public
rights-of-way, utility sites easements, or service areas may be required by the
City as part of the approval. The responsibility for and the method of
maintaining common open spaces shall be identified by the applicant as a facet
of approval of any final PUD development plan and placed into the development
agreement.
   D.   Planned unit developments that include a subdivision may be considered
concurrently as a subdivision and PUD.
   E.   The application for a PUD shall include a general design layout of the
entire parcel in question, prototypical elevations, and footprints for
structures other than detached single-family homes. General principles of
landscape design, streetscapes, nonresidential layouts, and general design
features must be included.
   F.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review a proposed planned unit
development and conduct a public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall determine if the proposed PUD complies with the requirements of this
title and forward a recommendation to the City Council. The criteria to be
applied to such review are:
      1.   Standards applicable to conditional use permits.
      2.   General concepts of community design.
      3.   Achieving compatibility and buffering internally and with
neighboring uses.
      4.   Demonstrate design techniques preferable to strict adherence to the
City land use regulations.
      5.   Demonstrate that the proposed PUD will enhance public health and
safety.
   G.   The City Council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning
and Zoning Commission, may review the record and determine whether to hold a
subsequent public hearing or decide whether to approve, modify, or disapprove
the proposed preliminary PUD. After City Council approval, if granted, the
applicant and staff shall complete a development agreement for the PUD using
the approved development plans as a primary element of the development
agreement. Such development agreement shall outline the obligations of the
developer to the extent that they represent a departure from typical ordinance
requirements. Construction standards must comply with adopted standards unless
expressly authorized by the terms of PUD approval. The form and manner of the
development agreement shall be as specified in the Kellogg subdivision
ordinance under master development agreements.
   H.   The approved plans for the planned unit development shall contain
sufficient detail and necessary specifications to construct the project. Among
the elements of the plans are:
      1.   A plan of the existing site of the proposed development showing the
dimensions and bearings of the property lines, topography, existing features of
the development site; including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses.
      2.   Engineered construction plans for water, sewer, storm drainage,
street improvements, and the nature and extent of earth work required for site
preparation and development.
      3.   Scalable plans, showing building(s) and their placement, various
functional use areas, common open space, circulation details, and landscaping.
      4.   Preliminary building plans including exterior elevations.
      5.   Phasing plans that depict the scope of each phase and a timetable
for implementation.
      6.   Project documents to be used to designate the use, development, and
maintenance of the land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas
that are to be commonly owned and maintained. The intent of designating such
responsibility shall not be included within the scope of the jurisdiction's
enforcement authority but rather to determine where responsibility lies for
maintaining compliance with terms of approval of any planned unit development.
   I.   Each individual phase of the development, as well as the total
development, must be capable of existing as an independent unit capable of
creating an environment of desirable aesthetics or that adequate assurance will
be provided that such objective will be attained. Individual phases of any such
development must conform to the overall density and use considerations required
by the jurisdiction's zoning ordinance and its comprehensive plan. Any
exception from standard zoning district requirements must be justified by
design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plans, in
accordance with the preliminary PUD and adopted policy of the City Council as
set forth in the comprehensive plan. The applicant must also satisfy the
standards applicable to subdivisions of land set forth in title 12,
"Subdivisions", of this Code. Final PUD plans must conform to the approved
preliminary PUD plans.
   J.   No construction of any kind shall take place on the site of an approved
PUD until final construction plans are reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer and a development agreement between the City and the developer is
executed.
   K.   The approval of a final development plan for the PUD or first phase of
a PUD shall be for a period not to exceed one year, or as expressly authorized
in a development agreement approved by the City Council. The approved time
period for planned unit development construction may be extended once for no
more than twelve (12) additional months by the Administrator or for a maximum
of two (2) years by action of the City Council.
   L.   Any modification of an approved planned unit development must be
submitted in writing by the applicant to the Administrator. The request shall
specify what modifications are proposed and why the changes are necessary. The
Administrator will determine whether the proposed modification is minor or
major. If the modification is minor, the Administrator will approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the modification in writing, subject to
confirmation by the City Council. Any major modification will require a public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with procedures
specified by this title.
   M.   Development of land through a PUD for residential, commercial, or
industrial uses shall be required to comply with subdivision regulations and
other jurisdiction ordinances as applicable. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-3: VARIANCE:
A variance is a discretionary exception to the requirements of the zoning
ordinance concerning bulk and placement standards such as lot area, lot
coverage, width, depth, setbacks, parking location requirements, height, or any
other ordinance provision affecting the size of a structure or the placement of
the structure upon the property. Variances may be permitted when, due to
unusual natural physical characteristics of the site, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship denying an
owner all reasonable use of the owner's land. An applicant for a variance bears
the responsibility for demonstrating an undue hardship because of unique
physical characteristics of the site, and after meeting that obligation must
demonstrate that the implemented variance would not harm the public interest.
   A.   A complete application using an application form supplied by the
Administrator shall include a site plan, a verbal description of the variance
requested, reasons why the variance is warranted, and any supporting documents.
The application will be scheduled for public hearing whenever it can be
accommodated by the schedule of the hearing body.
   B.   At least one public hearing must be held before the Planning and Zoning
Commission using the hearing and notice procedure required by State law.
   C.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following when
deciding a variance request:
      1.   Whether application of the provisions of this Code would deprive the
applicant of all reasonable use of his land.
      2.   That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to
the natural conditions of the land in ways not generally applicable to other
lands in the community.
      3.   Whether the variance, if granted, would harm the public interest by
adversely affecting public safety, the environment, or the legitimate interests
of neighboring owners.
   D.   When granting or denying an application, the commission shall specify
the relevant facts considered in evaluating the application, the reasons for
approval or denial, and the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
obtain a permit. The applicant will be notified of the decision in writing. A
variance decision may be appealed to the City Council within fourteen (14) days
of final action by the Planning and Zoning Commission by an applicant or other
affected person. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-4: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
A temporary use is a land use established for a period of time not to exceed
ninety (90) days in a calendar year and does not require permanent site
improvements. The actual use embodied by a temporary use permit must be a
permitted use in the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. The
temporary use permit may be allowed subject to conditions required by the
Administrator so long as the Administrator determines that granting the
temporary use permit will not harm the public interest if the required
conditions are complied with.
   A.   Temporary uses may be allowed in appropriately zoned areas without full
site development as otherwise required by this title. Such uses may include,
but are not limited to, erection of temporary structures such as tents, fences,
booths or parking of trailers for activities such as carnivals, circuses,
fairs, religious meetings, temporary outdoor displays and/or sale of Christmas
trees, art objects or other items and other similar activities conducted either
outdoors or within temporary structures.
   B.   An application for a temporary use shall include a written description
of the use, proposed starting date of the use, and a site plan that shows the
location of the use, access, setbacks from property lines, parking, restroom
facilities (if applicable), and any other pertinent information that the
Administrator may require to evaluate the use. An application for a temporary
use with a duration in excess of thirty (30) days shall include the names and
addresses of abutting land owners. The Administrator will prepare a notice of
the administrative permit request and mail it to abutting property owners who
will have seven (7) days from the date of mailing within which to respond with
written comments supporting or opposing the request. Notice of the proposal may
also be sent to City operating departments, agencies providing service or
affected agencies for comment.
   C.   A temporary use may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied by
the Administrator. A temporary use permit is valid on the date of approval or
on the date requested by the applicant and will be valid for the time period
requested but no more than ninety (90) days during a calendar year, such days
to be designated at the time of issuance. The Administrator, when deciding a
temporary use permit request, should consider the following:
      1.   Whether the proposed temporary use would be consistent with the
general policies of the zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan.
      2.   Whether the use would otherwise be permitted within the zoning
district wherein located.
      3.   Whether granting the temporary use permit would be detrimental to
the nearby neighborhood or to the community in general.
      4.   Whether the proposed temporary use would create a traffic hazard.
      5.   Whether the proposed temporary use would impair the functioning of
community facilities or delivery of public services. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-5: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
The site plan review process is intended to require new multi-family
residential, commercial, and industrial development to comply with applicable
provisions of land use and development ordinances in the context of practical
realties of each development site. Site plan review and approval is required
for the initial establishment or location of any commercial, industrial, public
or multi-family residential (greater than 4 units on 1 parcel) building or use,
or the expansion of floor area of an existing non- residential building by more
than thirty three percent (33%).
   A.   An application for site plan review approval shall be filed with the
Administrator in conjunction with, or prior to, application for a building
permit. The Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete
for review, a process that can be facilitated by a pre-application meeting with
jurisdiction staff. In addition to application requirements otherwise required
by this title or the applicable Building Code, a site plan submitted for review
should include:
      1.   A scaled drawing of the proposed, developed site depicting placement
of all buildings, parking areas, circulation patterns, landscaped areas,
signage, building bulk information, drainage patterns and locations, utility
service information and such other information as the Administrator might
require to assess the impact of development of a site upon the land and
infrastructure affected.
      2.   Location and empirical information about the site including the size
of the site in square feet or acres, the address of the site, if known, and the
assessors parcel identification number, the area of the lot covered by
buildings in square feet, square feet of impervious surface and the density in
units per acre for residential developments.
   B.   The applicant shall provide three (3) copies of site plans for review,
drawn to an appropriate scale to clearly show all required elements that
include but are not limited to location and height of existing and proposed
structures, signs, trash enclosures, site furnishings, and site lighting, site
boundaries and dimensions, spot elevations at the property corners and enough
site information from adjoining properties so that differences in site grading
can be addressed. Elevations should be sufficient to determine water flow to,
from and on the site, setbacks from property lines, existing or proposed
easements, location of existing and proposed utility structures and location
and size of existing and proposed sewer and water lines, location of the
nearest fire hydrant(s), location of all driveways, streets and sidewalks,
location and layout of all off- street parking, and location of loading areas
(if applicable), site grading and drainage to include stormwater collection and
treatment, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect, registered in the State of Idaho.
   C.   The Administrator may waive any of the requirements listed above upon
determining they are unnecessary based on the scope of work proposed. The site
plan review process is intended to provide a degree of flexibility in the
application of standards and ordinance requirements to allow site design to
function with its surroundings, while maintaining compliance with ordinance
requirements.
   D.   Upon receipt of a complete site plan review application, the
Administrator may schedule a site plan review with other members of City staff
and those from other agencies. Copies of submitted documents will be shared as
necessary with outside agencies and jurisdictions and neighboring property
owners that may be affected by the proposed use. The Administrator and
appropriate staff will review the site plan submittals to determine that all
applicable ordinance provisions are complied with and that the site will
function satisfactorily in the context of its surroundings. Site plan review
may include but not be limited to:
      1.   Review of lot dimensions, setbacks and other site development
characteristics to determine functional compatibility with topography, public
facilities and established or projected nearby uses.
      2.   Determine that there are utility services adequate to serve the
proposed use and to continue the utility systems to neighboring property lines
in order to facilitate continuity of utilities.
      3.   Assure that the design, grading and drainage, parking, circulation
design, landscaping, and other elements of the plan meet adopted performance
standards and function compatibly with nearby uses and public facilities.
      4.   To evaluate the location of streetlights and other site lighting
practices to protect public safety on-site and on adjoining rights-of-way,
without diminishing the livability of neighboring lands.
      5.   To consider if mitigation of any on-site or off-site impact is
necessary or would result in a more functional project that would not diminish
the potential use of public facilities or nearby private lands.
      6.   To identify the improvements and dedications required (curb,
sidewalk, paving, water, sewer, drainage, easements, right-of-way dedication,
etc.) to allow the project to meet legal requirements and to be compatible with
present or future development of neighboring land.
   E.   If material changes to the site development plans are required, the
plans will be returned to the applicant/representative for revision. Upon
submittal of a properly revised site plan, the Administrator may issue a
written approval addressing any supplementary conditions applicable to the
site. The owner shall acknowledge the review comments and conditions of
approval by counter-signing the written approval, returning an acknowledged
copy to the Administrator as a condition of permit issuance. When requirements
have been satisfied and the conditions of approval are acknowledged and
returned, the site plan may be approved. No construction or building permit
shall issue until provisional or final site plan approval has been issued by
the Administrator.
   F.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the Administrator to the
Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with
appeal procedures set forth in this title.
   G.   The approval of a site plan shall be effective for a period of one year
from the date of approval. If actual physical development has not commenced or
an extension granted within the one-year period, the site plan approval shall
expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit for site plan review.
Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the applicant may request
an extension, in writing, from the Administrator. The Administrator may grant
an extension, not to exceed one year upon a showing of good cause. The
Administrator shall address the request for extension by a written response to
the applicant. The applicant may appeal the Administrator's decision to deny an
extension in accordance with appeal procedures set forth in this title.
   H.   After site plan approval, the applicant may request an amendment, in
writing, to the approved site plan or to conditions of approval. If the
proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan and consistent with conditions
of approval, the Administrator may grant the amendment in writing upon receipt
of the request. If the Administrator determines the amendment involves
significant change to the conditions of approval, the Administrator shall
schedule a review with other staff members and the applicant shall pay an
additional one-half (1/2) of the then-current site plan review fee for review
of the proposed material amendment. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide processes to allow certain land use
related permits to be approved administratively. The Administrator is hereby
granted discretion to decide the administrative permits addressed by this
chapter; home occupation permits, short term rentals, fence permits, accessory
dwelling unit permits, and other such permits as determined by the Kellogg City
Council. Application forms for all administrative permits shall contain
information required by this title and additional information relevant to the
specific permits requested. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-7: HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS:
Certain limited business or professional uses may be conducted as a home
occupation within a residential dwelling as a permitted land use subject to
specific limitations established to maintain compatibility with the surrounding
residential neighborhood. The purpose of this section is to establish standards
for home occupations that retain and do not disturb the residential character
of a neighborhood.
   A.   Application And Fee: Before establishing a home occupation, an
application fee must be paid and an application must be approved by the
Administrator, in response to an application which addresses necessary
information to demonstrate compliance with this title in addition to providing
an accurate and concise description of the requested home occupation.
   B.   Application Review: The Administrator will review the application
materials and may grant, grant with conditions, or deny a home occupation
permit upon finding that the home occupation will not change the character of
the neighborhood or create a nuisance (noise, dust, odor, excessive traffic,
etc.) and that it complies with the standards established by this title.
   C.   Non-Compliance: A permit may be revoked or a violation may be
prosecuted for non- compliance with ordinance standards or conditions of
approval. A home occupation permit is specific to the individual and the
location and is non-transferable and is valid so long as the conditions of
approval issued with the permit are complied with and home occupation standards
set forth herein are met.
   D.   Home Occupation Standards: All home occupations shall comply with the
following standards, in addition to any site-specific conditions required by
the Administrator:
      1.   Occupation must be subordinate to the primary residential use. Not
more than one- third (1/3) of the floor area of the dwelling may be used for a
home occupation.
      2.   There shall be no outside storage of goods, equipment, or materials.
      3.   A home occupation shall not create a need for parking beyond that
required for a typical single family residential use.
      4.   There shall be no change in appearance that would alter the
residential character of the premises.
      5.   No more than one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet, non-
illuminated, mounted flat against the wall, is permitted.
      6.   A permitted home occupation shall have no more than one full time
employee who is not a family member on the premises.
      7.   A home occupation must be within the residence or a permitted
accessory building.
      8.   Home occupation daycare may provide care to no more than five (5)
children at any time inclusive of resident children needing daycare.
      9.   No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibration, odors,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or
nuisance beyond that caused by a typical single-family occupancy.
      10.   Uses of the following type or with the following characteristics
are prohibited.
         a.   Repair and/or servicing, storing, painting of autos, trucks,
boats, RVs, motorcycles, and ATVs.
         b.   Any use requiring wastewater pre-treatment.
         c.   Any business creating external noise, odors, vibrations, or other
potential nuisance factors including customer traffic that could detract from
residential enjoyment of the neighborhood. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-9-8: SIGN PERMITS:
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign may be constructed,
erected, enlarged, illuminated, or substantially altered except in accordance
with the provisions ofthis chapter and the Building Code. Maintenance or
repainting of a sign shall not be considered a substantial alteration. No signs
shall be permitted in residential zones, however certain exemptions more fully
articulated below may apply.
   A.   Purpose and Authority: The purpose of this chapter is to establish
standards for the commercial fabrication, erection, and use of signs, symbols,
and advertising devices within the city. These standards are designed to
protect and promote the public welfare, health and safety of the community, and
to aid in the development and promotion of business and industry. As used
herein, the term "administrator" shall refer to the city's building official,
planning administrator, or their designee.
   B.   Application Process: An application for a sign permit shall be obtained
from the Kellogg Building and Planning Department. The administrator or
designee shall review the application to determine if the proposal conforms
with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations, and if
so, will issue the sign permit(s). The application shall contain at least the
following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant and, if different, the name
and address of the person who will own the sign;
      2.   The street address of the property on which the sign will be located
or, if the property on which the sign is to be located has no address, the
address of the abutting property which shall be for reference only;
      3.   The name and mailing address of the owner of the property on which
the sign will be located;
      4.   A description of the sign, including its size, sign area, height,
and whether the sign will be illuminated or have electrical components, and the
location of the sign on the property;
      5.   For temporary signs, the dates, or estimated dates, that the event,
activity, or promotion will begin and end;
      6.   A drawing of the proposed sign, to include the size and shape, which
need not be to scale;
      7.   Any other information as may be specifically required for the
particular type of sign proposed, as set out in the following regulations,
administrator, or City Council.
   C.   Definitions: The following are definitions related to signs:
   ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business,
lessor, owner, product, use, or activity conducted. (Also see section K.)
   BANNER: A sign made of cloth, canvas, vinyl, or other flexible material used
to display a message or draw attention to an activity or site. A banner may be
suspended between two (2) structures, hung from a single structure or pole, or
attached to a wall or other structure. The term "banner" includes devices
referred to as blade, feather, sail, shark fin, swooper, teardrop, triangle,
and wind flags.
   BILLBOARD: An off-premises sign owned by a person, corporation or other
entity that engages in the business of selling the advertising space on that
sign.
   FREESTANDING SIGNS: A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by
some structure (i.e. a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not
itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose
principal function is something other than the support of a sign.
   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS: Signs where the source of illumination is
inside the sign or forms any portion that constitutes all or part of the
message and the light emanates from or through the message of the sign, rather
than being reflected off the surface of the sign from an external source.
   MURAL: An artistic painting, illustration or decoration, which is applied to
the exterior wall of a building or structure and which is not, or is not
intended to be graffiti or advertisement.
   OFF PREMISES SIGNS: Any sign that relates to or advertises products,
services, or uses at, or directs a person to a different premises from where
the sign is installed.
   PORTABLE SIGNS: Any mobile or movable sign or sign structure which is not
securely attached to the ground or other structure whose principal function is
something other than the support of a sign. Includes signs mounted on a trailer
or other wheeled device.
   PROJECTING SIGNS: Any sign affixed to any building or wall, the leading edge
of which extends beyond such building.
   ROOF SIGNS: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of
a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof. Roof signs also require a building permit.
   SANDWICH SIGNS: An A-frame type sign with information on both sides that is
designed to be placed either on a sidewalk or on premises within the frontage
of the subject property and proximate to the building entrance.
   SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or
device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place
designed to advertise, identify, or convey information, including any landscape
where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the public's
attention to a product or location. This excludes window displays and flags of
any state or nation. For the purpose of removal, the term sign shall also
include any sign structures.
   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN: A special event sign, with time and quantity
limitations, shall be for the purpose of advertising the opening of a business,
community event, community program or community festival. The permitted type of
signs allowable shall be freestanding- or banner-type.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed and is in place for
thirty (30) days or less.
   D.   Signs Excluded from Permitting: The subsequent signs are exempt from
permitting under this chapter provided the following conditions and standards
specified are met:
      1.   Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area that are customarily
associated with residential use, by way of example but not limitation: giving
property identification names or numbers or names of occupants, name and number
identification on mailboxes and newspaper tubes, and signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing
or danger from animals. Limited to two (2) such signs;
      2.   Signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body, including
legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs;
      3.   Flags, banners, pennants, or insignia of any governmental
organization;
      4.   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings,
including building names and dedication dates, or works of art, so long as such
features or works do not contain letters or numbers (except in case of building
names and dedication dates);
      5.   Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property;
      6.   Commemorative plaques that do not exceed four ( 4) square feet, are
permanently affixed to or near the structure or object it is intended to
commemorate;
      7.   Signs inside a building, that are part of decoration, or displays
applied or attached to the interior of a window or located on the interior and
visible through the window;
      8.   The following temporary signs are exempt from permit requirements so
long as the specified conditions and standards are met:
         a.   Election or campaign signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in
residential zones or thirty-two (32) square feet in other zones, or public
property, erected no more than thirty (30) days prior to dates specified in
Idaho Code Section 34-106 as it now exists or is subsequently amended; such
signs will be removed within five (5) days of Election Day.
         b.   Informational signs placed by nonprofit or civic organizations
about community events, public services, or attractions. Temporary special
event signs may be placed no more than fourteen (14) days prior to the event,
and must be removed within five (5) days of the conclusion of the event.
      9.   Window signs allowing for visibility of the building's interior from
the right-of-way.
      10.   Signs placed on residential property advertising services being
rendered so long as the sign is removed when the service or work is complete.
   E.   Signs Requiring a Permit: Unless otherwise provided in this title, the
following signs require a Sign Permit from the City of Kellogg, and are subject
to the application process outlined in section 11-9-8 B. of this chapter.
      1.   Wall Signs and Awnings: Except as follows, signs attached to or on
the surface of a building wall, may not, individually or collectively, cover
more than fifty percent (50%) of a total wall surface. Awning signs shall be
calculated as a part of the total wall surface area to which the awning is
attached. A mural is exempt from total sign surface area restrictions. No wall
sign attached to a building may project more than twelve inches (12") from the
building, except awning signs which shall project no more than four feet (4')
from the building face.
      2.   Projecting Or Hanging Signs: The total area of all projecting signs
shall not exceed ten (10) square feet and may not extend more than four feet
(4') from the building. Clearance under the lowest point of any sign which
projects over a walkway accessible to the public shall not be less than eight
feet (8').
      3.   Freestanding signs: Any sign not affixed to a structure shall be
entirely within the required yard area and shall not obstruct public walkways
or vehicular visibility requirements. Placement of freestanding signs in the
right-of-way is prohibited, with the exception of sandwich signs that have been
issued a sign permit by the City of Kellogg, and comply with provisions of this
chapter.
      4.   Sandwich Board Signs: Each face of the sandwich board sign shall be
no wider than two feet (2') and no taller than three feet (3'), including any
sign frame. A sandwich board sign placed on private property may differ in
dimensions with administrative approval. A minimum width of five (5) continuous
feet of sidewalk between the abutting property and the roadway must be
maintained for safe pedestrian travel; not to exceed one (1) sandwich sign per
business or location. Sandwich board signs must be placed within the same
block, and on the same side of the street as the business or service which they
advertise.
      5.   Roof signs: No roof sign shall extend a distance above the roofline
of more than ten feet (10') or one-third (1/3) of the building height,
whichever is less. Building permits are required for all roof signs.
      6.   Feather- or Teardrop-Style Banners: Poles or stakes of feather- or
teardrop-style banners must be permanently anchored into the ground. The
placement or installation of banners in the right-of-way is prohibited.
   F.   Total Sign Surface Area, Location, Height: Subject to the other
provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot
in a commercial or industrial district, except in a freeway location, shall be
determined as follows:
      1. There may be not more than one and a half (1.5) square feet of sign
surface area per linear foot of lot street frontage.
      2.   The maximum sign surface area on any commercial or industrial lot in
a freeway location shall be three (3) square feet for each linear foot of lot
street frontage. The total surface area devoted to all signs on any lot shall
not exceed the limitations set forth in this section, and all signs except
temporary and exempt signs shall be included in this calculation. Unless
otherwise provided in this chapter the maximum sign surface area permitted on
any lot in any residential district is four (4) square feet. The time and
quantity limitations defined .within this section are imposed to avoid visual
clutter, the development of litter, traffic hazard or other adverse effects.
   G.   Computation Of Sign Area: The surface area of a sign shall be computed
by including the entire area of the sign. The sign surface area of a double
faced; back-to-back sign shall be calculated by using the area of only one side
of such sign (the larger side if there is a size difference).
   H.   Illumination Of Signs: Lighting directed toward a sign shall be
shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not create a
nuisance. No sign may contain or be illuminated by repeated, strobe-like
flashing or intermittent lights or lights changing degrees of intensity.
   I.   Sign Restrictions and Prohibitions:
      1.   No sign may be located so that it interferes with the view necessary
for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit
from public streets or private roads.
      2.   Portable signs are prohibited, with the exception of sandwich signs.
      3.   No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape,
nature, or message it would tend to obstruct the view of, or be confused with,
official traffic signs or other signs erected by governmental agencies.
      4.   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no sign larger than four
(4) square feet shall be permitted in a residential district.
      5.   Wiring for lighted signs shall be installed in accordance with the
Electrical Code as amended, revised, compiled and published and to such
amendment and revisions adopted by the Idaho Electrical Board pursuant to the
Idaho Code section 54-1001.
      6.   Freestanding signs and banners shall be securely fastened to the
ground or to some other supportive structure so that they may not be moved by
the wind or other forces of nature. Sandwich signs in compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter are exempt from this requirement.
      7.   Permanent off-premises signs are prohibited except for the
following:
         a.   Signs that provide direction to attractions, amenities,
businesses, or features within the CB, Central Business District. A sign
located off-premises on private property shall comply with the following:
            (1)   An application for an off-premises sign must be accompanied
by a lease or agreement between the owner of the building on which the sign
will be placed and the applicant placing the sign. The agreement shall state:
the terms of the off-premises sign's placement; location; duration; or other
information deemed necessary by the Administrator.
            (2)   The sign must be affixed to a building, and shall not exceed
one (1) sign per business, or off-premises location and/or structure.
         b.   Banners on Public Property: A banner may only be installed in or
over public right-of-way with a permit granted by City Council. The permit
shall be subject to the following conditions:
            (1)   The banner must convey community, governmental, or seasonal
theme, or be for the sole purpose of beautification of a commercial area. No
commercial messages are allowed.
            (2)   The banner may be displayed for no longer than the time
period granted by City Council, provided there is a written agreement that the
banner will be maintained by the installer or responsible party. The City Clerk
may grant renewal of the permit for an additional like term provided the size
and location of the banner remains unchanged.
            (3)   Attachments for banners spanning city streets must be
inspected by the Building Official.
      8.   Commercial signs are prohibited in residential zones. (See section
D. Signs Excluded from Permitting: subsection 10.)
      9.   No development may be allotted more than one freestanding sign per
business or location.
   J.   Maintenance Of Signs: All signs and components thereof, including
supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair and
appearance.
   K.   Nonconforming Signs: Subject to the following, nonconforming signs that
were otherwise lawful on the effective date of these regulations, or as
amended, may be continued. A nonconforming sign may not be moved, altered,
expanded, or replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with
this title.
      1.   If a nonconforming sign is destroyed, removed, or altered it may not
be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the
provisions of this title.
      2.   Subject to other provisions of this section, nonconforming signs may
be repaired and renovated so long as the cost of such work does not exceed,
within any twelve (12) month period, fifty percent (50%) of the value of such
sign.
   L.   Removal and Disposition of Nonconforming signs: Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, any sign which is located on property which becomes
vacant and unoccupied for a period of two (2) months or more, or any sign which
pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed
to have been abandoned.
      1.   Any sign in violation of regulations may be removed by the City at
the sole expense of the owner of the sign five (5) days after written notice
has been supplied to the owner.
      2.   An owner or permit holder of the sign who claims it after its
removal shall pay to the City an amount equal to the costs incurred by the city
in removing the sign.
      3.   If a sign constitutes an imminent hazard or risk to lives or
property, as determined by the administrator, the City may remove the sign
immediately with or without notice.
      4.   Any temporary sign found to be in violation of regulations must be
removed immediately upon receipt of verbal and or written warning from the
Planning Administrator or their designee.
   M.   Appeals. Appeals from decisions made by the administrator or designee
shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Appeals from the
provisions or enforcement of this chapter shall be made as provided in section
11-7-7 of this code.
   N.   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction and shall be punished in accordance with provisions of
section 11-12-2 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed for each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018;
amd. Ord. 626, 5-8-2024; Ord. 633, 12-11-2024)
11-9-9: EXPIRATION OF PERMITS:
Permits, when granted, will be valid for the period of time requested or
conditioned during the approval process or according to the following for
certain permits.
   A.   Conditional Use Permits: In the absence of an approved period of time,
conditional use permits will run with the land or expire at the end of a one
year period if the permitted activity is not commenced with sustained effort.
If construction of the approved development or activity is not commenced with
sustained effort within one year after approval, the City may give notice to
the developer of the intent to terminate the permit for non-performance. Upon
such notice, the developer shall be allowed a public hearing concerning the
City's intent to terminate, if requested. After hearing from the developer, in
addition to comments from the public, City's Planning and Zoning Commission may
finally decide the status of the permit.
   B.   Planned Unit Developments: Permits for planned unit developments will
have specified terms within a development agreement or may expire for non-
compliance with the agreement. If construction of the approved development is
not commenced with sustained effort within one year after approval, the City
may give notice to the developer of the intent to terminate the agreement for
non-performance. Upon such notice, the developer shall be allowed a public
hearing concerning the City's intent to terminate, if requested. After hearing
from the developer, in addition to comments from the public, City Council may
finally decide the status of the development. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 10
STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-10-1: General Standards For All Zoning Districts
11-10-2: Residential Performance Standards
11-10-3: Commercial And Industrial Standards
11-10-4: Public Utility Standards
11-10-5: Specific Use Regulations
11-10-1: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Visibility At Intersections: It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to remove from his property any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall,
or other sight obstructions, except public traffic or highway signs, where
these sight obstructions compromise intersection visibility. Intersection
visibility shall not be impeded more than three feet (3'), or less than ten
feet (10') in height within the vision triangle. The boundaries of the vision
triangle are defined by measuring from the intersection of the edges of the
curb or pavement forty feet (40') along each road, street, or alley and
connecting the two (2) points with a straight line. The sight distance
obstruction restriction is also applicable to railroad-crossings with vision
triangle defined by measuring forty feet (40') along the railroad property line
when intersecting with a highway.
   B.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, trailers, equipment and
materials used in conjunction with construction work, may be permitted in any
district during the construction period upon showing that their use and
placement will not harm the area in which they are located. Temporary
facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction or issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
   C.   Screening And Landscaping: Screening devices and landscaping shall not
impair the visibility of drivers entering or exiting a commercial, industrial,
or multi-family site.
   D.   Dangerous And Objectionable Conditions: No land or building in any
district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions, which may adversely affect the
surrounding area or adjoining premises. Methods and procedures for the
determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements
shall conform to applicable standard measurement procedures listed in
applicable codes and regulations.
   E.   Glare/Exterior Lighting: No interior or exterior lighting shall create
direct or reflected glare which will adversely affect any surrounding property
nor shall such lighting adversely affect use of public streets or rights-of-
way.
   F.   Street Right-Of-Way Dedication And Frontage Improvements: Dedication of
necessary additional street rights-of-way, easements, and construction of
frontage improvements (sidewalks, curbing, pavement, lighting, etc.) is
required at the time of establishment of other than a temporary use, any
construction on a lot to establish a new land use or expansion of an existing
use by thirty three percent (33%) or more in floor area. Frontage improvements
(sidewalks, curbing, pavement, lighting, etc.) shall be to centerline of
existing fully developed roadways, or to centerline, plus ten feet (10') for
undeveloped roadways, including transitions on each end of the developing
property, as determined by the City Engineer. Right-of-way dedication shall
conform to the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, the
transportation master plan, or as otherwise required by the City Engineer
pursuant to site plan review or other ordinance specified procedures.
   G.   Utility Line Placement: All wire or cable utility service lines shall
be placed underground. The Administrator may waive this requirement if the use
is temporary in nature or if there are practical physical difficulties.
   H.   Surfacing:
      1.   Residential: All required residential access drives and parking
areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of four inches (4") of concrete or
asphalt paving. Driveways to individual residences shall be a maximum of eight
percent (8%) slope and measure a minimum of fourteen feet (14') in width and
twenty feet (20') in depth; this shall include a standard drive approach.
      2.   Commercial/Industrial: All required commercial/industrial access
drives, maneuvering areas and parking areas, outdoor merchandise display areas
and motorized vehicle display lots shall be surfaced with a minimum of six
inches (6") of concrete or asphalt paving. Surfacing material shall be designed
for the loading anticipated. Outdoor non-vehicular storage areas in the
commercial and industrial zones may be surfaced with gravel and shall be
enclosed within a sight obscuring fence. Outdoor merchandise display areas may
be provided without paving and/or a sight obscuring fence as determined by the
Administrator.
   I.   Water Supply And Sewage Disposal: The method of water supply and sewage
disposal for all land uses must comply with Municipal and other applicable
codes. Developers shall extend utility systems to the boundaries of the land
developed in order to maintain system continuity.
   J.   Dust Control: During all on site grading and construction activities,
adequate measures shall be implemented to control dust in accordance with the
Institutional Controls Program (ICP) administered by Panhandle Health District.
Methods for dust control may be required to be approved at site plan review.
The Administrator may issue a stop work order on any project that demonstrates
persistent inability to control dust until an acceptable dust control program
is implemented.
   K.   Fences And Walls (Excluding Retaining Walls): All walls and fences
shall not exceed four feet (4') in height within the required front yard
setback and nor shall they exceed six feet (6') in height in the rear and side
yard setback areas, unless otherwise permitted. For corner lots, fences
measuring six feet (6') in height along the "street side yard" can be permitted
so long as such fence height does not extend into the front yard setback where
the primary entrance of the residence is oriented. Corner lots which abut the
side yard of an adjoining lot may not block visibility of a driveway on the
adjoining lot above three feet (3'). The height and location of new fences or
walls that affect visibility from existing abutting driveways shall be
restricted, to provide for vision clearance. Where new driveways are proposed
adjacent to existing fences that exceed three feet (3') in height, the driveway
approach shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the fence.
   L.   Unsightly Conditions: The exterior of all structures and yards shall be
maintained in such manner that there is no detrimental effect on the property
of others. There shall be no keeping or depositing on, or scattering over, the
property of any of the following:
      1.   Garbage, trash, or debris.
      2.   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers and
parts thereof, or similar items.
      3.   Stagnant water or excavations.
      4.   Any device, decoration, design, structure, or vegetation which
offends the visual sensibilities of a reasonable person by reason of its
conditions.
   M.   Building Materials And Equipment: No building materials, machinery or
other materials or equipment used in or for a business shall be stored outdoors
on any lot in any residential district, except during construction on the lot.
   N.   Compliance: The operation of any use established after the effective
date of these regulations shall comply with the performance standards herein
for the zone in which the activity is located. No land use already established
on the effective date of these regulations shall be so altered or modified as
to conflict with these performance standards.
   O.   Addresses: Addresses for new buildings and structures will be assigned
by the Administrator at the time a building permit is issued. Addresses shall
be displayed on the building or property and shall be visible from the public
right-of-way.
   P.   Topography; Drainage Ways: All development/building shall conform to
the existing topography to the greatest extent possible. Natural and pre-
existing drainage ways shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
   Q.   Recreational Vehicle (RV) as Permanent Dwelling: Except for within
established RV or mobile home parks. the permanent habitation of park model
homes, RVs, and other vehicles, as defined by Title 39, Chapter 42 of ldaho
Code, shall be prohibited. Nothing within these regulations shall be construed
to allow for the use of a recreational vehicle as a permanent dwelling.
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018; amd. Ord. 631, 10-9-2024)
11-10-2: RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Single-Family And Duplex Residential: Single-family and duplex
residential development shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures in any zone shall be set
back behind the front of the residence. On a corner lot the accessory structure
may be placed in front of the residence on the "street side yard".
      2.   Accessory Dwelling Units: Accessory dwelling units may be permitted
as secondary dwellings to single-family homes subject to the following
restrictions:
         a.   Only one accessory dwelling unit per lot.
         b.   One of the residences shall be owner occupied.
         c.   One additional off street parking space must be provided.
         d.   Building materials will be consistent with the primary residence.
         e.   The accessory dwelling unit will not have a separate drive
approach.
         f.   The accessory dwelling unit shall be no larger than forty percent
(40%) of the living area of the primary residence, or no more than one thousand
(1,000) square feet, whichever is lesser.
         g.   An accessory dwelling unit shall have electricity, kitchen
facilities, and sanitary facilities. An accessory dwelling unit shall require a
separate sewer connection.
         h.   The applicant shall include a detailed site plan, drawn to scale,
including the proposed accessory living unit, setback lines, ingress/egress
routes.
         i.   An existing accessory building that is proposed to be converted
to an accessory living unit shall meet the requirements of the Building
Department and all other applicable codes.
   B.   Multi-Family Performance Standards: Multi-family development (3 units
or greater on a single lot) shall utilize the site plan review process of this
title, and shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Solid Waste Screening: All solid waste storage areas shall be
enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a sight obscuring wall or fence six
feet (6') in height or shall be stored within an enclosed building or
structure. Adequate access shall be provided for collection.
      2.   Parking Lot Lighting: Lighting shall be provided for all parking
lots for multi-family sites. Lighting shall be installed in a manner that
prevents glare on adjoining lands.
      3.   Outside Storage And Screening: Outside storage areas must be
screened from public view by sight obscuring fences, walls, berms, or a
combination of these, as approved by the Administrator. The Administrator may
approve alternative methods of reducing the visual impact in lieu of screening,
or waive the requirements if visual impact is not an issue.
   C.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes on individual lots zoned for
single-family residential uses as provided in this subsection C shall be in
addition to manufactured home subdivision. The City of Kellogg hereby adopts
the following placement standards for the approval of manufactured homes
located outside manufactured home parks:
      1.   The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space
of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is located not more
than twelve inches (12") above grade;
      3.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a minimum slope
of three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width with
appropriate snow load;
      4.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings
as determined by the Administrator;
      5.   A manufactured home shall comply with all setback, density, and
dimensional requirements for a particular zone as specified in section
11-6-2, "Bulk And Placement Table Delineation", of this title;
      6.   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing
apparatus shall be removed prior to occupancy;
      7.   An installation permit shall be obtained from the Building
Department to ensure the mobile home meets the requirements as set forth in
Idaho Code, title 44, chapter 22, Manufactured Home Installation Standards.
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-10-3: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS:
The following standards apply to commercial and industrial districts.
Development in the commercial and industrial districts requires site plan
review in accordance with section
11-9-5, "Site Plan Review Process", of this title.
   A.   Solid Waste Screening: All solid waste storage areas shall be enclosed
on at least three (3) sides by a sight obscuring wall or fence six feet (6') in
height or shall be stored within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate
access shall be provided for collection.
   B.   Outside Storage And Screening: Outside storage areas, service and
loading areas must be screened from public view by sight obscuring fences,
walls, berms, structures, or a combination of these, as approved by the
Administrator. Screening by vegetative plantings in combination with street
screens may also be acceptable, as approved by the Administrator. The
Administrator may approve alternative methods of reducing the visual impact in
lieu of screening, or waive the requirements if visual impact is not an issue.
   C.   The City of Kellogg shall have the authority to require fences, walls,
screening, landscaping, or a combination of methods to buffer effects of land
uses from adjacent residential uses or zones. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-10-4: PUBLIC UTILITY STANDARDS:
The following standards apply throughout the City of Kellogg:
   A.   Water: Kellogg water is provided by Central Shoshone County Water
District, 409 Main, Kellogg, Idaho 83837 (water district). Land uses requiring
water service are required to be connected to the water district. The manner of
connection and fees required are determined by the water district.
   B.   Waste Water: Kellogg waste water treatment is provided by South Fork
Coeur d'Alene River Sewer District, 1020 Polaris Avenue, Osburn, Idaho 83849.
Land uses requiring waste water treatment are required to be connected to the
sewer district. The manner of connection and fees required are determined by
the sewer district.
   C.   Connection To Waste Water Collection System: The City of Kellogg owns
and maintains the waste water collection system. The fee for connection to the
system is determined by the City of Kellogg. The manner of connection is
determined by Kellogg Public Works.
   D.   Plans And Specifications Required: Prior to issuance of any permits by
the City, or commencement of any construction of any waste water or water
supply system, detailed plans and specifications, if required, shall be
reviewed and approved by the appropriate agency or district.
   E.   Lighting: Public streets and sidewalks, public common areas, and public
facilities shall be illuminated to enhance security of property and safety of
persons using such areas. Parking lots and other common areas on private
property are required to be illuminated for safety.
   F.   Unnecessary Illumination: Lighting upon or within any lot that
unnecessarily illuminates any other lot and interferes with the use or
enjoyment of such other lot is prohibited.
   G.   Underground Utilities: All electric power lines, telephone, gas
distribution, and cable television lines, not including equipment appurtenant
to underground services, installed after the effective date of this title,
shall be placed underground in accordance with the specifications and policies
of the respective utility service providers and located in accordance with
standards adopted by the City of Kellogg.
   H.   Notification Of Utility Location: Whenever a developer installs or
causes to be installed any utility line in any public right-of-way, the
developer shall, as soon as practicable after installation is complete, furnish
the City with a copy of a drawing that shows the exact location of such utility
lines. Such drawings must be verified as accurate by the utility service
provider. Compliance with this requirement shall be a condition of the
continued validity of the permit authorizing such development. (Ord. 595, 6-13-
2018)
11-10-5: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Stores Selling Sexual Material: The location of stores selling sexual
material are controlled by Idaho Code 67-6533 or as subsequently amended.
   B.   Campground/RV Park: Campground uses are permitted in the designated
zones upon the granting of a conditional (special) use permit pursuant to the
provisions of section
11-9-1, "Conditional (Special) Use Permits", of this title and the following
minimum requirements:
      1.   Interior access roads shall connect to a street maintained by the
City of Kellogg. Interior access roads will be constructed to standards
established by the Planning Commission upon approval of a conditional (special)
use permit and will be privately maintained.
      2.   Campsites shall be located on well drained areas and shall be
properly graded to prevent accumulation of stormwater. Control of surface water
runoff shall be provided by a drainage system acceptable to the City Engineer.
      3.   Exposed ground surfaces (other than interior roads and defined
campsites) shall be protected with a cover or vegetative growth that is capable
of providing dust abatement and preventing soil erosion.
      4.   Adequate water supply, safe for drinking shall be provided in
accordance with State and local health authorities, with a minimum of one
accessible water supply outlet within three hundred feet (300') of each
campsite.
      5.   Sewage disposal facilities shall be provided acceptable to State and
local health authorities. Such toilet areas shall be located not less than
fifty feet (50') nor more than three hundred feet (300') from a campsite. There
shall be a minimum of one toilet for every ten (10) campsites. This requirement
may be modified by the Planning Commission where sewer hookups are provided to
individual campsites.
      6.   All solid waste shall be collected and stored in compliance with the
City of Kellogg solid waste regulations. Refuse containers (minimum 32 gallon
capacity with lids) shall be provided and maintained for every four (4)
campsites. Other types of solid waste facilities may be approved by the
Planning Commission as part of a conditional use permit.
      7.   All areas in campgrounds shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials. At least one (1) 5-pound chemical portable fire
extinguisher shall be installed and maintained in the campground office.
      8.   All areas in the campground shall be maintained in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition at all times. Campground rules in accordance with these
regulations shall be posted.
      9.   Dump sites (stations) shall be provided in all campgrounds having
more than twenty five (25) camp or RV sites.
   C.   Fences/Walls: Fences and walls are permitted in all zoning
designations, subject to the following minimum requirements:
      1.   No fence shall be constructed within the City without the issuance
of a permit by the Building Department.
      2.   Fences and walls exceeding six feet (6') in height shall require an
administrative permit pursuant to the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
      3.   Except for those directly associated with public game areas (i.e.,
tennis courts, ball fields), fences, and walls in residential districts shall
not exceed six feet (6') in height.
      4.   No fence, wall or hedge over four feet (4') shall be permitted in
any residential required front yard subject to maintaining the visibility
triangle at intersections.
      5.   No fences or walls shall be electrified.
      6.   Barbed wire shall not be used on a fence or wall except along the
top of an approved security fence in an industrial district. The applicant
shall show that the use of barbed wire will not constitute a hazard to public
safety and shall demonstrate the need for the use of such wire.
   D.   Manufactured Housing Community Standards: Manufactured housing
communities are permitted in the designated zones upon the granting of a
conditional use permit and the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Site Density: Each mobile home in a manufactured housing community
shall occupy a site not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square
feet in area for the exclusive use of its residents, with a maximum density of
eleven (11) mobile home units per acre.
      2.   Manufactured Housing Community Setbacks:
         a.   All mobile home units and structures accessory to the
manufactured housing community shall be located a minimum distance of twenty
five feet (25') from any park property line abutting upon a public street or
highway and at least fifteen feet (15') from other park boundary lines.
Structures accessory to individual mobile homes shall be located a minimum
distance of seven and one-half feet (7 1/2') from any exterior park property
line.
         b.   All mobile home units shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') from any other mobile home or permanent structure within the manufactured
housing community. There shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between a mobile
home and any detached accessory structure thereto. Structures attached to the
mobile home such as carports, decks, and covered patios shall be considered as
part of the mobile home.
         c.   No access drive for an individual mobile home shall be located
closer than seventy five feet (75') from any public street intersection.
      3.   Interior Park Drives:
         a.   Each mobile home space within a manufactured housing community
shall have direct access to an interior park drive and shall not have
individual access to a public rights-of-way.
         b.   Interior park drives shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in
width and surfaced with asphalt paving or concrete.
         c.   The number and location of all ingress and egress points for
access to the manufactured housing community shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
         d.   Interior drives and walkways designed for the use of the
manufactured housing community residents shall be adequately lighted for the
safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles during hours of darkness.
      4.   Drainage Facilities And Utility Services:
         a.   Control of surface water runoff shall be provided by a drainage
system acceptable to the City Engineer.
         b.   All utility distribution services (including electric,
communication, and cable lines) shall be placed underground. The Planning
Commission may waive such requirements if topography, soil, or any other
conditions, in accordance with the utility providers' policies, make
underground installation of said services unreasonable or impractical.
         c.   Manufactured housing communities shall be connected to sanitary
sewer or other facility approved by the City of Kellogg and the Panhandle
Health District. All mobile home spaces shall be provided a connection to the
sanitary facility serving the manufactured housing community.
         d.   All spaces shall be provided a connection to a water system
approved by the water district serving the development and Idaho Department of
Environmental Quality.
         e.   All solid waste shall be stored and collected in compliance with
the City of Kellogg mandatory pick up ordinance. All refuse shall be stored in
fly tight, watertight, rodent proof containers or drop boxes which shall be
provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse
awaiting collection. Common solid waste facilities shall be screened from the
direct view of any mobile home stand or space.
      5.   Fire Equipment: The manufactured housing community development shall
be subject to the rules and regulations of Shoshone County Fire District 2 for
the placement and maintenance of fire extinguishers, fire hydrants, or other
safety standards.
      6.   Parking: Each mobile home space shall be provided with two (2) off
street parking spaces. Storage of items such as boats, trailers, and campers
shall not be stored at the site of the mobile home unit. Storage areas may be
provided in separate screened areas within or adjacent to the manufactured
housing community. Such storage shall not be included as a part of the required
off street parking.
      7.   Landscaping And Screening: Manufactured housing communities shall be
landscaped and landscaping will be irrigated. Landscape plans will be reviewed
and approved as part of the conditional use permit.
         a.   Perimeter screening shall be provided at park boundaries by a
sight obscuring fence, landscaping or a combination thereof.
         b.   Lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, or other suitable ground cover
shall be provided for all open spaces other than access drives and parking and
circulation areas. Sixty five percent (65%) of the ground cover shall be trees,
shrubs, plants, or other vegetative cover.
   E.   Motor Vehicle Salvage Facility: Motor vehicle salvage facilities are
permitted in the designated zones upon the granting of a conditional (special)
use permit. The following are minimum standards:
      1.   An opaque landscape screen and fencing shall be required at all
property boundaries abutting public rights-of-way or residential or commercial
zoning districts. A sight obscuring fence, a minimum of six feet (6') in
height, shall be required at all other property boundaries.
      2.   All screening and fencing shall be maintained by the facility
operator to provide the shielding intended at all times and shall be replaced
when necessary. Fencing shall be kept free of unauthorized signs and markings.
      3.   No part of any public right-of-way shall be used in any manner for
the operation, storage, or use in any way of the motor vehicle salvage
facility. No operation, storage, or use shall be conducted beyond the required
peripheral fencing and screening.
      4.   No vehicle storage, or use of a motor vehicle wrecking facility may
be conducted within one hundred feet (100') of any stream or river.
      5.   All unsalvageable nonmetallic parts, tires, seals, etc., shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Kellogg Fire Protection
District and/or the appropriate health authority.
      6.   The harborage of vectors and rodents shall be controlled at all
times so as not to create a public health hazard.
      7.   A surface water drainage system, approved by the City Engineer,
shall be provided to prevent contamination of adjacent properties or a public
stormwater system.
   F.   Temporary Residence/Office Standards: Temporary residence/office uses,
necessary as the result of fire, accident, or natural disaster may be permitted
as an administrative permit. The following are minimum requirements:
      1.   Temporary residences/offices used on construction sites of
nonresidential premises shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the
project.
      2.   Permits for temporary residences, to be occupied pending the
construction, repair, or renovation of the permanent residential building on a
site, shall expire within six (6) months after the date of issuance. The
Administrator may renew such permit for one additional period not to exceed six
(6) months for good cause. Upon completion of the project or expiration of the
permit, the temporary residence shall be immediately removed.
   G.   Off-Street Parking Standards: The required off street parking, loading
spaces and display lots shall be developed and maintained according to the
applicable provisions of this Code. The Administrator is empowered to determine
the regulations and standards to be required in each particular circumstance,
considering the long-term needs of the facility constructed. Land uses in
existence prior to the effective date of this title may be continued as a
nonconforming use subject to other provisions of this title concerning
provision of off-street parking. The following standards apply:
      1.   Change Of Use Or Increase Of Space: Except for alterations or
additions to individual dwelling units, parking spaces meeting the requirements
of this chapter shall be provided whenever the use of a facility is changed to
a higher parking category or if the facility floor area is increased by more
than ten percent (10%) in any five (5) years. Existing parking and loading
spaces shall not be altered or reduced below the requirements and standards
specified for the use in this chapter. Whenever an individual lot or parcel has
a facility with more than one use or activity requiring different spaces for
parking and loading, the sum of the required spaces for each use or activity
shall be used in determining the overall requirements.
      2.   Street Parking Excluded: No portion of any public right-of-way shall
be used in satisfying the minimum parking requirements established by this
title.
      3.   Front-To-Back (Tandem) Parking Prohibited: Except for detached
single-family dwelling units, the design and development of front-to-back
parking and loading spaces shall not be allowed in meeting the minimum space
requirements of this chapter. A required space shall not be blocked by another
space such that a vehicle would be required to enter and leave a space by
having to cross another required space.
      4.   Maintenance Of Parking And Loading Areas: All paved areas intended
for use by the public and required by this chapter shall be maintained on a
regular basis. Regular maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
pavement repair and seal coating; pavement marking and striping; removal of
dust, leaves and litter; removal of snow and ice; maintaining landscaped areas;
and maintaining signs, fences, wheel stops, curbs, walks, drainage facilities
and any other appurtenances pertinent to the requirements of this chapter and
the zoning ordinance.
      5.   Off-Site Or Shared Parking: Whenever any required parking or loading
areas are located on a site which is not within the property limits of the
facility being served, the permit applicant shall provide an agreement
authorizing use of any off-site parking for the approval by the Administrator.
The primary considerations for such approval shall be the functionality of the
parking spaces, the safety of citizens, and the effect on neighboring land
uses. Any change in use or increase in use during the term of the agreement
shall require re-evaluation of the conditions and factors upon which the
agreement was based.
      6.   Ordinance Procedure - Required Spaces Determined By Administrator:
Where this title requires the Administrator to prescribe the number of parking
and loading spaces, the Administrator shall base his/her determination on the
following:
         a.   Traffic generation, giving particular attention to potential
number or timing of parking needs.
         b.   Location and peak hours of operation.
         c.   Extent and frequency of loading operations.
         d.   The number of employees during peak times.
         e.   Any other factors that would affect parking and loading
requirements.
      7.   ADA Accessible Parking Spaces: Where off street parking spaces are
required by this title there shall also be required parking spaces for persons
with disabilities as provided in the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). The
spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located as near as practical to a
primary accessible entrance.
      8.   Parking Space Sizes: Off street parking spaces shall meet the
minimum dimensions for the following types of spaces and conditions:
         a.   Standard ninety degree (90°) parking spaces shall be 9 feet by 18
feet.
         b.   Parallel parking spaces shall be 8 feet wide by 23 feet long.
      9.   Proximity To Use: The distance between parking areas and the use
being served shall not exceed the following:
         a.   Residential uses: On site.
         b.   Civic, commercial, and service uses: Within two hundred feet
(200') of the entrance to the facility being served.
         c.   Wholesale and industrial uses: Within three hundred feet (300')
of the entrance to the facility being served.
         d.   Parking areas must be located within zoning districts that permit
such use.
      10.   Aisles And Driveways For Maneuvering: All required off street
parking spaces and loading areas shall be designed with adequate space to
accommodate the turning movements of the vehicles entering and leaving the
facility. Space shall be provided such that all vehicles shall enter and leave
the public right-of-way in a forward direction. This requirement shall not
apply to residential parking areas that serve two (2) or fewer dwelling units.
The location and design of approaches to parking lots shall be approved by the
City Engineer.
      11.   Parking Area Grades/Drainage: All off-street parking shall be paved
such that no surface shall exceed five percent (5%) and no longitudinal
drainage gradient shall be flatter than one- half percent (0.5%). Approach
grades shall be safe and convenient. Parking spaces for persons with
disabilities shall be as level as possible but in no case shall the parking
space, adjacent aisle, driveway or designated pathways exceed a gradient of two
percent (2%) in any direction. All parking and loading areas shall provide for
proper drainage of surface water to approved drainage areas or structures.
Surface drainage shall be retained on site to the extent that site run-off
shall not exceed run-off from the site in its undeveloped condition.
      12.   Paving Of Parking And Loading Areas: All driveways, parking,
loading, and maneuvering areas required of this chapter shall be paved with
asphalt, concrete, or approved paving blocks or bricks. Single-family and
duplex family uses shall be served by a paved driveway and parking spaces as
required.
      13.   Paving Of Display Lots: Display lots for vehicles shall be paved as
shall approaches, driveways, maneuvering areas and parking spaces. The actual
area used for the display of the homes, nursery stock or heavy equipment may be
surfaced with compacted crushed aggregate, provided that the unpaved area is
maintained in a neat, dustless and weedless condition.
      14.   Lighting: The illumination of off-street parking and loading areas
and display lots shall be designed such that lighting is directed away from the
street and adjacent properties and toward the interior of the property focusing
on the ground to be illuminated.
      15.   Widths Of Driveways, Parking Aisles, And Turning Radii: The City's
parking requirements shall be considered to be minimum standards. All off
street parking areas shall be reviewed by the local fire district that may
request wider driveways and parking aisles and larger vehicular turning radii
as prescribed by the applicable Fire Code.
      16.   Irrigation: All landscaped areas including buffer strips and
drainage infiltration facilities shall be provided with an automated irrigation
system.
      17.   Dimensional Requirements: With the exception of residential parking
areas that serve two (2) or fewer dwelling units all other off street parking
areas shall be laid out and designed to satisfy the following requirements:
         a.   Traffic Lane Widths: The minimum driveway and approach widths
shall be determined from the operating speed and the classification of the
street providing access, the volume of traffic being generated, the potential
for truck use, and fire protection requirements. Parking aisle widths shall
vary with the angle of vehicular turning required to access the required space
on one-way aisles, but shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') wide on
two-way aisle. A forty foot (40') wide approach may also be allowed where heavy
truck use prevails.
         b.   Exit Vehicle Space: There shall be at least twenty four feet
(24') separating a parking aisle from the edge of the adjacent street to
provide space for one exiting vehicle.
         c.   Striping: Each parking space shall be delineated with clearly
marked pavement striping. Other pavement markings for spaces for persons with
disabilities, pathways, crosswalks, stop bars, delineations, turning arrows,
bicycles, etc., may be required.
      18.   Required Off Street Parking Spaces: The following parking standards
shall apply to all uses constructed or established pursuant to this title,
unless otherwise permitted by the Administrator in writing for good cause:
Use Required Spaces
Use                                      Required Spaces
Residential uses:                         
 Cluster housing                        2 per dwelling unit
 Condominiums and multi-family units    2 per dwelling unit
 Detached housing, single-family        2 spaces
 Duplex housing                         2 per dwelling unit
Civic uses:                               
 Administrative                         1 per 300 square feet
 Community assembly                     Per design capacity
 Community organization                 1 per 300 square feet
 Daycare or nursery                     1 per 200 square feet
 Hospitals/healthcare                   1.5 per bed
 Library                                1 per 250 square feet
 Meeting hall                           1 per 4 seats
 Museum or art gallery                  1 per 1,000 square feet
 Nursing and convalescent facilities    1 per sleeping room
 Religious assembly                     0.5 space per seat
 Schools:                                
  Elementary school                    9 spaces per classroom
  Middle or junior high school         10 spaces per homeroom class
  High school                          10 spaces per homeroom class
Commercial/industrial uses:               
 Agricultural supplies and commodity    1 per 200 square feet
  sales
 Automotive accessory sales             1 per 200 square feet
 Automotive fleet storage               1 per employee and 1 per vehicle
 Automotive repair                      3 per bay and 5 queuing spaces
 Automotive sales                       1 per 200 square feet
 Banks/financial services               1 space per 200 square feet and 5
                                         queuing spaces
 Beauty and barber shops                1 space per 200 square feet
 Business retail supply sales           1 per 200 square feet
 Child or juvenile facility             Per ordinance procedure
 Construction retail sales              1 per 200 square feet
 Convenience store                      1 per 200 square feet
 Department store retail sales          1 per 200 square feet
 Farm equipment sales                   1 per 200 square feet and 3 per
                                         service bay
 Fast food with drive in                1 per 75 square feet and 5
                                         unencumbered queuing spaces
 Fast food without drive in             1 per 75 square feet
 Gasoline sales                         1 per pump
 Golf course                            4 per hole
 Hotel/motel                            1.35 spaces per unit and as required
                                         per accessory uses
 Laundry services                       1 space per 200 square feet
 Medical/healthcare office              1 space per 150 square feet
 Mini-storage                           Minimum of 2 spaces/paved lot
 Professional and administrative office 1 per 200 square feet
 Restaurant - seating                   1 per 75 square feet
 Service establishments                 1 space per 200 square feet
 Skating rink                           1 space per 100 square feet
 Storage/warehouse                      1 per 500 square feet
 Supermarket                            3 per 1,000 square feet
 Swimming facilities                    1 space per 75 square feet of water
                                         surface
 Theatres, auditoriums, and stadiums    1 per 3 seats
 Veterinary office                      1 space per 150 square feet
 Wholesale uses                         1 per 200 square feet office and 1 per
                                         500 square feet warehouse
 
   H.   Landscape Standards: The purpose of these provisions is to provide
standards for landscaping, buffering, and screening, shading of parking areas,
and providing street trees.
      1.   Authority: The City shall have the authority to require fences,
walls, screening, or landscaping to buffer adverse external effects from or to
adjacent property or to otherwise protect the public health and safety.
      2.   Deviation From Landscape Standards: The City recognizes that because
of the wide variety of development and the relationships between them, it is
reasonable to permit flexibility in the application of landscape requirements.
Therefore, the Administrator may permit deviation from landscape requirements
depending on the characteristics of the neighborhood and/or existing site
conditions. Whenever the Administrator permits or requires a deviation from
these requirements, it shall be in writing stating the reasons for permitting
or requiring the deviation. Decisions by the Administrator may be appealed
according to procedures found in section
11-7-7, "Appeals", of this title.
      3.   Fencing: Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to set
aside or reduce any requirements for fencing as established by Federal, State,
County, or City laws for security, or other purposes.
      4.   Landscaping: All required yards abutting a street shall be
landscaped, except for those areas occupied by parking.
         a.   Landscaping shall include the planting, irrigation, and
maintenance of some combination of trees, ground cover, shrubs, vines, flowers,
or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features
such as rock and structural features including, but not limited to, fountains,
reflecting pools, artwork, screens, walls, and fences.
         b.   When undeveloped land is subdivided and undeveloped lots are
sold, the subdivider shall not be required to install the required landscaping.
Landscaping and screening shall be required when individual lots are developed.
         c.   For subdivisions providing common areas, planned unit
developments, or combination of subdivision and PUD, landscaping and
installation of such landscaping will be determined during the approval process
and detailed in the development agreement.
      5.   Commercial And Industrial Screening: Land used for open off street
parking, loading and/or storage, automotive sales, or other commercial and
industrial activities conducted outside an enclosed structure shall provide
fencing, a berm, landscaping or a combination thereof adjacent to public
rights-of-way to reduce the visual impact to the public.
      6.   Timing Of Landscaping: All required landscaping shall be completed
prior to use or occupancy of new buildings or structures weather conditions
permitting. An extension of time to complete landscaping may be granted by the
Administrator due to weather or other unforeseen circumstances. An extension of
time shall be in writing and state the reasons for the extension, a date for
completion, and signed by both the Administrator and the developer. The
developer shall provide surety (125 percent of the cost estimate for the
landscaping) in the form of cash, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit prior
to receiving an extension.
      7.   Maintenance: All required landscaping shall be maintained in good
growing condition and, whenever necessary, shall be replaced with new plant
materials to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping, shading,
and screening requirements.
      8.   Retention Of Trees: Every development shall retain healthy existing
trees eighteen inches (18") in diameter or more to the greatest extent possible
unless the retention of such trees would be an unreasonable burden to the
development. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-11-1: Mediation
11-11-2: Exhaustion Of Administrative Procedures
11-11-3: Administrative Exceptions
11-11-4: Legal Nonconforming Structures
11-11-5: Legal Nonconforming Uses
11-11-6: Legal Nonconforming Lots
11-11-7: Institutional Controls Program
11-11-8: Area Of City Impact
11-11-1: MEDIATION:
Mediation is a discretionary communication process potentially available to any
affected person who owns real property that might be materially affected by a
quasi-judicial zoning-related issue or whenever determined by the City Council.
The purpose of mediation is to promote resolution of differences concerning
potentially divisive land use matters. The process for mediation, if required
or proposed by the City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in Idaho
Code 67-6510 or as subsequently amended. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-2: EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
Any procedure addressed by this title that authorizes the Planning and Zoning
Commission to make a decision, as contrasted with a recommendation to the City
Council, shall not be deemed a final decision unless it has been appealed to
the City Council by the party seeking to bring a judicial appeal. Any such
appeal must be filed with the Administrator within fourteen (14) days after the
date of the decision entered by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any such
appeal must be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the
City Council and a completed appeal application as provided by the
Administrator. Any such appeal shall be decided by the City Council within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the date it is filed with the Administrator.
Failure to file such an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies prior to seeking reconsideration and court review of
proceedings. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-3: ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS:
An administrative exception to express bulk or placement standards may be
approved by the Administrator upon a showing by an applicant that any such
exception is consistent with the intent of zoning ordinance policy in general,
that the exception is essential to make productive use of the land involved,
that the exception would not conflict with requirements established by uniform
codes, that the public safety would not be compromised and that the interests
of neighboring landowners would not be impaired by approval of the exception.
   A.   The maximum extent of administrative exception shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) reduction in required setback from external property lines, up to
a ten percent (10%) reduction in lot area requirements or up to a ten percent
(10%) increase in the allowable height of buildings, administrative discretion
to allow fences or walls in excess of existing maximums by up to an additional
foot in the designated front yard area, and allowing fences or walls up to two
feet (2') higher than the maximum in a rear or side yard.
   B.   An application for an administrative exception shall include a written
description of the requested exception and a site plan that shows information
relevant to the request in order to allow the Administrator to evaluate the
proposed exception. Any application requesting an exception equal to fifty
percent (50%) or more of the maximum allowed by this section (e.g., a setback
reduction equal to 10 percent of the required setback or exceeding the maximum
height allowed by 5 percent, or more) shall include the names and addresses of
adjoining property owners. The Administrator will prepare a notice of any
administrative exception request and mail it to abutting property owners who
will have seven (7) calendar days from the date of mailing to deliver a written
responsive comment to the Administrator.
   C.   After considering the merits of any comments submitted by neighboring
landowners, an administrative exception may be approved, approved with
modifications or denied by the Administrator. The Administrator, when deciding,
shall consider the factors set forth in subsection A of this section.
   D.   Written notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and
mailed to any abutting property owner who submitted written comments. A
decision may be appealed within seven (7) days of such mailing by any affected
property owner who commented or by the applicant in accordance with procedures
specified by this title for decisions made by the Administrator. (Ord. 595, 6-
13-2018)
11-11-4: LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A legal nonconforming structure is one that was in compliance with all land use
and Building Code requirements at the time it was constructed, or that was
constructed or established before land use regulations were enacted, but does
not conform to the structure requirements of the current Land Use Codes of the
City. It is the policy of the City to encourage maintenance and continued
vitality of existing legal nonconforming structures until a change of land use
is undertaken by the owner in conformance with requirements of this title.
   A.   Any legal nonconforming permanent structure may continue to be used and
maintained as otherwise allowed by this title. A nonconforming structure shall
not be enlarged in area in any way that increases its non-conformity. A
structure used to house a non-conforming non-residential use may be enlarged by
up to ten percent (10%) of its square footage so long as any such enlargement
does not increase the non-conformity of any setbacks or building bulk
regulations.
   B.   A damaged or destroyed legal nonconforming structure may be repaired or
reconstructed provided that the extent of the previously existing
nonconformance is not increased.
   C.   Any structure legally built prior to the adoption of land use
regulations within a currently-required yard setback area shall be deemed a
legal non-conforming structure and the nonconforming dimension shall not be
expanded by additional construction, unless otherwise qualifying for a
variance. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-5: LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES:
All existing uses of land that are not permitted uses in the zoning district in
which such use is being conducted, and all uses which, if presently initiated,
would require a conditional use permit, and which do not have a conditional use
permit, are deemed legal nonconforming uses. Legal nonconforming uses shall not
be expanded or extended in any way, except as otherwise expressly allowed by
this title. A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed except to a use that
complies with the regulations of the zoning district in which the subject
property lies or to diminish its non- conformity. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-6: LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS:
All existing platted subdivision lots that do not meet the minimum lot area and
dimension standards of the district within which they are located are hereby
deemed nonconforming lots. Any lot that was legally created prior to the
effective date of this title may be used in conformance with the uses permitted
by the zoning district within which it is located, provided that all yard and
setback requirements are met.
   A.   If lot area is deficient in a residential zone by no more than fifty
percent (50%), any such non-conforming lot may be used only for construction of
a detached single-family residence.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any such lot is contiguous to one or
more lots of common ownership and any combination of such lots will meet the
area or dimension standards of this title, such lots shall be considered to be
an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title. Accordingly, the separate
lots shall be treated as a single parcel concerning the issuance of a building
permit for any residential construction on the lot, or contiguous commonly
owned lots where this condition exists. No nonconforming or conforming lot
shall be reduced in area or dimensions if such reduction would result in a
greater degree of nonconformity. In the least dense residential district in
jurisdiction, any lot with an area less than the minimum required for the least
dense residential district may only be developed to the minimum residential use
allowed in the zone. Any lot in any residential district that has an area less
than the minimum square footage desired, but at least fifty percent (50%) of
the minimum area, unless it adjoins one or more substandard lots held in common
ownership, may only be developed with a single-family dwelling unit.
   C.   The Administrator is authorized to take such steps as are necessary,
including civil or criminal litigation, to abate, penalize or prevent the use
of any unlawful structure, lot or use. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-7: INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS PROGRAM:
The Institutional Controls Program is designed to protect the public residing
and working within the Bunker Hill Superfund Site. The Institutional Controls
Program (ICP) is administered by Idaho Panhandle Health District in accordance
with Idaho Administrative Procedures Act (IDAPA) 41.01.01, 500 through 543.
   A.   Objective: The objective of the ICP is to insure that barriers are
created and maintained, and a system of activity controls and standards are
implemented to keep contaminants from migrating through any barrier or
remediate areas.
   B.   Permitting: All excavation, grading, and certain interior remodeling
projects for any land or structure within the superfund site must have an
approved permit from the Panhandle Health District (PHD). The PHD permit shall
be issued prior to any construction activity on permits issued by the City of
Kellogg begins. PHD shall inspect, and approve if warranted, work completed
before any certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the City. (Ord.
595, 6-13-2018)
11-11-8: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of establishing the Kellogg area of City impact is
to identify an urban fringe area in the unincorporated territory surrounding
the City within which there is potential for development or changes in land use
that must be planned in an orderly and compatible manner in order to insure
timely or economical provision of public services such as water supply,
sanitary and storm sewage collection and treatment, public safety services,
other community service facilities, and to promote land use compatibility,
street alignment, and traffic flow objectives.
   B.   Areas Of City Impact Defined: The area of City impact shall consist of
an area where development or use of land affects or may affect the City of
Kellogg in consideration of trade areas, geographic factors, and areas that can
reasonably be expected to be annexed to the City in the future.
   C.   Geographic Areas Of City Impact Established And Defined: The official
adopted area of City impact is hereby established and shown on the map entitled
"Kellogg Area of City Impact" and is officially made a part hereof by
reference, said map being specifically adopted by this section.
   The Kellogg area of City impact shall be reevaluated by the City of Kellogg
and Shoshone County at such times as they may agree upon to consider possible
changes in the geographic area affected and/or other provisions of this section
including but not limited to applicable standards.
   D.   Right To Comment: Within the area of City impact, the following comment
periods are hereby enacted upon an application to Shoshone County:
      1.   Upon an application to Shoshone County for a subdivision,
subdivision plat, zone change, comprehensive plan change, request for a special
or conditional use permit, planned unit development, variance request, or
similar land use request, the County shall provide written notice and a copy of
the application and other pertinent information pertaining to such request to
the Kellogg City Clerk. The City shall have thirty (30) days to comment after
receipt of the notice and information prior to any public hearing or meeting
pertaining to said request.
      2.   Prior to amendment or repeal by the County of any plan or ordinance
set forth in subsection E of this section, applicable in the area of City
impact, the County shall forward the proposed change to the City for review and
comment at least thirty (30) days prior to the first public hearing at which
such amendment will be considered.
      3.   Prior to any annexations to the City of Kellogg, the City shall
notify the County at least thirty (30) days prior to the first public hearing
at which time such annexation will be considered. The Board of County
Commissioners may waive this requirement.
   E.   Standards: The following standards shall apply whenever an agency,
Planning and/or Zoning Commission, hearing examiner, or Governing Body of the
City or County considers a zone change, comprehensive plan change, and request
for a special or conditional use permit, planned unit development, limited
planned unit development, variance request, or subdivision plat within the area
of City impact.
      1.   Shoshone County Comprehensive Plan; and
      2.   Shoshone County subdivision ordinance; and
      3.   Shoshone County zoning ordinance; and
      4.   Shoshone County stormwater management requirements.
   F.   Enforcement: Shoshone County shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the County's ordinances listed in subsection
E of this section within the area of City impact and shall, except as otherwise
provided, receive all permit fees for inspections performed to recapture direct
costs of inspections, administration, legal publications, any development fees,
or other costs arising from fulfilling the terms of each ordinance or
regulation.
   G.   Hearing Procedures Within The Area Of City Impact: All applications for
subdivision, and all other applications (e.g., zone change, comprehensive plan
amendment, variance, conditional use, etc.) within the area of City impact
shall be filed by the applicant with Shoshone County. All approvals and public
hearings in the area of City impact shall be conducted by Shoshone County in
accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6501, et seq., and Idaho Code section 50-
1301, et seq.
   H.   Annexation: Annexation by the City of Kellogg shall be limited as
nearly as possible to those lands lying within the area of impact and being
contiguous to the City limits of the City of Kellogg, and further as required
by applicable State law. Upon annexation, the provisions of this section, which
is the agreement between the City of Kellogg and Shoshone County, shall no
longer apply to the annexed area. (Ord. 598, 7-11-2018)
CHAPTER 12
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
11-12-1: Enforcement
11-12-2: Penalties
11-12-3: Abatement Proceedings
11-12-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The Administrator or his designee is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this title. It shall be deemed a violation of this title to construct any
building, structure or improvement for the purpose of establishing any land use
contrary to the requirements of this title, to violate any express prohibition
or exceed any express limitation contained in the text or exhibits of this
title or to use any land, building, or premises, contrary to the provisions of
this title, contrary to the terms or conditions of a permit, variance or in a
manner contrary to the terms and conditions established by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, City Council or Administrator. Violations of this title are
hereby declared to be unlawful and subject to the penalties established by this
chapter and by other provisions of law. (Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
11-12-2: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with any provision or requirement of this title or terms or
conditions of permits shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In the
discretion of the Administrator, any violation of this title may be charged as
an infraction, subject to a fine alone in an amount not to exceed the limits
established by State law. The Administrator may elect to pursue enforcement by
filing criminal charges, pursuing enforcement by charging as infraction and/or
by proceeding in any form of civil legal action related to any violation of
this title deemed likely to achieve compliance. Each day a violation continues
may be considered a separate offense. Any landowner, tenant, subdivider, or
builder who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation
shall be guilty of a violation. Nothing contained in this title shall prevent
any other public official or affected person from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title. (Ord. 595, 6-
13-2018)
11-12-3: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
Agency legal counsel or their designee may commence action or proceedings for
the abatement of any violation of this title as a nuisance in the manner
provided by law, and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction
to grant relief as to abate, terminate and remove unlawful uses, buildings or
structures, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from
setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using any building, structure,
vehicle, or property contrary to the provisions of this title or to any permits
or authorizations issued pursuant to this title.
(Ord. 595, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 13
STORM WATER STANDARDS 1
 
Notes
     All figures and tables are attached to ordinance 364, appendices B and C, on
1 file in the office of the city clerk. activities, and residential yard and
  community soils. To augment and protect this remediation, a comprehensive
  program called the institutional controls plan (ICP) has been developed by PHD.
ARTICLE A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
SECTION:
11-13A-1: General
11-13A-2: Performance Standards
11-13A-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this document is to direct land development in
such a way as to minimize the negative effects or impacts that increased storm
water runoff can have on ground water, surface water, and public and private
property. It is the specific intention of the planning administrator to require
natural, on site control of storm water and to prohibit the release of
untreated storm water, sediments, and other materials from development sites.
   B.   Best Management Practices: This natural control can be afforded by a
series of techniques collectively called best management practices (BMPs).
These BMPs and their applications are described and referred to throughout
ordinance 364, on file in the office of the city clerk. In some situations BMPs
may not allow certain specific development goals. For these situations more
structural storm water controls may be used and some are discussed herein. In
either case, however, the collection and treatment efficiencies of the BMPs
shall stand as the measure against which the alternative measures must perform.
The control of storm water runoff and its effects as a result of BMPs or
equivalent technologies is considered to be the essence of storm water
management.
   C.   Institutional Controls Plan: Most of the terrain in the city of Kellogg
and its area of city impact are either mountainous or in the floodplain. This
area has a long history of mining and smelting activities which have left a
variety of wastes, including high concentrations of lead, arsenic, antimony,
copper, cadmium, mercury, and zinc. A twenty one (21) square mile area of the
Silver Valley, which includes the city of Kellogg, was declared a superfund
site by the EPA and has undergone extensive remediation of hillsides, areas of
mining
   The size and complexity of the site have resulted in the extensive use of
capping and contaminants stabilization techniques. The ICP was developed to
ensure that these contaminants remain controlled and away from direct human
contact to the greatest extent possible. "Institutional controls" are defined
as nonengineering mechanisms used to prevent or limit access to contaminated
soils, thereby eliminating health risks. The ICP at the Bunker Hill superfund
site (hereinafter referred to as the site) includes a barrier management
program (barriers are the physical means of limiting human contact with
contaminated soils; barriers can be as simple as a layer of clean soil, asphalt
paving, or a concrete sidewalk, but may also include access controls such as
fencing) to control large excavations and building renovations, an education
program to promote barrier awareness, a testing and monitoring program, and a
disposal program for contaminated materials which have been removed. PHD is the
manager of the ICP. The program maintains a property tracking system to assist
lending institutions as they continue to complete property transactions valley
wide, in addition to the education and enforcement of the ICP.
   D.   Areas Of Concern: The areas of greatest concern within the site with
regard to contaminants are the low lying areas, especially the floodplain
areas. The sediments which have been washed from the hillsides over the last
one hundred (100) years have collected in these areas and are associated with
high concentrations of contaminants to depths up to ten feet (10') in areas,
creating a considerable remediation challenge. Although the hillsides have
contaminated soils, they are usually of a superficial nature and may be
remediated by using methods as simple as deep tilling, which mixes the surface
soils with the clean underlying material and lowers the contaminant
concentrations to acceptable levels. Soil pH is also a concern in many areas.
Soils with pH as low as four (4) or five (5) are common within the site with
some as low as two (2). There is the existing hazard of mine dumps and tailings
located on the hillsides and these should be avoided when possible. For the
most part, the need for barriers is limited to the floodplains, mine waste
areas, and populated areas within three (3) miles of the smelter site.
   E.   Intent Of Regulations: It is the intent of these regulations to limit
migration of these contaminants, as well as direct human contact with them, to
the extent possible by controlling storm water.
   F.   Acknowledgments: The storm water control measures discussed in this
manual are supplemented versions of the "Best Management Practices For Storm
Water Management And Erosion And Sedimentation Control" and the "Storm Water
Management Plan Criteria And Engineering Standards", prepared for the
interagency storm water committee of Kootenai County by Kennedy Engineers of
Spokane, WA. They have been edited to reflect the environmental conditions and
concerns present in the site. Although they contain provisions for storm water
control in areas of heavy metal contamination and low pH, they are still useful
for, and it is recommended that they be practiced in, areas within Shoshone
County which includes the city of Kellogg which do not suffer the environmental
problems of the site.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13A-2: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   The following performance standards shall be applicable to the design,
construction, and maintenance of all storm water management systems developed
pursuant to the storm water management ordinance:
   A.   It is the specific intention of the planning administrator that there
shall be as little increase in the peak rate (flow) of surface runoff from a
site as possible when compared with the rate which is determined to have
existed from the natural, undeveloped state of that site. Designs and
contingencies shall accommodate runoff events up to and including that peak
flow from a 25-year storm event (see article G of this chapter).
   B.   All sediment resulting from site development activities shall be
detained on site during runoff events to the extent possible. Detained sediment
shall be either stabilized on site or removed in an approved manner.
Contaminated sediments shall be handled and disposed of in a manner and place
approved by the PHD and the Idaho department of health and welfare (IDHW-DEQ).
   C.   No storm water shall be collected or concentrated except in on site
channels which are projected from erosion (through the establishment of ground
cover [vegetation or other], installation of energy dissipating structures and/
or design of sufficiently low velocity producing slopes) (see article D of this
chapter). The potential effects of on site collected and concentrated storm
water, especially that from greater than design storm events, to off site areas
shall be considered during project design.
   D.   All storm water from the completed development shall be directed to
grassed infiltration areas (GIAs), where possible and appropriate, for
treatment by natural biological, chemical and physical processes which occur
during infiltration (percolation) into the ground. Grassed infiltration areas
(or their acceptable alternatives) shall be sized to store and treat the first
one-half inch (1/2") of runoff draining from the "impervious surface area from
a storm (precipitation or snowmelt) event (see article F of this chapter).
Further, the GIA shall be designed such that excess runoff volumes overflow to
a drywell or other approved on site system without damage to that storm water
system or adjacent land improvements. If the use of a GIA is impractical due to
slope or soil type, a written explanation of why must accompany the storm water
plan when it is submitted to the planning administrator. Any storm water from
the site which is not directed to a GIA must be detained on site long enough to
assure removal of all sediments in a sediment trap. No runoff released from the
sight shall have passed over contaminated soils which have been exposed by
activities on the sight without first having been detained in a sediment trap
for a sufficient time to have removed any sediments.
   E.   A storm water management plan shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to any site clearing or construction documenting the design
considerations of all storm water controls which are needed to meet the
requirements of the storm water management ordinance. In addition, a post
construction (as built) drawing(s) shall be submitted showing details of
completed control features, including the installation or repair of any
barriers, to PHD for inclusion in the tracking system (see article C of this
chapter).
   F.   An operation and maintenance plan shall be submitted for review and
approval, prior to any site clearing or construction, documenting the methods
and responsibility for the continued functioning and integrity of constructed
storm water controls and barriers (see article E of this chapter).
   G.   It is the intention of the planning administrator that all development
activities within his jurisdiction shall be conducted so as to achieve these
performance standards. It is acknowledged, however, that the cost of
preparation of a detailed storm water management plan for a single-family
residential dwelling may pose a financial hardship to the owner. As a result,
simplified storm water control planning procedures may be developed for smaller
projects; however, the intent and spirit of these regulations shall still be
met.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE B. DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-13B-1: Storm Water Management Definitions
11-13B-1: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS:
Storm water management definitions shall be as follow:
AGGREGATE: A term for the stone or rock gravel needed to fill in an
infiltration BMP, such as a trench.
ANTISEEP COLLAR: A device constructed around a pipe or other conduit and placed
through a dam, levee, or dike for the purpose of reducing seepage losses and
piping failures.
AQUIFER: A geologic stratum containing ground water that can be withdrawn and
used for human purposes.
AS BUILT DRAWINGS: Design plans which have been revised to reflect all changes
to the plans which occurred during construction.
BERM: A constructed IC barrier of compacted earth, rock, or gravel.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water.
BIOFILTER: A designed, vegetated treatment facility where the more or less
simultaneous processes of filtration, infiltration, absorption, and biological
uptake of pollutants in storm water takes place when runoff flows over and
through. Vegetation growing in these facilities acts as both a physical filter
which causes gravity settling of particulates by regulating velocity of flow,
and also as a biological sink when direct uptake of dissolved pollutants
occurs.
BIOFILTRATION: The process of reducing pollutant concentrations in water by
filtering the polluted water through biological materials.
BOND: A surety bond, cash deposit or escrow account, assignment of savings,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other means acceptable to or required by the
permit authority to guarantee that work is completed in compliance with the
project's drainage plan and in compliance with all local government
requirements.
BUFFER: The zone contiguous with a sensitive area that is required for the
continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the sensitive
area. The critical functions of a riparian buffer (those associated with an
aquatic system) include shading, input or organic debris and coarse sediments,
uptake of nutrients, stabilization of banks, interception of fine sediments,
overflow during high water events, protection from disturbance by humans and
domestic animals, maintenance of wildlife habitat, and room for variation of
aquatic system boundaries.
CATCH BASIN: A chamber usually built for the admission of surface water having
at its base a sediment sump designed to retain grit and detritus below the
point of overflow.
CHANNEL: A feature that conveys surface water and is open to the air.
CHANNEL EROSION: The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small
channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large floods.
CHANNEL STABILIZATION: Erosion prevention and stabilization of velocity
distribution in a channel using vegetation, jetties, drops, revetments, and/or
other measures.
CHECK DAM: Small dam constructed in a gully or other small watercourse to
decrease the stream flow velocity, minimize channel scour, and promote
deposition of sediment.
CLEARING: The destruction and removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical, or
chemical methods.
COHESION: The capacity of a soil to resist shearing stress, exclusive of
functional resistance.
COMPACTION: Densification of fill or existing soils by mechanical means.
CONSTRUCTED WETLAND: Those wetlands intentionally created on sites that are not
wetlands for the primary purpose of wastewater or storm water treatment.
CONTAMINATED MATERIAL: Any substance which contains levels of heavy metals
above normal background levels.
CONVEYANCE: A mechanism for transporting water from one point to another,
including pipes, ditches, and channels.
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: The drainage facilities, both natural and manmade, which
collect, contain, and provide for the flow of surface and storm water from the
highest points on the land down to a receiving water. The natural elements of
the conveyance system include swales and small drainage courses, streams,
rivers, lakes, and wetlands. The humanmade elements of the conveyance system
include gutters, ditches, pipes, channels, and most retention/detention
facilities.
CULVERT: Pipe or concrete box structure which drains open channels, swales, or
ditches under a roadway or embankment. Typically with no catch basins or
manholes along its length.
DESIGN STORM: A rainfall event of specific return frequency and duration that
is used to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to
control the peak discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of
pollutants.
DETENTION TIME: The amount of time a parcel of water actually is present in a
BMP. Theoretical detention time for a runoff event is the average time parcels
of water reside in the basin over a period of release from the BMP.
DRAINAGE BASIN: A geographic and hydrologic subunit of a watershed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal encumbrance that is placed against a property's
title to reserve specified privileges for the users and beneficiaries of the
drainage facilities contained within the boundaries of the easement.
DROP SPILLWAY: Overall structure in which the water drops over a vertical wall
onto an apron at a lower elevation.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or
other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep. Also,
detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or
gravity.
EROSION/SEDIMENT ATION CONTROL: Any temporary or permanent measures taken to
reduce erosion; control siltation and sedimentation; and ensure that sediment
laden water does not leave the site.
FERTILIZER: Any material or mixture used to supply one or more of the essential
plant nutrient elements.
FILTER FABRIC: Textile of relatively small mesh or pore size that is used to:
a) allow water to pass through while keeping sediment out (permeable), or b)
prevent both runoff and sediment from passing through (impermeable).
FILTER STRIP: A strip of vegetation used to retard or collect sediment for the
protection of diversions, drainage basins, or other structures. Often used in
conjunction with a level spreader to keep flow from becoming channelized in the
filter strip.
FIRST FLUSH: The delivery of a disproportionately large load of pollutants
during the early part of storms due to the rapid runoff of accumulated
pollutants.
FLOODPLAIN: For a given flood event, that area of land adjoining a continuous
watercourse which has been covered temporarily by water.
FOREBAY: An easily maintained, extra storage area provided near an inlet of a
BMP to trap incoming sediments before they accumulate in a pond or wetland BMP.
FREEBOARD: The space from the top of an embankment to the highest water
elevation expected for the largest design storm stored. The space is required
as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GABION: A large rectangular box of heavy gauge wire mesh, which holds large
cobbles and boulders. Used in streams and ponds to change flow patterns,
stabilize banks, or prevent erosion.
GROUND WATER: Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or
a surface water body.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph of runoff rate, inflow rate, or discharge rate, past a
specific point over time.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUPS: A soil characteristic classification system defined by
the U.S. soil conservation service in which a soil may be categorized into one
of four (4) soil groups (A, B, C, or D) based upon infiltration rate and other
properties.
IC BARRIERS: Physical institutional controls which maintain an effective buffer
between human activity and contaminated soils. These include sod, soil, gravel,
synthetic membranes, concrete, asphalt, fences, etc. These are installed and
maintained through a set of institutional controls.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A hard surface area which either prevents or retards the
entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to
development, and/or a hard surface area which causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow
present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways, patios,
driveways, parking lots, or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel
roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which
similarly impeded the natural infiltration of storm water. Open, uncovered
retention/detention facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces.
INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.
The infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches/hour.
INSTITUTIONAL CONTROL (IC): Any means of providing an effective buffer between
human activity and existing soil contaminants. Institutional controls include
physical IC barriers (and their maintenance practices) as well as policies,
general guidelines, and a public education program to make residents aware of
the hazards and how to avoid activities which involve exposure.
INTERMITTENT STREAM: A stream or portion of a stream that flows only in direct
response to precipitation. It receives little or no water from springs and no
long continued supply from melting snow or other sources. It is dry for a large
part of the year, ordinarily more than three (3) months.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity that results in a change in the existing
soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil
topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to,
demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
LEVEL SPREADER: A device used to spread out storm water runoff uniformly over
the ground surface as sheet flow (i.e., not through channels). The purpose of
level spreaders is to prevent concentrated erosive flows, and to enhance
infiltration.
NUTRIENTS: Essential chemicals needed by plants or animals for growth.
Excessive amounts of nutrients can lead to degradation of water quality and
algal blooms. Some nutrients can be toxic at high concentrations.
PERCOLATION: The movement of water through soil.
PERMANENT STORAGE: The portion of a pond or infiltration BMP which is below the
elevation of the lowest outlet of the structure.
RATIONAL METHOD: A technique for estimating peak discharge rates for very small
developments, based on the rainfall intensity, watershed time of concentration,
and runoff coefficient.
RECHARGE RUNOFF: The flow to ground water from the infiltration of surface and
storm water runoff.
RETENTION: The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass.
RIPARIAN: A strip of land that borders a stream, river, or other water body,
often coincides with the maximum water surface elevation of the 100-year storm.
RIPRAP: A combination of large stone, cobbles, and boulders used to line
channels, stabilize banks, reduce runoff velocities, or filter out sediment.
RISER: A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond BMP that is used to
control the discharge rate from a BMP for a specified design storm.
RUNOFF: Water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that is found
in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, and
wetlands as well as shallow ground water.
SCS METHOD: A hydrologic analysis used to calculate runoff volume and peak
rates of discharge, generally for basins greater than ten (10) acres in size.
SEDIMENT: Fragmented material that originates from weathering and erosion of
rocks or unconsolidated deposits, and is transported by, suspended in, or
deposited by water.
SEDIMENTATION: The deposition of sediment on ground surfaces and in
watercourse.
STORM FREQUENCY: The time interval between major storms of predetermined
intensity and volumes of runoff for which storm sewers and other structures are
designed and constructed to handle hydraulically without surcharging and
backflooding, e.g., a 2-year, 25-year, or 100-year storm.
STORM WATER: That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate
into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels
or pipes into a defined surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration
facility.
SWALE: A shallow drainage conveyance or infiltration area with relatively
gentle side slopes, generally with flow depths less than one foot (1').
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The time period necessary for surface runoff to reach
the outlet of a subbasin from the hydraulically most remote point in the
tributary drainage area.
TREATMENT BMP: A BMP that is intended to remove pollutants from storm water. A
few examples of treatment BMPs are detention ponds, oil/water separators,
biofiltration swales, and constructed wetlands.
UNDISTURBED NATURAL VEGETATION BUFFER: A zone where development activity shall
not occur, including logging, and/or the construction of utility trenches,
roads, and/or surface and storm water facilities. An area that is to be left in
its natural state.
VEGETATION: All organic plant life growing on the surface of the earth.
WATERSHED: A geographic region within which water drains into a particular
river, stream, or body of water.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE C. STORM WATER PLAN CRITERIA
SECTION:
11-13C-1: Objectives Of Plan Submittal
11-13C-2: Storm Water Management Plan Elements
11-13C-3: Plan Review
11-13C-4: Post Construction Drawings
11-13C-1: OBJECTIVES OF PLAN SUBMITTAL:
   A storm water management plan shall be submitted for review and approval by
the planning administrator for all proposed development activities within their
jurisdiction (except as specifically exempted). This plan shall describe the
proposed development with emphasis on the storm water control methods which are
planned to meet the provisions of the performance standards stated above and
any IC barriers already existing or required. Each submitted plan shall satisfy
the following objectives:
   A.   Answer the question: How are the features and systems going to work,
and thus provide a basis from which the planning administrator can review and
approve storm water drainage systems.
   B.   Identify the individual who can interpret the design for which he or
she is responsible (plan documents shall be stamped by a qualified, licensed
professional).
   C.   Convey the design of the storm water control system(s) to the builder
(contractor) and building inspectors.
   D.   Provide a record for present and future development owners to maintain
and perpetuate the drainage systems and for the planning administrator to
monitor their functioning and effectiveness.
   E.   Provide a record of any barrier alterations or additions for PHD's
tracking system, present and future development owners, and utilities.
   The frequency and difficulty of future maintenance should be minimized by
thorough consideration of all possible failures in the system during design and
what would be required to correct the problem. Design adjustments to ease
maintenance should be a major consideration.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13C-2: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN ELEMENTS:
Submitted storm water management plans shall have the following parts:
   A project summary with design calculations;
   Vicinity drainage plan;
   A site plan;
   An erosion and sedimentation control plan;
   A barrier option plan (BOP), including access control;
   A contaminated soil disposal plan;
   An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan;
   A dust control plan.
Specific contents of each of these parts are given below. A summary checklist
of required plan contents is presented in article H of this chapter. All or
most of these elements may be required as part of the ICP permitting process.
Separate plans may not be required by the planning administrator.
   A.   Project Summary And Design Calculations: This part of the storm water
management plan shall present, in text form, an overview of the proposed
project. Pertinent details include site acreage, a summary of the planned
development (number of units, type of construction for instance), proposed
construction schedule (with anticipated start and completion dates) and any
design problems or constraining environmental conditions that are anticipated
or have been encountered. Any pertinent information which supports the design
calculations should also be included in this part. For example, each
development proposal should include a list of appropriate soil characteristics
(soil erodability factors, engineering properties, lead levels in ppm, soil pH,
etc.) for all soil types found (or expected) on the site from the USDA soil
conservation service "Interim Soil Survey Of Silver Valley Area Idaho" and any
site specific soil data which is available or necessary. Site specific soil
test results for metal contamination may be required by PHD for development or
improvement plans submitted for locations within the boundaries of the site.
Test results for many locations within the site are on file with the PHD and
may be used for submittal purposes if no substantial changes have occurred on
the location since the test was performed. A new set of tests must be conducted
in compliance with the sampling analysis protocol (SAP) on file with PHD.
   The plan submitted shall present (in an organized manner with references to
the plan drawings where appropriate) all pertinent calculations performed for
the determination of the required size of the storm water controls system
elements. Included in this category is an analysis of off site flow upstream of
the site, a determination of pre and post development runoff from the site
(both total volume and peak flow) with the associated volumes of expected
sediment generation; grassed infiltration area and detention/retention facility
capacities and infiltration rates; swale, ditch, culvert and pipe system
capacities and velocities; and any other appropriate design detail.
   B.   Vicinity Drainage Plan: A vicinity map, with a scale of 1:24,000 (2,000
feet to the inch) or larger, shall be prepared showing the relationship of the
development site to its surroundings. Storm water drainage patterns (excepted
or observed) shall be shown for all lands, surface waters, and environmentally
sensitive areas within one mile of the site. This map should also include
delineations showing areas of heavy metal contamination within the drainage
pattern of the area to be developed.
   C.   Site Plan: A site plan shall be a scale drawing(s) of not more than one
hundred feet (100') to the inch and shall show property (site) boundaries and
existing natural and manmade features on and within five hundred feet (500') of
the site boundary including roads, structures including collection channels and
pipes, erosion checks, water sources and drainage channels, utilities,
easements, topography (at 2 foot intervals, referenced to datum) soil types,
and vegetative cover types.
      In addition, the plan shall show areas to be cleared of vegetation; where
topsoil is to be removed and stockpiled; where excavation, filling and grading
is planned (with final contours); where structures, paving, utilities,
barriers, lawns, and landscaping are planned; anticipated post construction
runoff patterns, and storm water control features. The storm water control
features shall further show (either on the plan or attached) profile/cross
sections, bottom elevations, temporary and permanent IC barrier locations and
cross sections, slopes and lengths of swales and open ditches; sizes, type,
invert areas, detention (retention facilities and other storm water controls
with references to appropriate capacity calculations); and bottom elevations
and dimensions of any off site drainage channels into which overflow on site
storm water controls will pass. The plan shall also show storm water easements
as described in article E of this chapter.
   D.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: An erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be submitted and be approved prior to the initiation of any
site clearing, excavation, grading, or other development activity. The theory
and application of erosion and sedimentation control, as well as required
elements are discussed in article D of this chapter.
   E.   Barrier Option Plan (BOP): A barrier option plan detailing the
condition of the soils on the site, including test results from a qualified lab
or agency showing the types and concentrations of heavy metals present and the
pH may be required by PHD. The types and locations of existing IC barriers,
areas most likely to become contaminated if soil migration occurs and the uses
of those areas, temporary IC barriers to be used during the construction phase
including a maintenance plan, and permanent IC barrier designs may also be
required for review. Details and cross sections will be required for all soil
cap barriers and shall conform to the minimum standards shown in the barrier
performance standards. Details of any temporary or permanent access control for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be included in the BOP. This will
include a plot plan showing access and egress locations, staging sites,
decontamination locations, fencing, and public detours. More information
concerning the requirements of this plan are specified in article D of this
chapter.
   F.   Contaminated Soil Disposal Plan: A plan and schedule for removing,
handling, transporting, and disposing of any contaminated soils is required for
sites which have lead levels in excess of the action levels listed in the
environmental rule and the institutional controls program; barrier design
criteria and permitting requirements (ICP;BDC&PR). Soils with lead levels
exceeding one thousand (1,000) ppm must either be off-hauled to the PHD
approved soil repository or used as fill material under a barrier. An equipment
decontamination plan to ensure that no contaminants are tracked off of the job
site by equipment or vehicles and a source for any imported borrow material
(including soil tests) may also be required. More information concerning the
requirements of this plan are specified in article D of this chapter.
   G.   Operation And Maintenance Plan: An operation and maintenance plan shall
be required for all developments describing the planned efforts which will be
followed to ensure future functioning of constructed storm water controls and
institutional controls as they relate to storm water management. This also will
be reviewed and approved separate from the storm water management plan.
Maintenance efforts should include annual inspections, replacement of damaged
vegetation in grassed infiltration areas, replacement of eroded soils in
channels, repair of any damaged IC barriers, schedule of sediment removal from
control structures with associated disposal protocol, and remediation of any
contaminated soils which may have resulted from a damaged IC barrier. Other
efforts and specific requirements of operation and maintenance plans are given
in article E of this chapter.
   H.   Dust Control Plan: If the proposed project involves the use of heavy
equipment for the purpose of earthwork, a dust control plan may be required by
PHD. The plan must detail a realistic work schedule for all activities which
will create airborne dust and the means by which the contractor or on site
agent plans to control it. More information concerning the requirements of this
plan are specified in article D of this chapter.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13C-3: PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Two (2) sets of prints of the plan drawings and two (2) sets each of
the project summary and design calculations, erosion and sedimentation control
plan, IC barrier protection and soil handling plan and operation and
maintenance plan, each signed and stamped by the design professional, shall be
submitted to the planning administrator for review and approval. Acceptance of
the submitted materials shall be based on the determination that the proposed
development is in compliance with the storm water ordinance. One marked up set
of prints and plans plus written comments/questions will be returned to the
applicant.
   B.   Engineered submittals will be reviewed by a qualified professional
engineer. If any of the parts of the plan are returned for corrections or
additional information, changes must be marked or highlighted in color on
revised copies and returned. The colors red and yellow are reserved the
planning administrator's use. The date that changes are made must be clearly
indicated.
   C.   To help expedite the review of a development plan, the sponsor and/or
his designer may request a meeting with the planning administrator following
receipt of initial review comments. However, prior to such a meeting, the
sponsor and his designer shall review all initial comments and be prepared to
discuss alternate solutions.
   D.   A copy of the approved plan must be on site whenever construction is in
progress. During any aspect of site development, if field conditions prove to
be substantially different from conditions assumed by the design professional,
such that storm water controls may not function as planned, the approved plan
will be deemed invalid. Revised portions of the plan shall be submitted for
review and approval, prior to resuming construction work. Any deviation from
the approved plan shall be approved in writing by the planning administrator
prior to further work.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13C-4: POST CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS:
   Prior to acceptance of plat improvements, release of bond, issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, or final sign off by the planning administrator, a
postconstruction drawing(s) shall be submitted by the applicant's design
professional to the planning administrator. All substantive differences from
the original, approved, design drawing(s) shall be approved and a reproducible
copy of the accepted drawings shall be labeled "POSTCONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS". The
following statement shall be lettered on these drawing(s) and stamped and
signed by the design professional certifying the postconstruction drawing(s):
I have reviewed the construction and find it to be in substantial conformance
with the approved plans.
   A postconstruction drawing(s) shall be submitted in timely manner following
the completion of construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
without the submission and approval of a postconstruction drawing(s).
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE D. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN CRITERIA
SECTION:
11-13D-1: General Requirements And Definition
11-13D-2: Temporary Erosion And Sedimentation Controls
11-13D-3: Permanent Erosion And Sedimentation Controls
11-13D-4: Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan Requirements
11-13D-5: BOP Requirements
11-13D-6: Contaminated Soil Disposal Plan
11-13D-7: References
11-13D-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DEFINITION:
   A.   A storm water drainage control system shall be provided before, during,
and after all pertinent land disturbance or construction. The goal of this
system is to minimize, to the maximum extent possible, the effect that
sediments and storm water runoff (including snow melt) can have on ground water
and surface water quality or on public or private downstream property,
especially with respect to heavy metal contaminant migration.
   B.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required to be
submitted to, and approved by, the planning administrator prior to the
initiation of any site clearing, excavation, construction, or other development
activity. This plan will address both temporary (primarily construction
related) and permanent erosion controls. Specific erosion/sedimentation
controls shall be consistent with those described in the Panhandle Area
Councils' "Handbook Of Best Management Practices For Storm Water Management And
Erosion Sedimentation Control Revised For The Environmental Conditions Of The
Bunker Hill Superfund Site". An approved erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall represent the minimum requirements for anticipated site conditions.
Additional erosion and/or sedimentation controls may be required in the event
of unexpected storm occurrences, repair, or maintenance of existing systems,
temporary or permanent barrier protection, or replacement of nonfunctioning
systems.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, "erosion" is considered to mean the
detachment and movement of soil or rock as a result of the action of water,
wind, ice, gravity, or human activities. "Sedimentation" shall mean the
deposition or accumulation of sediment (soil, dust, debris, or other materials)
on ground surfaces and in watercourses.
   D.   Note the suggestions and recommendations made herein are not intended
to limit, in any way, the use of the best available technology on achieving
erosion and sedimentation control. However, for other runoff control techniques
which are proposed for use in the erosion and sedimentation control plan, it
may be required to show that equivalent control or treatment can be achieved
utilizing alternatives not described.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13D-2: TEMPORARY EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS:
   A.   Prior to any clearing or grading for any land disturbance or
development which falls under the authority of the city of Kellogg storm water
management ordinance, devices or structures which shall intercept and collect
all runoff from (or flowing across) the proposed disturbed areas shall be
installed or constructed. This interception and collection shall make use of
best available runoff management practices, and shall preclude the direct,
uncontrolled discharge of sediment laden runoff to downstream properties, and
provide for the collection of sediment particles on site prior to runoff
discharge off site.
   B.   It is recognized that sediment removal efficiencies of temporary runoff
collection devices will vary depending on soil type and other factors. Very
fine grained suspended sediment carried in runoff may not be stopped by the
required interception and collection. In addition to causing turbid conditions
in water bodies, this fine sediment can carry a significant level of heavy
metal contaminants, nutrients, and other pollutant which can harm water
quality, pollute neighboring soils, and even pose significant health risks.
While higher sediment removal efficiencies can be achieved by increasing the
size or complexity of the collection devices or structures, one hundred percent
(100%) sediment removal cannot realistically be expected from temporary
sedimentation controls. As a result, other measures aimed at reducing the
initial erosion shall be included in the erosion and sedimentation control
plan. The focus of these measures shall be all denuded and graded areas, soil
stockpiles, water bodies, or otherwise exposed contaminated soils.
   C.   Storm water runoff from active construction sites can be effectively
intercepted and collected using earthen berms, straw bales, silt fences, and
other techniques described in the handbook of best management practices. For
sites of less than five (5) acres, located more than one-quarter (1/4) mile
from a designated surface water or environmentally sensitive area, temporary
sediment traps are recommended and will likely be required (based on the
potential for erosion, sedimentation, and soil contamination problems in the
site area). While specific design details are presented in the handbook, some
general, but important, considerations are given below:
      1.   Any barrier, berm, or structure forming a sediment trap shall be
located to provide for maximum volume capacity for trapping sediment behind the
structure and for greatest ease of cleanout.
      2.   Sedimentation traps shall provide a minimum of one foot (1') below
the outfall (overflow) elevation of cleanout.
      3.   The sediment traps shall be located as close as possible to the
disturbed area.
      4.   Runoff from undisturbed areas should be excluded from the sediment
trap to the extent possible.
      5.   No contaminated soil shall be left exposed to a storm event of any
kind. Work shall be done in such a fashion that soil exposed during the day is,
at a minimum, covered with a synthetic membrane (6 mil poly tarp) at the end of
the day if precipitation is expected.
      6.   Each sediment trap shall be inspected after significant runoff
events to check for damage or operational problems. Sediment shall be removed
from traps when it fills half (1/2) of the constructed capacity and disposed of
in an appropriate fashion (at a PHD approved repository). All collected
sediments will be considered, until demonstrated otherwise, to be contaminated
and shall be disposed of at the Page site. Access to the Page site will be
allowed via PHD.
      7.   Sediment traps should be used where they will see two (2) years or
less of service. Once the contributing drainage area has been stabilized, the
sediment traps should be removed.
      8.   For sites of greater than five (5) acres, or where the distance to a
designated surface water is less than one-quarter (1/4) mile, or for permanent
runoff control, sedimentation basins or detention ponds may be required based
on local erosion/sedimentation and contaminant migration potential (see below).
      Many runoff controls described in the handbook are appropriated for use
in controlling the initial detachment of soils or rock that occurs in the
erosion process. One very basic technique which should be inherently obvious to
all site developers and storm water control engineers is the preservation of
existing vegetation. A stable plant cover, in a healthy condition, will
preclude erosion where it provides seventy five to one hundred percent
(75–100%) cover 1 . Preservation of natural and/or restorative vegetation shall
be considered during the planning and design stages of a development and areas
to be preserved shall be indicated on the erosion and sedimentation control
plan (see below). Further, designated preserve areas must be fenced to protect
them from damage by construction equipment.
   D.   Other runoff controls which are recommended for erosion control are
mulches, pervious covers (jute/cotton woven netting), impervious covers (the
most effective inexpensive means of protecting exposed contaminated soils from
precipitation), and filter fabric silt fences. Whichever of these, or other,
runoff and erosion controls are used, they should be maintained and left in
place until the construction site or other disturbed area is permanently
stabilized and all permanent barriers are in place.
   E.   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization of graded areas, denuded
areas, and soil stockpiles must be applied within two (2) weeks after initial
clearing 2 . If there is greater than a thirty percent (30%) chance of a
precipitation event of more than 0.25 inch expected within that two (2) week
period, interim measures such as plastic tarps and silt fences should be used.
Although this is a nonenforceable requirement by virtue of the precipitation
probability, it is incumbent upon the contractor or owner to make a reasonable
attempt to stay abreast of weather forecasts and make an appropriate effort to
ensure that the site is protected from any significant precipitation.
   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization shall be performed as soon as
possible after initial soil disturbance. Applicable practices include
vegetation establishment, mulching, and early application gravel base on areas
to be paved. Soil stabilization measures should be appropriate for the time of
year, site conditions, and estimated duration of use (for example winter
grading with hydroseeding will not be allowed).
   F.   A final requirement which is primarily related to construction
activities is the transportation or tracking of soils (mud) from work sites by
vehicles, particularly in areas where heavy metals are present in the soil.
Wherever construction vehicle access routes intersect paved public roads,
provisions must be made (in the erosion and sedimentation control plan) for
control of this. While daily street sweeping can be effective in limiting this
movement of soils off site, temporary rock construction entrances are generally
more effective and less labor intensive (see handbook). In the case of job
sites with contaminated soils, all vehicular traffic which comes into contact
with the contamination must be made free of mud, dust, or other incidental dirt
before leaving the site in order to control migration of the contaminants to
clean or remediated areas. (A detailed description of decontamination
procedures is to be included in the BOP for PHD's review.) This process is
simplified if a rock pad is established on a portion of the job site and is
used as a staging area for employee parking, deliveries, personnel and
equipment decontamination, fueling and any other general site access. The pad
may be kept and incorporated later into the project as part of a road base or
building pad (e.g., covered by a permanent barrier) or it must be removed and
treated as contaminated material.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2D-7A of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2D-7B of this article.
11-13D-3: PERMANENT EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS:
   A.   General: When erosion and sedimentation control plans are prepared they
must consider potential erosion for the development "in perpetuity".
Fortunately for developers, the risk of erosion and resultant sedimentation,
either on or off site, diminishes when the soils become stabilized. Soil
stabilization can be accomplished by establishing vegetation or covering with
pavement, structures or other permanent impervious barrier. The preferred
method of soil stabilization (where structures are not to be placed) is by
vegetation since this allows the soil to maintain its natural absorptive and
purifying characteristics. This stabilization should take place as soon as
possible following the initial disturbance.
      The following is a list of considerations that must be addressed, where
appropriate, for adequate long term control of erosion on a site:
      1.   Permanent Vegetation: Establish perennial, herbaceous vegetation
(grass) on disturbed area in the maximum extent possible. As shown in article F
of this chapter, grassed areas are extremely beneficial in absorbing moisture
in rainfall and snow melt and in filtering runoff as it percolates to the
ground water. Grasses and other types of vegetation can be applied effectively
as seed; with mulch, fertilizer and other additives recommended to protect and
enhance the initial growth. Care should be taken with all fertilizer
applications to prevent its wash off and transport to surface water bodies.
Grass can also be applied as sod, which is appropriate on steep slopes, and for
late season applications. It is important, however, to select the proper
vegetation for the intended uses of an area, particularly in areas where the pH
restricts growth for many species.
      2.   Vegetative Buffer Strips: In order to provide for short and long
term protection of existing, adjacent watercourses, water bodies or wetlands,
vegetated buffer (or filter) strips shall be created and/or protected and
maintained. Buffer strips shall consist of grass or other close growing
vegetation designed to receive overland flow. The width of the buffer shall be
sufficient to prevent erosion, trap sediment in overland flow, provide access
to water body and allow for periodic flooding without damage to structures.
Generally, good performance for pollutant removal can be expected if the buffer
is fifty (50) to seventy five feet (75') wide with an additional four feet (4')
for each one percent (1%) slope at the site 1 . Specific proposed widths will
be evaluated on a case by case basis.
      3.   Watercourses:
         a.   Natural watercourses (channels carrying natural drainage on an
intermittent or infrequent basis) should be avoided during clearing and site
development. However, if these areas do become impacted they must be restored
and revegetated using natural plant species to the extent possible. Temporary
erosion controls (jute netting for instance) will be required within one week
after completion of work and during the establishment of a permanent vegetative
cover. All soils disturbed during construction should be stabilized within
fourteen (14) days of initial disturbance. Any contaminated soils within the
naturally established stream environment, as defined by the handbook, which
have been exposed during development shall not be left subject to any storm
event in excess of 0.25 inch, to the extent that weather predictions can be
followed, and shall be covered by a temporary impervious synthetic membrane
(such as 6 mil poly tarp) if such an event is predicted. This practice is to be
continued until all permanent barriers and erosion control measures have been
constructed. Any contaminated soils which have been removed must be properly
disposed of at a PHD approved soil repository.
         b.   Artificial watercourses such as storm water conveyance channels,
grassed swales and gutters must be designed with short and long term erosion
controls in mind. Generally it is recommended that these "structures" be grass
lined as this provides for percolation and filtration of a portion of the
runoff flow. Grassy vegetation also tends to slow the flow and this dampens the
peak flows to downslope areas. Vegetative cover in channels and swales will
naturally tend to reduce runoff velocities but suitable grade must be designed
which is favorable to growth of the cover and which provides velocities not
greater than four (4) to six feet (6') per second 2 . Rigid lining of any
artificial watercourse such as gunite or concrete shall be constructed to
ensure that it is not damaged by frost heave. Specific designs will be
evaluated on a case by case basis by a professional engineer. The planning
administrator may elect to share any engineering review to limit the cost.
Review costs, however, will be borne by the applicant. Other design
considerations are detailed in the handbook.
      4.   Detention And Retention Basins:
         a.   The most common "low structural" best management practice for
storm water control is detention storage 1 . Storage in depressions or actual
detention basins reduces peak runoff flows and treats the runoff by
sedimentation and percolation. Detention refers to the temporary or partial
storage of storm flows, so detention basins would have an overflow outlet
structure to allow them to be drained either downslope or subsurface. When
released to surface drainages off site, detained water shall be released in a
manner approximating the predevelopment, natural flow of runoff. Retention on
the other hand is the complete or permanent storage of storm water. Retention
basins could be larger structures at the end of a runoff collection system or
network, or they could be smaller depressions providing "off line" storage. The
treatment mechanisms in retention systems are percolation and
evapotranspiration. Evapotranspiration does not occur in the Silver Valley in
the winter months; therefore, the designer must account for this when
calculating storage volumes. Either detention or retention facilities will be
required in areas of soil contamination to ensure that any incidental sediment
picked up by storm water coming from the developed area is removed before the
water is released to downstream areas. If the soil in the drainage area has
been demonstrated to be clean either by testing or review of PHD data,
detention and/or retention facilities may or may not be required depending on
what the runoff and erosion calculations reveal. Runoff control is mandatory.
      b.   Both detention and retention facilities can be either wet or dry
areas. Dry catchment basins can be developed to serve as dual purpose areas,
providing dry weather recreational or aesthetic benefits along with wet weather
runoff storage. Wet ponds or manmade wetlands can provide some recreation and
aesthetic benefits and also a greater degree of pollutant removal. If the
detention or retention facility is to be used for recreation, it must be
demonstrated that the collected sediments have levels below the action level
(1,000 ppm). If sediment levels exceed the action level, then access control
(fencing) must be considered. The maintenance of healthy biological communities
in wet basins can be extremely difficult, however. The banks of detention and
retention basins shall be constructed with a gentle slope into the basin for
safety reasons and to encourage growth of vegetation in wet ponds. Other design
details, especially for embankments (berms) and overflow details shall be as
required in the handbook. Note that natural water bodies and wetlands shall not
be used for storm water runoff storage or treatment.
      5.   Maintenance: All temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation
control practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure the
continued performance of their intended function. A long term maintenance
program must also be outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan and
the operation and maintenance plan (see article E of this chapter) which
includes responsibility for annual inspections, postrunoff event inspections,
access controls, repairs, and liability in the event of downslope damages or
contamination.
      Maintenance efforts may include (but are not limited to) removal and
disposal of sediment from detention or retention basins or ponds, replacement
or vegetation in grassed infiltration areas, buffer strips or watercourses,
repair (filling) of eroded rills or gullies and watering of established
vegetation. Removal of sediments from control structures requires that the
sediments be considered contaminated and disposed of at the Page site via PHD
access or demonstrate by testing that the sediments area free of contaminants
(below 350 ppm lead) and may be disposed of in some other location.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2D-7B of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2D-7C of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2D-7D of this article.
11-13D-4: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   The erosion and sedimentation control plan mirrors in several respects the
storm water management plan, the BOP, and contaminated soil disposal plan
described in article C of this chapter. While the focus is somewhat different,
there are several areas of overlap and duplication. In spite of this, it is the
intention of the planning administrator that the erosion and sedimentation
control plan be a separate document (a plan sheet with notes for example) which
will receive a separate review and approval. This plan will, however, make
reference to the overall site storm water management plan, the BOP, and the
contaminated soil disposal plan where appropriate.
   Each erosion and sedimentation control plan which meets the review
requirements of the planning administrator and all appropriate engineering
reviews may be required to contain complete information on the following
topics:
   A.   Existing site conditions (map at not more than one hundred feet (100')
to the inch).
   B.   Site boundaries.
   C.   Location of existing roads, structures, general vegetation types,
surface water bodies (streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, wetlands) and their
buffers, utilities and easements within five hundred feet (500') of the site
boundary.
   D.   Topography (2 foot intervals for 0–10 percent slope, 5 foot intervals
for 10–30 percent slope, and approximate intervals for slope greater than 30
percent).
   E.   Existing storm water runoff patterns with known or anticipated flow (in
cubic feet per second), volume (cubic feet) and velocity (feet per second)
information.
   F.   Soil type distribution and profiles (with tabulated USDA soil
conservation service "erodability" and "permeability" factors) and any soil
test results showing lead levels present. Soil tests shall be performed per the
soil analysis protocol (SAP) or performed by PHD and the cost borne by the
applicant.
   G.   Proposed site conditions.
   H.   Location of all buildings, structures, and paving (including graveled
walks and driveways). Location of all temporary changes to the land surface:
clearing limits, vegetation preserve areas, soil stockpile areas, temporary
erosion and sedimentation control features, and temporary IC barrier locations
and types (with notes indicating type of facility, construction materials,
dimensions, and holding capacity in gallons per cubic feet).
   I.   Location of all permanent changes to the land surface: cuts
(excavations) and fills (with cross sections), revegetation areas (with type,
size and extent), permanent erosion and sedimentation control areas (with notes
indicating type of facility, construction materials, dimensions and holding
capacity where appropriate), and barriers (types and locations).
   J.   Proposed storm water runoff patterns with anticipated flow, volume and
velocity information.
   K.   Schedule of construction and revegetation work.
   L.   Anticipated starting and completion dates of each phase of work.
   M.   Maintenance/repair schedule and responsibility.
   N.   Routine inspection schedules for during construction and afterward.
   O.   Anticipated maintenance efforts.
   P.   Who will be responsible (legally bound) for long term maintenance
repairs and liability after construction is complete.
   The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted and approved
by the planning administrator prior to the commencement of any work on site.
Failure to comply with this will be cause for enforcement actions as provided
by the storm water ordinance and the PHD.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13D-5: BOP REQUIREMENTS:
   The BOP has overlapping information with other plans required in the overall
storm water management plan but due to the levels of heavy metal contamination
found in the soils in the site and the health problems that they are capable of
creating, it is viewed as prudent, and therefore may be required by PHD, that
this issue be given a plan of its own. This plan will, however, make reference
to the overall site storm water management plan, the erosion and sedimentation
control plan, and the contaminated soil disposal plan where appropriate.
   If the soil on the site tests out below the action levels, one thousand
(1,000) ppm in individual residential yards and three hundred fifty (350) ppm
average over the entire area of a proposed development, no BOP is required for
submittal. There are two (2) areas of concern on a given site; the primary
development location and the adjacent hillside property. Both of these need to
be tested in accordance with the SAP on file with PHD.
   A.   The BOP shall include the following information:
      1.   Soil test results for the site itself showing lead levels at the
required soil depths. Soil sampling and testing methods shall be in accordance
with those laid out in the ICP and SAP and shall be performed by a qualified
lab or provided in the tracking information held by PHD. The developer may use
test results already on file with PHD if they reflect the present condition of
the site.
      2.   Soil profiles and types found on the site as listed by the soil
conservation service in their "Interim Soil Survey Of The Silver Valley Area,
Idaho" in conjunction with a more in depth study by a qualified soil scientist
of the on site if conditions warrant.
      3.   Locations, types, and present condition of all existing barriers on
the site shall be shown on a map of the site (scale not to exceed 100 feet to
the inch). Most or all of the existing conditions should be available through
the PHD tracking system.
      4.   The map shall show all natural drainage features within five hundred
feet (500') of the site including all environmentally sensitive areas
downstream of the site. The map shall also show topographic intervals as
specified in the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
      5.   Locations of all proposed barrier disturbances and/or the exposure
of any previously unexposed contaminated soils.
      6.   Detail drawings, locations, descriptions of, and schedules for
installation, maintenance, and removal of all temporary barriers to be used
during construction.
      7.   Detail drawings, locations, descriptions of all permanent barriers
to be installed. A long term maintenance and inspection plan shall also be
included.
      8.   Personal protective measures, including apparel, equipment,
sanitation, and safety zones to be taken by employees during all activities
involving exposed contaminated soils.
      9.   Any other requirements mandated by the PHD or IDHW-DEQ regarding
environmental safety.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13D-6: CONTAMINATED SOIL DISPOSAL PLAN:
   A.   Disposal of contaminated soils must be done in an approved manner and
location in order to minimize the migration of soil contaminants and maintain
the integrity of the barrier system. If the excavation involves less than one
cubic yard of residential soil, PHD will provide a container for the soil and
will collect it for disposal at the Page soil repository or other PHD approved
location. This service is free of charge. If the excavation exceeds one cubic
yard, it becomes the responsibility of the property owner to remove the soil
and transport it for disposal. There will be no charge for dumping. Access to
the repository site will be arranged through the PHD.
   B.   The following elements are required in a submittal if any soils are to
be excavated and removed. Some of these elements are required for other
portions of the storm water plan and may be referred to instead of resubmitted.
      1.   Calculations determining the amount of contaminated soil to be
removed.
      2.   A plan explaining the process to be used for soil removal,
transporting, and disposal, including equipment to be used.
      3.   An equipment decontamination plan showing design details. It is
recommended that this be done over a pad of crushed rock in an area which will
later be paved (for road or driveway) and maintained as a barrier zone. All
decontamination procedures must comply with those outlined in the ICP;BDC&PR.
      4.   A detailed dust control plan and schedule for the duration of the
project per the ICP;BDC&PR.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13D-7: REFERENCES:
   A.   Soil Conservation Service. Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
Technical Release No. 55. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
(1975).
   B.   Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Protecting Water Quality in Urban
Areas (1989).
   C.   Wanielista, M.P. Stormwater Management: Quantity and Quality. Ann Arbor
Science, Ann Arbor, MI (1979).
   D.   Field, A., A.N. Tafuri and H.E. Masters. Urban Runoff Pollution Control
Technology Overview. Report No. EPA-600/2-77-047. Office of Research and
Development U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1977).
   E.   Final Commercial Properties Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   F.   Final Residential yards Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   G.   Final Rights-Of-Way Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   H.   Institutional Controls Program for the Bunker Hill Superfund Site,
Regulatory and Performance Standards Component, September 20, 1993; Murray
Lamont & Associates, Inc.
   I.   Interim Soil Survey of Silver Valley Area, Idaho, Part of Shoshone
County, June 1989; Soil Conservation Service.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE E. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN CRITERIA
SECTION:
11-13E-1: General Requirements
11-13E-2: Storm Water Easements
11-13E-3: Plan Criteria
11-13E-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   All storm water runoff controls and permanent erosion/sedimentation controls
which are approved by the planning administrator shall be maintained and
operated to function as if they were designed "in perpetuity". To ensure this,
an operation and maintenance plan shall be required to be submitted and
approved prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or acceptance of plat
improvements or final sign off by the planning administrator.
   It is acknowledged that development designers and contractors are not
responsible for long term functioning of constructed storm water controls.
Further, landowners and agency personnel change over time make record keeping
and management of critical importance to the achievement of this goal. For this
reason the operation and maintenance plan must be prepared by the project
design engineer and must be tied to each successive property owner through the
establishment of storm water easements which are recorded on the property title
(deed).
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637. 4-9-2025)
11-13E-2: STORM WATER EASEMENTS:
   All storm water control facilities (swales, grassed infiltration areas,
detention/retention ponds, underground piping, etc.) and natural drainage
channels shall be located in dedicated storm water easements. Both storm water
facilities and their respective easements shall be shown on the final
postconstruction drawings (see article C of this chapter). Easements shall be
located to provide access for routine inspection and shall be sized for access
of construction equipment that would be needed for maintenance and repair work
(i.e., generally 8 to 10 feet wide for vehicle access).
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637. 4-9-2025)
11-13E-3: PLAN CRITERIA:
   Due to the wide range of storm water controls that could be built for
development projects within the jurisdiction of the planning administrator,
only general criteria can be stated within. This does not, however, relieve the
project designer from providing a specifically detailed plan which can be
followed to bring about the continual functioning of these controls. The
general criteria are listed and briefly described below.
   A.   Inspection Schedule: Constructed storm water controls (including
permanent erosion/sedimentation controls and barriers) shall be inspected at
least annually for a minimum of five (5) years. After five (5) years, a future
schedule will be determined based on the established history of the controls.
Inspections shall also be performed following precipitation and runoff events
which approach or exceed the "design storm" criteria used to size storm water
controls (see article G of this chapter).
   B.   Contact Person: A person shall be designated (and approved by the
planning administrator) who shall be responsible for operation and maintenance
of storm water controls. For example, this person could be the landowner for
small developments, a maintenance supervisor or groundskeeper for larger
developments, or a public works representative for storm water systems
maintained by the municipality. Provisions shall be made for the specific
responsible person to be designated on the property title (deed).
   C.   Maintenance Activities: Specific maintenance needs of grassed
infiltration areas are presented in article F of this chapter. Also, general
maintenance activities for permanent erosion and sedimentation controls are
given in article D of this chapter. Other maintenance activities which should
be included where appropriate are:
      1.   For grassed infiltration areas, watering, mowing, and fertilizing.
      2.   For grassed infiltration areas, sod renovation.
      3.   For detention basins, sediment and debris removal and appropriate
disposal.
      4.   For detention ponds (permanent wet basins), vegetation harvesting
and sediment removal and appropriate disposal (Page site if contaminated).
      5.   For oil/grit separators, cleaning and sludge disposal plan.
      6.   For storm drain inlets, debris removal.
      7.   For all storm water controls repair of any deterioration which
threatens their structural integrity. These repairs may include replacement of
rock in emergency spillways, reconstruction of dikes or berms, replacement of
catch basin or drywell lids, etc.
      8.   Warning signs ("Dump no waste, drains to groundwater") shall be
maintained on or adjacent to storm drain inlets. (Stencils are available for
loan from Panhandle health district and division of environmental quality.)
      9.   For all barriers, repair any deterioration which threatens their
integrity, or the migration of contaminated sediments.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637. 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE F. ENGINEERING STANDARDS FOR
GRASSED INFILTRATION AREAS (GIA)
SECTION:
11-13F-1: General Considerations
11-13F-2: Specific Recommendations For Grassed Infiltration Areas
11-13F-3: Design Equations And Examples For GIAs
11-13F-4: References
11-13F-1: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   All land developed within the site shall incorporate storm water runoff
treatment facilities to mitigate the potential for ground and surface water
degradation. The preferred treatment mechanism is the infiltration of storm
water runoff through a grassed area. When development of the land is in the
planning stages, these types of controls can easily be included in the design
of green area landscaping. The planning administrator understands that much of
the terrain and soil types within the site do not lend themselves well to use
of GIAs; however, many of the lower areas within the site basin are
appropriate. The use of this technology wherever possible will limit the
further migration of heavy metal contaminants towards the local ground water
supply as well as the Coeur d'Alene River drainage system. Alternative systems
may be used subject to the approval of the planning administrator.
TABLE 5-1: EXPECTED CONTAMINANT REMOVALS
FOR GRASSED INFILTRATION AREAS 1
Total suspended solids                    95%
Total dissolved solids                    50%
Nutrients:             Nitrate        20% �50%
                      Total nitrogen      80%
                      Phosphorus          90%
Metals                                    80%+
Organic chemicals                         60%+
Bacteria                                  99%
 
   B.   The primary principle of storm water controls using natural vegetated
areas (i.e., grassed infiltration areas) is, when runoff passes over or is held
over grass covered permeable soils, the volume is reduced by percolation and
the quality of this percolate is improved by biological, chemical and physical
filtering. A design criterion which must be kept in mind is to provide enough
grassed infiltration area to handle the runoff generated at the site so as not
to overload the infiltration areas. An overload is defined as that volume or
rate of runoff which could damage the grassed infiltration or swale area and
reduce its effectiveness in future runoff events. Numerous possibilities exist
to aid the process of storm water disposal utilizing grassed infiltration
areas.
   C.   Grassed swales and gutters can be used instead of impervious
passageways to transport storm flows 2 . These grassy areas will not only
percolate and filter a portion of the flow, but also slow the flow and thus
dampen the peak flows to downslope areas. Certain types of grasses, termed
"high roughness", help to emphasize the flow delay 3 and may be found in the
soil conservation service's interim soil survey of the Silver Valley area.
Vegetative cover in swales and gutters will naturally tend to reduce runoff
velocities but a suitable slope must be designed which is favorable to the
growth of the cover and which provides velocities not greater than four feet
(4') per second 4 (evaluated on a case by case basis).
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2F-4A of this article.
2    See subsections
  13-2F-4B, C and D of this article.
3    See subsection
  13-2F-4E of this article.
4    See subsection
  13-2F-4F of this article.
11-13F-2: SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GRASSED INFILTRATION AREAS:
   A.   Standards:
      1.   Where the grassed infiltration concept is employed, infiltration of
the required runoff volumes (first 1/2 inch from impervious surfaces) shall be
assured by designing the system to retain the prescribed volume. This is
necessary to ensure that various biological, chemical, and physical processes
active within the root zone act on the required volume of runoff.
      2.   No GIA shall be designed to receive direct runoff from an area
contaminated with heavy metals or low pH unless that area has had barriers
installed or can otherwise be demonstrated not to be a contaminant migration
source. All contaminated areas shall have an appropriate barrier(s) to prevent
direct contact with storm water or all runoff from such areas shall be directed
through a detention/containment facility with a sediment trap or other approved
method of sediment detention.
      3.   The GIA needs to be situated on a good soil mantle which allows the
grass to grow and should not have to be fertilized. The subsoil underlying the
infiltration area should not be compacted during or subsequent to construction
or its ability to pass water could be severely compromised. High permeability
soils (silty sand to sandy soils are preferable) underlying the topsoil mantle
are recommended of the GIA is to pass water at a reasonable rate.
      4.   The surface area required for GIA installation is dependent on the
flooded depth. The design of the surface area of the grassed infiltration area
is to be determined using the volume of the runoff, received from the developed
areas (including, but not limited to, roofs and paved or gravel driveways,
parking areas, and walkways) as well as precipitation falling on the GIA
directly, which produces an average depth of six inches (6") within the GIA.
Flexibility in depth is desirable but there are certain limits which must be
observed. An average flooded depth on the order of four inches (4") is
desirable for three (3) reasons:
         a.   At this flooded depth, the time the grassed area is under water
allows the use of traditional turf grass rather than water tolerant varieties;
         b.   The amount of surface area involved should provide twenty to
thirty (20–30) years of effective contaminant removal in areas which are not
subject to concentrated contaminants. GIAs should be monitored on an annual
basis for build up of heavy metals and the soil in these GIAs should be
removed, disposed of, and replaced when the lead levels exceed the action level
of one thousand (1,000) ppm. Access control (fencing) should be considered if
heavy metal accumulation is expected;
         c.   Shallow grassed areas have a desirable aesthetic appearance.
      5.   Typically, best management practices dictate that the design of GIAs
be sufficient to catch and treat the first one-half inch (1/2") of a storm
event 1 . For storm events producing volumes of runoff in excess of one-half
inch (1/2"), a drywell structure is located within the grassed infiltration
area to handle the excess runoff. In Idaho, these structures are regarded as
class V(e) injection wells and they are discussed in detail in subsection 11-
13G-3F of this chapter.
      Regarding class V(e) injection wells, the Idaho Code (title 42, chapter
39), states: "the ground waters of this state to be a public resource which
must be protected against unreasonable contamination or deterioration of
quality to preserve such waters for diversion to beneficial uses".
"Contamination" as defined by the statute means:
"the introduction into the natural ground waters of any physical, chemical,
biological, or radiological substance or matter in water which may:
Cause a violation of Drinking Water Standards; or
Adversely affect the health of the public; or
Adversely affects a designated and protected use of the State's ground water."
      6.   Permitting of class V(e) shallow injection wells (drywells) is not
required; however, they must be inventoried (registered) with IDWR. They are
also subject to IDHW rules for individual subsurface sewer disposal systems.
      7.   Because of these restrictions, other types of overflow controls may
be required in conjunction with GIAs. Within the site it may be more desirable
to divert any overflow into the natural surface drainage system than into an
injection well in order to safeguard the quality of the ground water. This
depends on the quality of the storm water entering the GIA. Factors such as
ground level soil quality in the upstream areas, barrier condition and
effectiveness, environmental sensitivity of the downstream areas, and soil
drainage and filtration capabilities at drywell depth must be considered in
determining which approach to take. PHD and IDWH-DEQ should be consulted to
help resolve this question if it arises.
      8.   Within the site, GIAs shall be designed to store and treat the first
one-half inch (1/2") (0.04 feet) of runoff. Following the requirements stated
in article G of this chapter, however, the GIA and adjacent land and
improvements shall not be damaged in any manner by the peak runoff flow from a
25-year storm event. In areas where barrier erodability and integrity is an
issue (soil barriers especially), the design storm shall be a 50-year event.
      9.   Grassed infiltration areas shall be a maximum of eight inches (8")
deep, calculated as the difference between the low point of the grassed
infiltration area and the inlet of the overflow structure. The GIA's cross
sectional area shall be flat bottomed, having a permissible average depth of
six inches (6"). Use of GIAs with a triangular, elliptical, or rounded cross
sections should be avoided. Swales with rounded shaped cross sections may be
used for conveyance of the storm water provided the swale's area is not used in
the calculation for the percolation area for the GIA. The maximum side slope
for a GIA shall be three (3) horizontal to one vertical (3:1). Lower side
slopes of four (4) horizontal to one vertical (4:1) or five (5) horizontal to
one vertical (5:1) are preferred. Consideration should be given to integrating
the GIA into the overall landscape design in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
      10.   The ICP may require soil tests to ensure that the soil is capable
of assimilating the contaminants in the runoff and will percolate the runoff at
an acceptable rate (i.e., that which will infiltrate the given depth of water
in a 24 hour period under optimum, nonfrozen conditions).
      11.   One test each for cation exchange capacity (CEC) 1  and soil
organic matter 2  may be required for each GIA of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet or less. As additional set of tests may be required for
each additional two thousand (2,000) square feet or fraction thereof. Tests
shall be performed on a well mixed composite sample consisting of the top six
inches (6") of soil from at least four (4) cores uniformly distributed over the
infiltration area. If the average cation exchange capacity is fifteen (15)
milliequivalents per one hundred grams (100 g) or more, or the soil is two
percent (2%) organic carbon or more, the soil will be considered suitable for
storm water treatment. Test results shall be reported in the storm water
management plan (see article C of this chapter).
      12.   Where existing data is sufficient to assure that the soil type on
the site meets the requirements for contaminant removal and percolation (as
described above), the planning administrator may waive the testing
requirements.
      13.   To handle runoff volumes greater than that from the first one-half
inch (1/2"), a drywell or overflow structure should be placed at a level
equivalent to the ponded depth of the storm water runoff, in a static
condition, received from the first one-half inch (1/2"). The overflow or
drywell inlet should be located near the inlet of the ponded area, off to one
side of the flow pattern. This will preclude the mixing of the high pollutant,
"first flushed" ponded water with more dilute continued runoff in the
infrequent case of a storm event above the design storm value. If an overflow
diversion to the natural drainage system is being used, it should be located in
a similar fashion within the GIA to avoid sending the "first flushed" water
downstream. When the inlet structure is located within the GIA, the slopes
around the inlet shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1).
The drywell or structural system constructed to handle the excess volume of
runoff shall be designed in conformance with the standards in article G of this
chapter (and the handbook). When drywell structures are used in combination
with GIA storage, a simplified routing technique, known as the bowstring method
for detention basin design, can sometimes be used to reduce the number of
drywells required 1 .
      14.   If additional ponded depth over four inches (4") is designed, it
should be recognized that the life of the grass in the infiltration area may be
shortened. The developer may want to increase the surface area (lower the
flooded depth) to extend the life span of the infiltration area. Properly
designed, a GIA should provide twenty to thirty (20–30) years of effective
contaminant removal in areas where there are no concentrated levels of
contaminants. Effective GIA contaminant removal life span within the site may
be much shorter and should be monitored regularly.
   B.   Maintenance:
      1.   Sediment Removal: Proper maintenance of GIAs is critical. The
infiltration areas should be inspected by the owner (or assignee approved by
the planning administrator, see article E of this chapter) semiannually as a
minimum and after major storm events which approach or exceed the design storm
event. Sediment removal should be accomplished when the sediment is dry enough
to crack and readily separates from the floor of the basin. Proper handling and
disposal (at the Page site) methods for the collected sediments shall be
adhered to.
      2.   Grass Maintenance: The sod or grass should be maintained as needed
to control weed growth and maintain the health of the grass. This will include
mowing and minimal amounts of fertilizer. (Chemical fertilizers or pesticides
shall not be used within vegetated buffer zones or otherwise within 100 feet of
permanent surface waters.) It is preferable that the soil mantle provide the
nutrients necessary for the health of the grass to avoid the potential for
leaching from the fertilization process. Selection of the grass in the design
process should include consideration of those varieties of grass which are
suited to the site's climatological and soil conditions, providing low
maintenance, drought resistance, low pH tolerance, or other desirable
characteristics (i.e., red top, Timothy, Canada bluegrass, carrex spp.) 1 .
      3.   Renovation:
         a.   When the GIA has reached the end of its useful life, it shall be
renovated. The useful life will be considered to have ended when water remains
standing in the GIA more than seventy two (72) hours following the end of a
runoff event or when the cover material dies, whether due to the build up of
toxic materials in the soil or any other cause, or if soil tests reveal lead
concentrations in excess of one thousand (1,000) ppm. Access control may be
needed if contaminant levels are expected to reach this level frequently or
before soil removal is effected.
         b.   When infiltration fails, renovation shall be accomplished by any
needed action from standard soil aeration to removal of the sod layer,
scarification of the underlying soil, removal and replacement of soil and
replacement of the sod layer.
         c.   When the cover material dies, the sod and at least six inches
(6") of soil shall be removed from the affected area and disposed of at an
approved site. The soil shall be replaced, graded, and a new cover material
planted, or sod applied.
   C.   Roof Runoff: Runoff from the roofs and buildings shall be discharged to
GIAs when possible, rather than into drywells or off site. Expected volumes of
runoff generated from roofs shall be considered in GIA design.
   D.   Sand And Silt Traps: If gravel roads, driveways, or parking areas are
utilized within the development, it will be necessary to install a sand and
silt trap upstream of the GIA. Storm water studies have indicated large
quantities of sand and silt are washed off gravel structures. This phenomenon
could significantly decrease the life of grass percolation areas by covering
grass and filling low areas which would otherwise hold runoff.
   E.   Grassed Swales And Gutters: The use of grassed swales and gutter areas
as a method of conveyance of storm water runoff would, in most storm events,
serve as an additional infiltration area, reducing the volume which would need
treatment in the GIA. Under certain circumstances though, these conveyance
systems could lose their ability to percolate water overloading the GIAs
downstream. In late fall or early spring, frozen soil conditions may not allow
the grassed swales or gutter areas to percolate runoff. In this instance, the
downslope grassed infiltration area will have to be designed with additional
capacity to serve as a storage area for runoff. The use of grassed swale
conveyance should receive additional attention during design and construction
if their area and storage capacity is a factor in the overall GIA. Only those
swales which are flat bottomed and meet the other design criteria for grassed
infiltration areas shall be considered as a part of percolation area.
   F.   Spill Control Requirements: Special considerations need to be addressed
for storm water runoff from areas within commercial and industrial developments
where chemical spills may occur. Specific problem areas include outdoor loading
docks and outdoor chemical storage facilities. Design of facilities for these
situations will be addressed on a site specific basis by the planning
administrator.
      In the event of a toxic material(s) spill within a GIA, the polluted
grass and soil shall be replaced and disposed of in an approved manner. This
accomplishes two (2) goals:
      1.   Removal of the toxic material from the site.
      2.   Removal and replacement of the dead grass to maintain an effective
infiltration area.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2F-4A of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2F-4G of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2F-4G of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2F-4A of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2F-4H of this article.
11-13F-3: DESIGN EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES FOR GIAs:
   A.   Obviously, design of the GIA is site specific. In one development, the
site topography and layout may readily allow the use of regular geometric
shapes for the design of the impervious surface areas or GIAs. In other cases,
the site topography may not allow design using standard geometric shapes or
patterns. The equations listed below or a combination of these equations should
provide a basis for the developer to evaluate the characteristics for
acceptable GIAs given a defined impervious surface on a site specific basis.
See figure 1 for an example of a uniform rectangular GIA.
   B.   As mentioned above, the GIA shall be designed to store and treat the
first one-half inch (1/2") of runoff draining from a developed, impervious
surface area (ISA) from any storm event. Impervious surface areas shall include
paved or graveled roads, driveways, parking area, and walkways, and roof areas.
Using the concept of storage volume as the basis for the GIA design yields the
following equation:
 
           VGIA = R x AISA
Where:
 VGIA = Volume of the GIA, in cubic feet (ft3).
 R    = Depth of runoff, in feet (ft) (i.e., 1/2 inch equals 0.04 feet), and
 AISA = Impervious surface area, in square feet (ft2).
 
      1.   The volume of a GIA, with a flat bottom and uniform width, can be
determined by multiplying the basin cross sectional area by the length of the
basin. In this case, the above equation becomes:
 
            AXGIA x LGIA = R x AISA
Where:
 AXGIA = Cross sectional area of the GIA, in square feet (ft2) and
 LGIA  = Length of GIA, in feet (ft)
 
UNIFORM RECTANGULAR GRASSED INFILTRATION AREA AND IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9b30d26b7abd7091baed27496ab385a516d41727/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1832.png]
 
TRAPEZOIDAL CROSS SECTION
Figure 1 - Example of an impervious surface area and grassed infiltration area
showing characteristics used in design equations.
      2.   If the impervious area and the GIA are rectangular in area and the
GIA has a trapezoidal cross section, the relationship in the above equation
becomes:
  1/2(WT+WB)GIA x DGIA x LGIA = RxWISA x LISA
Where:
 WTGIA = Distance across the top of the GIA, in feet (ft).
 WBGIA = Distance across the bottom of the GIA, in feet (ft).
 DGIA  = Depth of the GIA, at deepest point, in feet (ft).
 LGIA  = Length of the GIA, in feet (ft).
 R     = Depth of runoff, in feet (ft).
 WISA  = Width of the ISA, in feet (ft).
 LISA  = Length of the ISA, in feet (ft).
 
   C.   This will work for a basic calculation of the area. For the final
design the developer should calculate the area based on the actual area of the
circular sector.
   D.   In most cases where GIAs are used along roadsides, the slope limitation
will be the controlling factor in design of the GIA width.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
11-13F-4: REFERENCES:
   A.   Spokane County Engineers, Guidelines for Stormwater Management,
Spokane, WA (1984).
   B.   Wanielista, M.P., Y.A. Yousef, and J.G. Taylor. Stormwater Management
to Improve Lake Water Quality. Report No. EPA 600/2-82-048. Office of Research
and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. (1982).
   C.   Field, R., A.N. Tafuri, and H.C. Masters. Urban Runoff Pollution
Control Technology Overview. Report No. EPA 600/2-77-047. Office of Research
and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. (1977).
   D.   Berwick, R., M. Schapiro, J. Kuhner, D. Leucke and J.J. Winerman.
Selected Topics in Stormwater Management Planning for Residential Developments.
Report No. EPA/2-80-013. Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. (1980).
   E.   Soil Conservation Service, Interim Soil Survey of Silver Valley Area,
Idaho. U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, Washington,
D.C. (1989).
   F.   Wanielista, M.P. Stormwater Management: Quantity and Quality. Ann Arbor
Science, Ann Arbor, MI (1979).
   G.   Page, A.L. (editor). Methods of Soil Analysis, Part II (Chemical
Measurements) Second Edition. American Society of Agronomy, Soil Science
Society of America (1982).
   H.   Bunker Hill Superfund Site Hillside Area Remedial Design Report.
Pintlar Corporation and Jasberg Technical Services, Kellogg, ID (1993).
   I.   Final Commercial Properties Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   J.   Final Residential Yards Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   K.   Final Rights-Of-Way Remedial Design Report for the Bunker Hill
Superfund Site, January 1994; prepared for ASARCO Inc., Hecla Mining Company,
Sunshine Mining Company.
   L.   Institutional Controls Program for the Bunker Hill Superfund Site,
Regulatory and Performance Standards Component, September 20, 1993; Murray
Lamont & Associates, Inc.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE G. ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
FOR RUNOFF CONTROL AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSIS
SECTION:
11-13G-1: Introduction
11-13G-2: Climatic Considerations For Selection Of The Design Storm
11-13G-3: Engineering Standards
11-13G-4: Hydrologic Analysis Methods
11-13G-5: References
11-13G-1: INTRODUCTION:
   As the population density and land values increase, the effects of
uncontrolled runoff become an economic burden and a serious threat to the
health and well being of a community and its citizens. This is especially true
in an area with the environmental circumstances of the site. Therefore, the
focus of storm water management is to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public, and mitigate property damage by reducing the frequency
and severity of flooding, and limit, insofar as possible, the migration of
heavy metal contaminants and their direct contact with the public. Estimating
the frequency and severity of future flooding events makes systematic planning
and installation of structural and nonstructural measures to reduce these
hazards to an acceptable level available to the designer. Additionally,
treatment of storm water to improve its quality is now required at federal,
state, and local levels to control contaminants and prevent degradation of
public water sources (GIAs and sediment removal).
   Studies in other parts of the country indicate that for a basin of one
square mile that is completely storm sewered and whose surface is completely
(or 100 percent) impervious, the mean annual flood (approximately the two (2)-
year flood) is about eight (8) times larger than for the natural basin. The
mean annual flood from a basin of one square mile that is completely storm
sewered but zero percent (0%) impervious is about 1.7 times as large as the
natural basin. The mean annual flood for a basin which is completely impervious
but not sewered is about two and a half (2.5) times as large as for the natural
basin. Information of this type is unavailable regarding discharges from
urbanized areas in Idaho 1 .
   A.   "Precipitation", whether it occurs as rain or snow, is the source of
surface runoff in watersheds. The extent of the storm and the distribution of
rainfall during the storm are two (2) major factors which affect the rate of
peak runoff.
      1.   The storm distribution can be thought of as a measure of how the
rate of rainfall, or "intensity", varies within a given time interval. For
example, within a given twenty-four (24) hour period, a measurable amount of
precipitation may have been recorded. However, this precipitation may have
occurred over the entire twenty-four (24) hour period or just within one hour.
These two (2) scenarios represent entirely different storm distributions.
      2.   The size of the storm is described by the length of time over which
the precipitation occurs, the total amount of precipitation occurring and how
often this same size of storm would be expected to occur (its "frequency"). A
ten years (10)-year, twenty-four (24)-hour storm is a storm producing a
measured intensity of rain in twenty four (24) hours with a ten percent (10%)
chance of occurrence in any given year. Thus a one hundred (100)-year, twenty-
four (24)-hour storm is a storm producing a measured intensity of rain in
twenty-four (24) hours with a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any
year.
      3.   The "time of concentration" is that time it takes for water to
travel from the most distant part of the watershed to the point of interest.
The time of concentration affects the peak rate of runoff and shape of the
hydrograph.
      4.   A streamflow or discharge "hydrograph" is a graph or table showing
the flow rate as a function of time at a given location on the stream or for a
watershed. In effect, the hydrograph is "an integral expression of the
physiographic and climatic characteristics that govern the relations between
rainfall and runoff of a particular drainage basin" 2 .
      5.   "Antecedent moisture content" is the existing soil moisture content
resulting from the amount of precipitation occurring during the preceding five
(5) days. This content, especially when close to saturation, is a very
important feature in the process of runoff generation.
      6.   The "infiltration and percolation rates" of soils indicate their
potential to absorb precipitation and thereby reduce the volume of runoff. In
general, the higher the rate of infiltration, the lower quantity of storm
runoff. Fine textured soils such as clay produce a higher rate of runoff than
do coarse textured soils such as gravelly sand.
      7.   The "type of cover" and its hydrologic condition affects the runoff
volume. Vegetation, including the ground litter, forms numerous IC barriers
along the path of the land which slows the water down and reduces the volume of
runoff. Fallow land yields more runoff than forests or grassland for a given
soil type. Development reduces the natural storage and infiltration increasing
the amount of runoff.
      8.   Plants transpire moisture into the atmosphere creating a moisture
deficiency in the soil which must be replaced by some portion of the
precipitation before runoff occurs. The canopy provided by the foliage and
ground litter allow the soil to retain its infiltration potential. Some
moisture is retained on the surface of the foliage, evaporating back to the
atmosphere. Other portions of the intercepted precipitation take so long to
drain from the plants to the soil that it is withheld from the initial period
of runoff.
      9.   "Surface depression storage" begins when the precipitation exceeds
infiltration. "Overland flow" starts when surface depressions are full. The
water in depression storage is not available as direct runoff.
      10.   In wetlands, or on very flat areas where ponding occurs within a
watershed, a considerable amount of surface runoff may be retained in temporary
storage, thus reducing the runoff.
   B.   "Steep and unstable slopes" present additional hydrologic problems. It
should be recognized that while a certain site may be stable under natural
conditions, the same site with steeper slopes may have increased erosion
potential and an unstable slope when the site is developed. Slope and soils are
in balance with vegetation, underlying geologic structure, and the ground and
surface hydrologic environment in its natural, predeveloped state. Any
development will permanently alter this natural equilibrium and may affect the
stability of the slope.
      1.   Slope stability is a relative measure of the earth's resistance to
physical change. Natural processes such as wind, rain, runoff, ground water
conditions, or human influenced processes such as the removal of surface
vegetation or the soil mantle result in erosion, downcutting, slumping, and
sliding of the slope.
      2.   Development design on slopes is influenced by the potential for
damage which result from such processes. The relative risk to life or property
may have no influence on the design or may be so great that development on a
particular site should be abandoned. In all cases, special engineering
considerations should be integrated into development of the site to provide an
acceptable level of risk.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5B of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2G-5H of this article.
11-13G-2: CLIMATIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR SELECTION OF THE DESIGN STORM:
   A.   The general climate of the Idaho Panhandle is transitional between a
north Pacific coastal type and a continental type. The Pacific influence is
particularly noted by an autumn and winter maximum in low type cloudiness and
precipitation. These are enhanced by the mountainous topography and its forced
uplift of moist airflow 1 . Precipitation increases may be expected from this
uplift. In Shoshone County, this orographic effect is strongly evident with
average annual precipitation in the lower valleys of thirty to thirty five
inches (30–35") increasing to fifty five to sixty five inches (55–65") in the
adjacent mountainous area 2 . The cloudiest, wettest months are usually
November, December, and January. (See figure 6-1, the mean annual precipitation
map attached to ordinance 364, appendix B, on file in the office of the city
clerk.)
      1.   a.   In the city of Kellogg between the years of 1905 and 1992,
there were four (4) storm events which exceeded two inches (2") of
precipitation in a twenty-four (24) hour period with the extreme being four
inches (4") on December 9, 1987. The high monthly total in Kellogg was 12.28
inches in December 1933.
         b.   Wallace recorded ten (10) events between 1931 and 1992 which
exceed two inches (2") in a twenty-four (24) hour period with a high of 3.18
inches on November 26, 1960, and a high monthly total of 14.56 inches during
January of 1974.
         c.   Mullan recorded two (2) events between 1972 and 1992 which
exceeded two inches (2") in a twenty four (24) hour period with a high of 3.17
inches on February 16, 1986, and a high monthly total of 10.2 inches in the
month of November 1990. These precipitation totals are in inches of water but
may have come in the form of snow or rain.
      The following twenty-four (24)-hour duration storm event frequencies
shall be used for design purposes in the site:
Table 6-B1: Bunker Hill Area Storm Event Frequency
 
Event Frequency Precipitation Depth
2-year          1.6 inches
10-year         2.4 inches
25-year         2.8 inches
50-year         3.1 inches
100-year        3.6 inches
 
      These event frequencies are from the national oceanic and atmospheric
administration (NOAA) 1973, "Precipitation-Frequency Atlas Of The Western
U.S.", NOAA atlas 2, volume V-Idaho, National Weather Service, Silver Spring,
Maryland. The data is from Kellogg, ID 1933-1954 daily precipitation data,
state climatologist, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID.
      2.   In Idaho, most of the extremely high rates of runoff of record are
caused by intense thunderstorms. Portions of Shoshone County area considered to
be susceptible to flooding from intense thunderstorms and meltoff events. The
south fork of the Coeur d'Alene River creates a substantial floodplain as it
passes through the site and areas of it are designated as such by the national
flood insurance program (NFIP). These storm cells are often small and may be
confined to a small portion of the basin, but produce rates of runoff which are
much higher than typical precipitation events 1 . June, July, and August are
normally the peak months for thunderstorm activity in the Idaho Panhandle with
an average of three (3) thunderstorms per month 2 .
      3.   Occasionally, in the spring climatic conditions (frozen ground,
rising air temperatures, increasing wind velocities, abundant snowpack, and
rain) may combine to produce high rates of runoff. As the temperature warms,
the snow melts, when temperatures drop below freezing again the melt water
freezes in place forming an impermeable frozen barrier. Even the most permeable
alluvial deposits or basaltic surfaces are no longer able to infiltrate runoff.
If additional snowfall or rain follow, high rates of runoff may result (see
figure 6-2 attached to ordinance 364, appendix B, on file in the office of the
city clerk).
   B.   Given the varied topography and precipitation rates within Shoshone
County, the environmental concerns, the susceptibility to flooding from intense
thunderstorms, the possibility of spring flooding from abundant snowfall and
climatic conditions, a peak runoff design storm with a twenty-five (25)-year
reoccurrence level is considered to be prudent for storm water management
designs in areas of the site which do not have soil barriers. All areas within
the site which do have soil barriers must be designed to withstand a storm of
fifty (50)-year reoccurrence.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5C of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2G-5C of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5B of this article.
2    See subsection
  13-2G-5C of this article.
11-13G-3: ENGINEERING STANDARDS:
   The standards established by this chapter are intended to represent the
minimum design standards for the construction of storm drainage facilities and
stream channel improvements. Compliance with these standards does not relieve
the designer of the responsibility to apply conservative, sound professional
judgment to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
These are minimum design standards and should be considered the lowest
acceptable limits in design. Special site conditions and environmental
constraints may require a greater level of protection than would normally be
required under these standards.
   The design policies and standards contained herein are intended to serve as
a basic guide in design work; however, they are not to be considered
inflexible. They are also not intended to be a substitute for engineering
knowledge, experience or judgment. When it is deemed necessary or desirable to
deviate from these design policies and standards, the developer shall submit
plans which show compliance with at least the minimum design standards for
approval from the planning administrator.
   A.   Storm Water Control: The rate of runoff from any proposed land
development shall not exceed the rate of runoff for the design storm prior to
the proposed land development.
      1.   Restriction of storm water runoff on the proposed land development
shall be controlled by structural measures and best management practices
(BMPs). Structural measures include collection systems, conveyance systems and
storage (retention/detention) systems with treatment processes. BMPs are low
structural or nonstructural alternatives designed to control the runoff volume
from the source and improve the runoff water quality. Grassed infiltration
areas are recognized as a nonstructural, low cost BMP, with high levels of
contaminant removal (see article D of this chapter).
      2.   Runoff cannot be diverted in the proposed development and released
to downstream property at locations not receiving runoff prior to the proposed
development unless an easement, consent, and on site retention is provided by
the downstream property owner and approval is granted by the planning
administrator.
      3.   a.   For sites with tributary basins ten (10) acres or less and
slopes of zero to ten percent (0–10%), an allowable runoff rate shall be
limited to the predevelopment peak runoff for a twenty-five (25)-year storm. If
limiting the runoff to this level is unfeasible for some reason, it must be
demonstrated to the planning administrator in detail in the storm water control
plan. Other alternatives shall be discussed and analyzed in detail for possible
downstream locations and repercussions of increased runoff before any permit is
issued to the developer. Construction of structures for controlling any
increase of runoff from a site may be required of the developer by the planning
administrator. The peak runoff rate shall be computed using the rational method
(see subsection 11-13G-4B of this article).
         b.   For sites with tributary basins ten (10) acres or less and slopes
of ten to forty percent (10–40%), an allowable runoff rate shall be limited to
the predevelopment peak runoff for a 50-year storm. Other alternatives shall be
discussed and analyzed in detail for possible downstream locations and
repercussions of increased runoff before any permit is issued to the developer.
Construction of structures for controlling any increase of runoff from a site
may be required of the developer by the planning administrator. The peak runoff
rate shall be computed using the soil conservation service TR-55 method (see
subsection 11-13G-4C of this article).
         c.   For sites with tributary basins greater than ten (10) acres and
slopes of ten to forty percent (10–40%), an allowable runoff rate shall be
limited to the predevelopment peak runoff for a 50-year storm. Other
alternatives shall be discussed and analyzed in detail for possible downstream
locations and repercussions of increased runoff before any permit is issued to
the developer. Construction of structures for controlling any increase of
runoff from a site may be required of the developer by the planning
administrator. The peak runoff rate shall be computed using the soil
conservation service TR-55 method.
      4.   The rainfall intensity shall be obtained from the Idaho
transportation department's intensity-duration-frequency charts or table 6-1.
These charts are based on U.S. weather bureau records. The state of Idaho has
been divided into different intensity-duration-frequency zones (IDF zones). For
the site, the IDF zone E or F may be applicable depending on the geographic
location of the site. A map of Idaho delineating the IDF zones and the IDF
charts for zones E and F are shown in figures 6-3, 6-4, 6-5, 6-6, and 6-7,
respectively.
      5.   Other hydrologic methods may be appropriate for determination of
runoff rate; however, it is strongly recommended that the designer consult with
the planning administrator and all federal, state, or local authorities prior
to beginning hydrology studies for the project if an alternate hydrologic
method is selected.
      6.   Developments shall be engineered and constructed to provide control
of the quality and quantity of storm water runoff during and after
construction. The on site drainage system including conveyance systems,
detention/retention systems, pollution control, and emergency overflow elements
must be properly designed and sized to handle runoff from the site and
conveyance through the site.
      7.   Appropriate easements and rights of way shall be established by the
developer to the satisfaction of the planning administrator through federal,
state and local agencies.
      8.   a.   Off site storm water runoff passing through the site shall be
conveyed by hydraulically adequate conveyance systems and shall pick up any
sediments from the site during its passage through it.
         b.   Off site surface water (streams) entering the site shall be
received and discharged at the existing locations with adequate energy
dissipaters to minimize downstream damage. There shall be no diversion at
either of these points.
      9.   Storm water detention/retention systems and culverts shall be
designed to permit storage and conveyance capacity as required in these
standards. In addition, these structures shall be designed to provide a
satisfactory level of protection for the 100-year storm. This design standard
will assure a level of protection for all habitable structures and assure
reasonable access is available to all habitable structures during the 100-year
storm event.
      10.   Outfalls must conform to the requirements of the planning
administrator and all federal, state, and local authorities.
      11.   For any future developments, class V(e), shallow injection wells
shall be authorized for disposal of storm water runoff provided the effluent
from the well meets the water quality standards set by the department of water
resources under the rules and regulations for "Construction And Use Of
Injection Wells". Attention shall be paid to the surrounding upstream soil
types and the possibility of heavy metal contaminants entering the ground water
through any injection well.
      12.   a.   Any and all stream work shall be consistent with the
requirements of the planning administrator and any or all other regulatory
agencies including, but not limited to, the environmental protection agency,
Idaho department of water resources, Idaho department of lands, Idaho
department of fish and wildlife, Idaho department of environmental quality,
Panhandle health district, and army corps of engineers.
         b.   For purposes of these standards, "stream" shall mean any and all
surface water routes generally consisting of a channel having a bed, banks,
and/or sides in which surface waters flow in draining from higher to lower
land, both perennial and intermittent; the channel, banks, and intervening
artificial components.
      13.   Lands that lie within "flood hazard zones" as delineated on
appropriate maps prepared by the federal insurance administrator, shall comply
with the regulations of the national flood insurance program (NFIP).
      14.   The planning administrator shall be consulted on the availability
and applicability of computer programs for hydraulic design. The Idaho
transportation department maintains a list of applicable computer programs for
hydrologic applications. Programs identified or provided by the planning
administrator or Idaho transportation department may be used for design.
Responsibility for the use of these programs and their accuracy will be borne
by the designer. Programs which have been used to develop the remedial studies
for the site will be considered as acceptable and are as follows:
         a.   U.S. army corps of engineers, "HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package",
1990. (Haestad Methods, Inc.)
         b.   U.S. army corps of engineers, "HEC-2 Water Surface Profiles",
1990. (Haestad Methods, Inc.)
         c.   Haestad Methods, Inc., "Flowmaster Model For Open Channels And
Pressure Pipes".
         d.   Haestad Methods, Inc., "Pondpack Model For Detention Pond
Design".
         e.   Intelisolve, "Hydraflow, Vol. 1 Hydrographs, Vol. II Open
Channels And Vol. IV Sanitary For Piping System Analysis".
         f.   McDonald and Harbaugh, 1988, "MODFLOW, 3-Dimensional Groundwater
Flow Model", USGS.
         g.   Dames & Moore, 1985, "TARGET, Dames & Moore Mathematical Model Of
Groundwater Flow And Solute Transport", October 1985.
         h.   U.S. army corps of engineer waterways experiment station, 1989,
"Hydrologic Evaluation Of Landfill Performance (HELP)", version 2.04.
         i.   Civil Software Design, 1989, "SEDCAD, Version 3.0, Flood
Hydrograph And Sedimentgraph Package" (used for hillside runoff/sedimentation
study).
      Table 6-1 provides the minimum storm design frequency for hydraulic
structures as approved by the planning administrator. The designer may find
that the federal, state, or local ordinances will require more restrictive
design frequencies.
   B.   Storm Sewers: A storm sewer is a system of drainage conduits that
carries surface drainage or street wash, from catch basins or surface inlets,
to an outfall. All storm sewer designs will be based on engineering analysis
which takes into consideration total drainage areas, runoff rates, pipe
capacity, foundation conditions, soil characteristics, pipe strength, potential
construction problems, and any other factors pertinent to design.
      Storm sewer design is based on the calculation of peak runoff from an
area and design of a pipe system to carry the runoff. The peak runoff design
storm shall be the 25-year storm except in areas where soil IC barriers are
present, where the peak runoff design storm shall be the 50-year storm.
      1.   Minimum design standards for storm sewers:
         a.   Future Expansion Of The Site: If it is anticipated that the site
or storm sewer system may be expanded in the future, provisions for the
expansion shall be incorporated into the current design.
         b.   Location Of The System: The location of the storm sewer system as
it relates to the overall site design and delineation of boundaries for
differing regulatory agencies (federal, state, or local) shall be clearly
defined.
         c.   Pipe Alignment: No storm sewer pipe alignment in a drainage
easement shall have its centerline closer than five feet (5') to a private
property line.
         d.   Soil Conditions: Surface and subsurface drainage shall be
provided to assure stable soil conditions necessary for adequate soil bearing
capacity and protection of fills or cuts. Soil contaminant migration due to
surface or subsurface drainage shall be avoided in all circumstances.
         e.   Profile Of Grade For The Storm Sewer: A profile of the pipe
system shall be provided showing invert elevations, manholes, or catch basins
showing top and bottom elevations, existing and finished groundline or grade
elevations, etc.
         f.   Minimum Pipe Slope: Minimum pipe slope shall be used to maintain
minimum velocities of flow. All storm sewers shall be designed and constructed
to give mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two and a half
feet (2.5') per second.
         g.   Minimum Pipe Diameters: The minimum pipe diameter shall be twelve
inches (12") for storm sewers and irrigation systems, except that single
laterals less than fifty feet (50') long may be eight inches (8") in diameter.
Pipe carrying drainage from irrigated lands shall be considered as culverts and
the appropriate minimum size used.
         h.   Inlet Spacing And Capacity: Inlet spacing on roads and highways
shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements of the planning
administrator, and all federal, state, and local authorities.
         i.   Junction Spacing For Catch Basins And Manholes: Catch basins or
manholes shall be provided for breaks in grade, or alignment or along pipe
runs. For pipe runs, junctions shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') for
pipes smaller than forty eight inches (48") or five hundred feet (500') for
pipes greater than forty eight inches (48").
         j.   Grades Through Junctions: Grades through junctions shall be
consistent with the standards of the planning administrator.
         k.   Minor Head Loss Calculations: Minor head loss calculations shall
be included in the storm water management plan. In some cases, head losses
occurring at pipe junctions may not be negligible. The design shall provide
calculations for the head losses in the following cases:
            (1)   Very high velocities with the inlet and outlet pipes forming
a sharp or acute angle at the junction.
            (2)   Changes in pipe diameter.
            (3)   Abrupt changes in slope.
         l.   Outfalls: Outfalls must conform to the requirements of the
planning administrator and all federal, state, and local authorities.
         m.   Siltation Basins: Siltation basins shall be used to prevent
clogging or silting of the storm sewer lines or the migration of silts which
have been contaminated by heavy metals or other substance in the soil and shall
be incorporated with the use of cast metal inlets, concrete inlets, or any
other inlet which does not have a silt basin.
         n.   Project Life: Project life of materials for the purpose of
selecting storm sewer materials shall be one hundred (100) years.
   C.   Culverts: A culvert is a conduit used as an artificial channel under a
roadway or embankment to maintain flow from a natural channel or drainage
ditch. A properly designed culvert will carry the flow without causing damaging
backwater, excessive constriction, or excessive outlet velocities. Designing
culverts involves the determination of design flow, hydraulic performance,
economy, pipe materials, horizontal and vertical location, environmental
considerations, and end designs.
      The culvert design should include the profile of the culvert flow line
(invert), culvert length, allowable headwater depths for the design flood and
the 100-year flood, roadway or embankment cross sections, and a roadway or
embankment profile showing the height of the fill. The hydraulic features of
the downstream controls, tailwater or backwater must be given.
      There are certain cases where hydraulic capacity is not the only
consideration for determining the size of a waterway opening. Fish passage
requirements may dictate a different type of crossing. Wetland preservation may
require a culvert be upsized. The designer shall follow the regulations and
recommendations of the appropriate authority (federal, state, local) and
document the information in the storm water management plan.
      1.   Minimum Design Standards For Culverts:
         a.   Minimum Culvert Size: The minimum diameter of culvert pipes under
the main roadway shall be eighteen inches (18") until a length of seventy feet
(70') is reached. All culverts over seventy feet (70') shall be twenty four
inches (24") or more in diameter or shall conform to the requirements of the
federal, state, or local authority, whichever is applicable. Culvert pipes from
grated inlets or catch basins in the roadway have a minimum diameter of eight
inches (8"). Culvert pipe under driveways, roadways, approaches, and median
drains shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches (8"). Pipe draining
irrigated land shall be sized using the minimum culvert sizes.
         b.   Allowable Headwater: All culverts shall be designed to carry the
design frequency flood with a headwater (HW) depth not greater than 1.25 times
the culvert depth (D). The intent of this limitation is to prevent the
headwater from materially increasing the size of the flooded upstream area
under normal conditions. It must be determined in the field what headwater
depths can be permitted for the design flood and the 100-year flood. Allowable
headwater depths are determined by the field conditions and are not associated
with design criteria.
         c.   Level Of Protection: This design standard shall assure a level of
protection for all habitable structures and assure reasonable access is
available to all habitable structures during the one hundred (100)-year storm
event (i.e., the culvert should pass the 100-year storm without damaging or
eroding the roadway or embankment).
         d.   Depth Of Tailwater: Depth of tailwater is important in
determining the hydraulic capacity of culverts flowing with outlet control.
When the downstream water surface elevation is controlled by a downstream
obstruction or backwater and the tailwater at the outlet of the culvert exceeds
the height of the water outlet for the culvert barrel, the capacity of the
culvert is reduced. Field inspection of all major culvert locations should be
made during project design to evaluate the downstream controls and to assess
the potential discharge capacity of the culvert or the resulting headwater when
a culvert is flowing under the outlet control.
         e.   Velocity In Culverts: Due to its hydraulic characteristics, a
culvert will increase the velocity of flow over that in the natural channel.
High velocities (abrasive velocities) are most critical just downstream from
the culvert outlet where the erosion potential from the energy in the water is
enormous.
         f.   Placement Of Culverts: Culverts shall be placed on grades that
produce a nonsilting or nonabrasive velocity, three (3) to ten feet (10') per
second. Silting velocities may be overcome by raising the inlet of the culvert
above the stream invert to increase the grade and provide a siltation basin at
the inlet. Siltation basins upstream of the inlet may also be provided by
excavating a basin or using a concrete basin. Siltation basins must be large
enough to decrease velocities to two feet (2') per second but shall not short
circuit the flow over the top or along the sides of the embankment. Oversized
culverts may be used where silting will occur to prevent blocking and to
facilitate cleaning.
         g.   Abrasive Velocities: Abrasive velocities may be overcome by
raising the outlet to decrease the grade. Structural plate pipe may be provided
with extra thickness in the bottom plates to account for possible abrasion.
Concrete box culverts and concrete bases for arches may have steel inverts of
rails or beams, or extra slab thickness to resist abrasion.
         h.   Alignment And Grade: Culverts shall generally be placed on the
same alignment and grade as the natural streambed or channel to maintain the
natural drainage system. This avoids creating unnatural ponding at the inlet or
drops at the outlet.
         i.   Embankment Material: The embankment for the culvert shall consist
of nonerodable material and riprap or other outlet protection is essential. The
embankment material should be free draining and capable of withstanding
ponding.
         j.   Culvert Material: Concrete pipe may be used for any grade up to
ten percent (10%). Corrugated metal pipe may be used for grades up to twenty
percent (20%). For grade in excess of twenty percent (20%), the design and
material shall be approved by the planning administrator.
         k.   Minimum Cover: Minimum cover for a culvert within any roadway
embankment shall be one foot (1').
         l.   Constant Flow: Where a pipe flows at least three-quarters (3/4)
full over a period of a month or more during the year, gasketed corrugated
metal pipe (CMP), rubber gasket concrete or plastic pipe shall be required.
         m.   Project Life: Project life of culverts for the purposes of
selecting culvert materials shall be one hundred (100) years.
         n.   Minimum Spacing Of Multiple Culverts: Multiple culverts are
acceptable in special cases, but their general use is discouraged. When
multiple lines of pipe or pipe arch greater than forty eight inch (48")
diameter or span are used, they should be spaced so that the sides of the pipe
or arch are no closer than one-half (1/2) in diameter or three feet (3'),
whichever is less, so that sufficient space for compaction of the fill material
is available. For culvert diameters up to forty eight inches (48"), the minimum
distance between the sides of the pipe shall be no less than two feet (2').
         o.   Camber: If a large amount of settlement is anticipated due to
high fills, it may be necessary to add some camber to the culvert profile to
correct for settlement. A soils engineer shall be consulted at the planning
administrator's request as to the amount of camber which should be placed in a
culvert.
         p.   Moderate/High Fill Culverts: Culverts installed under moderate to
high fills can experience differential settlement. At the pipe ends, there is
no fill, at the centerline of the embankment the depth of the fill is at
maximum. The difference in surcharge pressure at the elevation of the culvert
causes the differential settlement. Consult a soils engineer for design of a
culvert under these conditions.
         q.   Culvert End Considerations: The type of end treatment used on a
culvert depends on many interrelated and sometimes conflicting considerations.
The designer must consider safety, aesthetics, debris capacity, hydraulic
efficiency, scouring, and economics.
            (1)   Projecting Ends: Projecting ends are the simplest and most
economical of all end treatment designs; however, projecting ends provide no
transition to prevent scouring at the outlet and buoyancy may become a problem
at the entrance. Projecting ends shall not be used in a highway "clear zone" as
designated by Idaho transportation department.
            (2)   Beveled End: For culverts thirty inches (30") or less in
diameter, a beveled end section shall be the preferred end treatment. The
standard bevel end section shall not be used on pipes laid on a skew of more
than thirty degrees (30°) from the perpendicular to the centerline of the
roadway.
            (3)   Flared End: A flared metal end section is a manufactured
culvert end that provides a simple transition from the culvert to the streambed
or drainage channel. It provides a hydraulic transition which allows the flow
to spread out and slow down before it is discharged into the watercourse.
Flared ends shall not be used for culverts greater than forty eight inches
(48") in diameter. Flared ends shall not be used in a highway "clear zone" as
designated by Idaho transportation department.
         r.   Headwalls: All pipes larger than thirty inches (30") in diameter
shall be beveled at the entrance to conform to the fill slope and provided with
a concrete headwall. Pipe culverts larger than seventy two inches (72") in
diameter shall have their inlet headwalls beveled, tapered or rounded to
improve the inlet flow characteristics. In addition to the headwall, riprap may
be required by the planning administrator.
         s.   Wingwalls: Wingwalls shall be used on reinforced concrete box
culverts. However, they may be modified for use on circular culverts in areas
with severe scour problems. The purpose is to retain and protect the embankment
and to provide a transition from the channel to the culvert.
         t.   Improved Inlets: When head losses in the culvert become critical,
the designer shall consider the use of the hydraulically improved inlet. These
inlets provide side transitions as well as top and bottom transitions that have
been designed to maximize the culvert capacity. However, it should be noted it
is generally less expensive to increase the size of the culvert by one or two
(2) sizes to achieve the same or greater benefits.
         u.   Energy Dissipaters: When the outlet velocities of a culvert or
storm sewer outfall are excessive for the site conditions, the designer shall
provide energy dissipaters for culvert outlets shall be used to prevent severe
scouring at the outlet. Debris and maintenance problems shall be addressed in
the design.
            (1)   Riprap: Riprap placed at the outlet of a culvert is the
simplest method of handling outlet velocities when the soils are unstable.
            (2)   Special Energy Dissipating Structures: Special energy
dissipating structures, including impact basins and stilling basins, shall meet
the requirements of the planning administrator and any or all federal, state,
or local authorities and shall be approved on a site specific basis.
         v.   Culvert Debris: Debris problems can cause even an adequately
designed culvert to experience hydraulic capacity problems. The culvert site is
a natural location for these materials to settle and accumulate. Debris may
consist of anything from limbs, sticks, orchard prunings to logs and trees.
Silt, sand, gravel, and boulders can also be classified as debris.
            (1)   There is no method to accurately predict debris problems.
Examining maintenance history for similar sites is probably the most reliable
way of determining potential problems. Requirements for debris deflectors,
racks, basins, or spillways will be addressed on a site specific basis by the
planning administrator.
   D.   Open Channel Flow: Open channel flow is encountered naturally in rivers
and streams. Artificial channels include irrigation channels, drainage ditches,
swales, or gutter flow for pavement drainage. Proper design requires that open
channels have sufficient hydraulic capacity to convey the magnitude of runoff
from the design storm. In the case of grassy swales, bank protection is also
required if the velocities are high enough to cause erosion or scouring.
      1.   Minimum Design Standards For Open Channel Flow:
         a.   Stream Velocities: Stream velocities are useful in determining
the hydraulic capacity of a channel and the need for erosion protection along
the banks. As the depth of the water in an open channel increases, the velocity
also increases. Maximum velocity in open channels shall be four feet (4') per
second.
         b.   Manning's Equation: Manning's equation shall be the method of
analysis for open channel flow. The trapezoid is the most often used for a
channel cross section. Manning's coefficients are provided in table 6-4.
         c.   Critical Depth: Occasionally, it is necessary to determine
critical depth in design of open channels. This will occur when the level of
the headwater is controlled by the entrance of the pipe or channel rather than
by the pipe or channel itself. Critical depth should always be calculated since
it may control (when critical depth is less than normal depth) the capacity of
the channel on a relatively steep slope (0.5–1.0 percent).
         d.   River Backwater Analysis: Natural river channels tend to be
highly irregular in shape so as simple analysis using Manning's equation, while
helpful for making an approximation, is not sufficiently accurate to determine
a river water surface profile. The planning administrator shall be consulted on
the availability and applicability of computer programs and data useful in
calculating a backwater profile. The Idaho transportation department maintains
a list of applicable computer programs. Programs provided by the planning
administrator and Idaho transportation department may be used for design.
Responsibility for the use of these programs and their accuracy will be borne
by the designer.
         e.   Stream Bank Stabilization: Stream banks shall be stabilized to
the planning administrator's satisfaction where degraded or impacted by the
development. Bank stabilization is required when design flow velocities of new
or existing channels exceed three feet (3') per second or erosive velocity for
the channel bed, whichever is smaller.
         f.   Existing Ditch Modification: Existing ditches shall be provided
with riprapped bottoms and side slopes at the discharge points of storm sewers
or culverts. The rock shall extend for a minimum of ten feet (10') downstream
from the end of the storm sewer or culvert.
         g.   Channel Modification: All channel sides and bottoms shall be
seeded, sodded, or riprapped as directed by the planning administrator.
         h.   Velocity Control: Check dams, pools, nonerosive drop structures,
or other means shall be used as necessary to control velocity.
   E.   Detention/Retention Facilities: The peak rate of runoff from a site
shall not be increased due to the proposed development for the design storm
unless it has been sufficiently demonstrated to the planning administrator that
no detrimental downstream effects will occur as a result and any structural
requirements to limit said effects have been met. Therefore, retention or
detention facilities will be required on the developed site.
      In certain situations, it is possible and even desirable to store a
volume of water before allowing it to discharge to the downstream drainage
courses. When this storage effect is properly considered, the design can reduce
the amount of peak flow released to the downstream drainage facility or
eliminate it altogether. Detention/retention facilities include GIAs, earthen
basins, shallow injection wells, and buried tanks or large diameter pipes.
      1.   Open or closed storage detention systems are desirable in the
overall management plan for the following reasons:
         a.   Prevention of storm water runoff in excess of predevelopment
runoff to downstream properties.
         b.   Reduction of flow rates in downstream drainage structures.
         c.   Reduction of frequency and capacity of infiltration, conveyance
and drainage systems on the site as a whole.
         d.   The size of pump stations could be designed with smaller pumps if
storage for the runoff was provided.
         e.   Existing culverts or storm sewers on site which would be
undersized may be made adequate if upstream storage were provided.
         f.   Allow any contaminated silts to settle out before the runoff is
released into local surface waters.
      Detention/retention facilities which are subject to collecting
contaminated sediments must either be cleaned on a frequent regular basis or
have some form of access control (fencing) around them. As maintenance often
has a tendency to be put off, access control is the preferred method of dealing
with the issue. Detention and retention facilities should be cleaned after all
storm events approaching the design intensity, bimonthly during the wet season,
and at the end of the winter as a minimum. Testing of collected sediments
should be performed annually for all such control facilities to determine the
level of contamination expected in the sediments collected in each structure.
All materials with lead levels in excess of three hundred fifty (350) ppm must
be disposed of at a PHD approved repository. All sediments collected in a given
control structure are to be considered as contaminated if no testing has been
performed at that location. If the sediments from a structure test less than
one hundred (100) ppm for two (2) consecutive years, then the sediments from
that structure shall be considered as clean and no further testing will be
required.
      2.   Liabilities and potential problems associated with detention systems
must also be considered:
         a.   There must be adequate space available for a storage basin.
         b.   The potential for damage from overtopping the design level of the
storage basin must be considered.
         c.   There is a potential safety hazard to the public for storage
basins which could become covered with several feet of water.
         d.   Basins subject to frequent flooding may lose natural vegetation
from the excessive amounts of water.
         e.   Accumulated sediments which may be contaminated by heavy metals
or have a low pH, posing a public health hazard.
      3.   Minimum design standards for detention/retention facilities:
         a.   An overflow type storage detention system which regulates the
rates of flow shall be the preferred storage facility. Landscaped facilities
such as parks and playfields are recommended for use as storm water detention
facilities unless the sediments are likely to contain heavy metals or have a
low pH.
         b.   All storage detention facilities shall be accessible for
maintenance and a regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the
operation and maintenance plan. Access for maintenance vehicles (generally 8 to
10 feet wide travel lane) shall be included in the design.
         c.   Storage detention facilities with side slopes steeper than five
(5) horizontal to one vertical shall be fenced as approved by the planning
administrator.
         d.   The reservoir routing method is straightforward and shall be used
for design of the storage detention facility. This method involves plotting an
inflow hydrograph for the future storm event, then superimposing an outflow
hydrograph over the inflow hydrograph. The area inscribed between the two (2)
graphs represents the volume to be stored in the facility. The inflow
hydrograph will be developed using the rational method (see below).
         e.   The outflow hydrograph will be dependent upon the particular
control structure selected as well as the depth of the water in the storage
detention basin. The actual shape of the outflow hydrograph can be developed by
an application of a technique known as reservoir routing.
         f.   Any detention or retention facility which is likely to accumulate
contaminated sediments shall have an impervious bottom and access control
(fence) to eliminate public contact with the sediments.
   F.   Shallow Injection Wells:
      1.   Shallow injection wells are any excavation or artificial opening
into the ground which meets the following four (4) criteria:
         a.   It is a bored, drilled, or excavated hole, a driven mine shaft;
         b.   It is deeper than its largest straight line surface dimension;
         c.   It is used for or intended to be used for injection; and
         d.   The well is less than or equal to eight (8) vertical feet of
depth below ground level. Catch basins with lateral subsurface infiltration
piping are also considered to be injection wells under subsection F1c of this
section.
      2.   Class V (e) shallow injection wells are used for the disposal of
nonhazardous, nonradioactive wastes such as clean storm water runoff and
irrigation wastewater. Regarding class V (e) injection wells the Idaho Code,
title 42, chapter 39, states: "the ground waters of this state to be a public
resource which must be protected against unreasonable contamination or
deterioration of quality to preserve such waters for diversion to beneficial
uses". Contamination as defined by the statute means:
"the introduction into the natural ground waters of any physical, chemical,
biological, or radiological substance or matter in water which may:
(1)   Cause a violation of Drinking Water Standards; or
(2)   Adversely affect the health of the public; or
(3)   Adversely affect a designated and protected use of the State's ground
water."
      3.   Minimum design standards for shallow injection wells:
         a.   The capacity of a site's subsurface soils to infiltrate storm
water from a shallow injection well shall be determined based on SCS soil
permeability criteria. Soil gradation (sieve analysis) determinations of
specific soils shall be required at the option of the planning administrator to
confirm SCS soil class criteria prior to injection well construction.
         b.   Class V (e), shallow injection wells are authorized by rule for
the life of the facility provided that the required inventory information is
furnished to the department of water resources and use of the well does not
contaminate a drinking water source.
         c.   The owner or operator of a proposed class V (e) injection well
shall submit the following inventory information to the director of the
department of water resources as a condition of authorization:
            (1)   Facility name and location;
            (2)   County in which the injection well(s) is (are) located;
            (3)   Location of the well(s) by legal description to the nearest
ten (10) acre tract, or by highway milepost where the well is owned or operated
by a state or local entity;
            (4)   Ownership of the wells;
            (5)   Name, address, and phone number of legal contact;
            (6)   Type or function of the well(s);
            (7)   Number of wells of each type; and
            (8)   Operation status of the well(s).
         d.   For any future developments, class V (e), shallow injection wells
shall be authorized for disposal of storm water runoff provided the effluent
from the well meets the water quality standards set by the department of water
resources under the rules and regulations for "Construction And Use Of
Injection Wells".
         e.   If the operation of a class V (e) injection well is causing or
may cause contamination of a drinking water source, the planning administrator,
or director of the department of water resources, shall require immediate
cessation of the injection activity.
   G.   Constructed Wetlands 1 : Manmade wetlands can provide significant
storage capacities for runoff and provide effective pollutant removal. Other
benefits include recreation and aesthetic possibilities. Studies have found
that controlled storm water retention in marshes has resulted in better
vegetative conditions which in turn enhanced storm water nutrient removal.
Other reports indicate removal of storm generated pollution has been achieved
by detention and natural treatment in small urban lakes.
      The use of wetlands, whether they be lakes, ponds, or marshes, is
straightforward from an engineering design standpoint. However, the
disadvantage of these types of systems is a considerable effort may be required
to maintain them in a healthy state. Wetlands can be seen to remove waterborne
pollutants principally through physical and chemical processes which are
substantially improved by biological processes associated with aquatic
vegetation. This vegetation is generally resistant to the pollutants found in
storm water; however, the interactions of various plant and animal species are
not completely understood and changes in this community structure may affect
the overall health, aesthetic character, and pollutant removal capacity of the
wetland.
      1.   Minimum design standards for constructed wetlands:
         a.   Constructed wetlands shall be approved on a site specific basis
by the planning administrator.
         b.   The designer shall be responsible for obtaining approval through
all federal, state, and local authorities.
         c.   Wetland design should utilize a team approach with expertise in
hydrology, water quality, soils, botany, wildlife ecology, landscape
architecture as well as design and construction engineering.
         d.   Water retention time (approximated by volume divided by outflow
rate) for particulate removal should be approximately one week. For removal of
nutrients and soluble pollutants, greater than two (2) weeks retention time
should be allowed.
         e.   Surface area (wet pool area divided by watershed or drainage
basin area) should be 0.01 minimum, but preferably greater than 0.025.
         f.   Optimum water depth distribution within a wetland is fifty
percent (50%) less than six inches (6") (a bench form), twenty five inches
(25") to one foot (1') and twenty five percent (25%), two (2) to three feet
(3').
         g.   Ideally a forebay would be constructed in the inlet channel prior
to the wetland area proper. The depth of this forebay should be approximately
three feet (3') and its surface area approximately twenty five percent (25%) of
the total wetland area.
         h.   Consider a liner if needed to maintain summer water and to
prevent ground water contamination.
         i.   To prevent flow short circuiting, place the outlet remote from
the inlet, minimize flow velocities, construct multicelled configuration, and
design a length to width rates of three to one (3:1) minimum, greater than five
to one (5:1) preferably.
         j.   For inlet design, use techniques that will minimize entrance
velocity and momentum such as level spreaders, enlarged inlet conveyance,
reduced inlet slope, and baffle islands or peninsulas.
         k.   Soils to be used for wetland construction should have moderate to
fine texture (loams) with relatively high muck. (This can be an important
source of plant "propagules".)
         l.   Soil and water pH should be circumneutral (6 to 8) with slightly
alkaline (7 to 8) best. Note that many of the soils located within the site
have low to very low pHs. As such, care should be taken to study the use of
wetlands as a contaminant removal technology in the site.
         m.   Plant selection principles center not around water quality goals,
but:
            (1)   Prospects for effective establishment and continued survival
under site conditions;
            (2)   Using native species;
            (3)   Avoiding invasive or nuisance species; and
            (4)   Selection to fulfill multiple objectives (if any).
         n.   Best pollutant removal plants are those dense, fine herbaceous
plants with good winter viability. Choices for specific pollutants (NW native
plants) include:
            (1)   For Metals Removal: Oenanthe sarmentosa (water parsley),
Spirea douglasii (hardback), Carex species (sedges), Elodea canadensis lemna
species (duckweeds), Nuphar species (water lilies), Scirpus species
(bulrushes), Typha species (cattails).
            (2)   For Oils And Other Organics: Plants that grow from basal
meristem- Juncus species (rushes), or Scirpus species (bulrushes).
         o.   Best results for establishing plantings are by using live plants
or dormant rhizomes from nurseries; obtaining plants from natural wetlands is
discouraged. Seeding offers lower prospects of success.
         p.   The designer shall provide a monitoring program for ensuring the
wetland functions as is intended in the design.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5I of this article.
11-13G-4: HYDROLOGIC ANALYSIS METHODS:
   A.   Drainage Basin: The size and shape of the drainage basins are important
factors regardless of which method is used to determine the hydrologic
characteristics of the basin. Determination of the basin area should only
proceed after procurement of the best available topographic maps of the entire
area contributing surface runoff to the site. Outline the area on the map(s)
and determine the size in acres or square miles. Any areas that are known to be
noncontributing to surface runoff should be subtracted from the total drainage
area and justification given for this. The slope, length, and surface roughness
of the drainage basin or watershed affect the travel times for runoff.
   B.   Rational Method:
      1.   Purpose: The rational method is used to predict peak flows for small
drainage areas which can be either natural or developed. The greatest accuracy
is obtained for smaller drainage basins or for developed conditions with large
areas of impervious surfaces.
      2.   Drawbacks: Drawbacks of the rational method are:
         a.   It gives only the peak discharge and provides no information
about the time distribution of the storm runoff.
         b.   Selection of the variables for the formula is more an art of
judgment than a precise account of the antecedent moisture content or an aerial
distribution of rainfall intensity 1 .
      3.   Facility Design: Given these limitations, the rational method shall
only be used for design of storm water management facilities for drainage
basins ten (10) acres or less. However, for these areas, the formula is
accurate in determining the total runoff volume as well as peak discharges.
These two (2) factors will provide the designer with a basis for designing
GIAs, storm sewers, culverts, outfalls, open channels, etc.
      4.   Formula: The formula for the rational method is as follows:
    Q = CIA
Where:
 Q = Runoff in cubic feet per second (cfs).
 C = Runoff coefficient representing ratio of runoff to rainfall.
 I = Average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a particular duration
      storm event.
 A = Drainage area in acres.
 
      When several subareas within a drainage basin have different runoff
coefficients, the rational formula can be modified as follows:
 
Q = I(ΣCA)
Where:
 ΣCA = C1 x A1 + C2 x A2 + C3 x A3 + .............
 
      5.   Runoff Coefficients: The runoff coefficient represents the ratio of
runoff to rainfall. The rational method implies that this ratio is fixed for a
given drainage basin. In reality, the coefficient may vary with respect to
prior wetting and seasonal conditions.
      The coefficients in table 6-2 are applicable for peak storms of 10-year
frequency. Less frequent, higher intensity storms will require the use of
higher coefficients because infiltration and other losses have proportionally
smaller effect on the runoff. Conversely, long duration storms with low average
intensities would require the use of lower coefficients. Until such time as
coefficients are available for 25-year frequency storms, this table of
coefficients shall be used for Shoshone County areas.
      6.   Rainfall Intensity:
         a.   The rainfall intensity shall be obtained from the Idaho
transportation department's intensity-duration-frequency charts. These charts
are based on U.S. weather bureau records, and the state of Idaho has been
divided into different intensity-duration-frequency zones (IDF zones). For
Shoshone County IDF zone E, F, or H may be applicable depending on the
geographic location of the site.
         b.   When using these graphs, it should be noted that the data from
which they are derived is sporadic and much more information is needed for
short duration storms in order to obtain more accurate estimates.
         c.   A map of Idaho delineating the IDF zones and the IDF charts for
zones E, F, and H are shown in figures 6-3, 6-4, 6-5, 6-6, and 6-7,
respectively.
      7.   Time Of Concentration:
         a.   The time of concentration is that time it takes for water to
travel from the most distant part of the watershed to the point of interest.
The time of concentration affects the peak rate of runoff and shape of the
hydrograph.
         b.   Overland flow, storm sewer flow, and channel flow are three (3)
phases of runoff flow commonly used in computing travel time. In a given
watershed or drainage basin some areas would be dominated by overland (sheet)
flow while other areas would be dominated by channel flow. Developed drainage
basins may be further complicated by significant flows from storm sewers. The
time of concentration is equal to the sum of the travel times computed for each
subarea.
         c.   Special attention should be given to the computation of
concentration and travel time. Once storm drains are installed the flow
patterns may be changed so significantly that flow retardence cannot be
represented by factors based on runoff curve numbers or overland flow.
Velocities of flow through culverts and channels should be computed using
hydraulic procedures that take into consideration the characteristics of flow
paths.
         d.   An exception to this procedure may occur when a complex drainage
pattern exists. The designer should be cautious when two (2) or more subbasins
have different types of cover (i.e., different runoff coefficients). The most
common case would be a large paved area together with a long narrow flat strip
of natural area. In this case the designer should check the paved area and a
fraction of the natural area to determine if this combination would produce a
greater peak than the peak produced by using the longest time of concentration.
         e.   The procedure for determining the time of concentration is based
on the U.S. department of agriculture, soil conservation service method which
was originally developed from the Manning formula. It is sensitive to slope,
type of ground cover, and the size of channels.
 Tc = L   = L1.5
       KS5   KH5
Where:
 Tc = Time of concentration in minutes.
 L  = Length of the drainage basin area in feet.
 H  = Height of the drainage basin area in feet.
 K  = Ground cover coefficient in feet per minute.
 S  = Average slope (H/L) in feet per feet.
 n  = Manning roughness coefficient.
 
         (1)   The ground cover coefficient is provided in table 6-3.
         (2)   Manning's roughness coefficient is provided in table 6-4 (see
"Open Channel Flow").
   C.   Soil Conservation Service Method:
      1.   For watersheds or drainage basins greater than ten (10) acres, the
SCS, TR-55 1  method shall be used to calculate runoff volume and peak rates of
discharge. The SCS uses three (3) standard rainfall distributions, types I, IA,
and II. Type II distribution applies to all areas of the United States except
for parts of the Pacific coast states (California, Oregon, and Washington). The
type II distribution shall apply to the state of Idaho. The amount of runoff
from a given watershed is solved using the following equations:
 S  = 1,000 - 10
       CN
     
 Q  = (P - 0.252)
       (P + 0.8S)
Where:
     
 S  = Potential abstraction in inches.
 P  = Total storm rainfall in inches.
 CN = Runoff curve number.
 Q  = Actual direct runoff in inches.
 
      2.   Runoff Curve Numbers: CN represents and indicates the runoff
potential of a watershed. A higher CN results in a higher runoff potential. The
factors affecting the CN, called the soil cover complex are a combination of
the hydrologic soil group, the land use and treatment class (ground cover).
      3.   Hydrologic Soil Groups: The hydrologic soil groups describe a soil's
potential to produce runoff from a precipitation event. Soils not protected by
vegetation are placed in one of four (4) groups on the basis of the intake of
water after the soils have been wetted and have received precipitation from
long duration storms. The four (4) standard hydrologic soil groups 1  are:
         a.   Group A soils, having a high infiltration rate when thoroughly
wet. These consist chiefly of deep, well drained to excessively drained, sands
or gravels. These soils have a high rate of water transmission.
         b.   Group B soils, having a moderate infiltration rate when
thoroughly wet. These consist chiefly of moderately deep or deep, moderately
well drained or well drained soils that have moderately fine texture to
moderately course texture. These soils have a moderate rate of water
transmission.
         c.   Group C soils, having a slow infiltration rate when thoroughly
wet. These consist chiefly of soils that have a layer that impedes the downward
movement of water or soils that have a moderately fine texture or fine texture.
These soils have a slow rate of water transmission.
         d.   Group D soils, having a very slow infiltration rate (high runoff
potential) when thoroughly wet. These consist chiefly of clay soils that have a
high shrink-swell potential, soils that have a permanent high water table,
soils that have a claypan or clay layer near the surface, and soils that are
shallow over a nearly impervious material. These soils have a very slow rate of
water transmission.
      4.   Factors For Computing CN: Several factors should be considered when
computing the anticipated future CN for urban areas. The types of structural or
nonstructural methods used within the development for controlling the runoff
will vary the quantity and flow paths of the runoff.
         a.   Consideration should be given to construction methods. Soils
compacted by heavy equipment beyond natural compaction conditions, the extent
of vegetative cover or sod versus barren soil within a pervious area, the
impact of grading on surface and subsurface soils (to the extent that the mixed
soils may create a completely different hydrologic condition) all must be
factored into the CN determination.
         b.   Irrigation in farming communities or heavily watered lawns in
suburban areas may significantly increase the moisture content in the soil
above that which would be expected with natural rainfall conditions.
         c.   Table 6-5 gives CNs for agricultural, suburban, and urban land
use classifications. The suburban and urban CNs are based on typical land use
relationships that exist nationwide. The CNs should only be used when it has
been determined that the area under study meets the criteria for which the CN
was developed.
         d.   There will be areas to which the values in table 6-5 do not
apply. The percentage of impervious area for the various types of residential
areas or the land use condition for the pervious areas may vary from the
conditions assumed in table 6-5. A curve for each pervious CN can be developed
to determine the composite CN for any density of impervious area. Figure 6-
8 was developed assuming a CN of ninety eight (98) for the impervious area. The
curves in the figure can help estimate the increase in runoff as the impervious
area increases for a given development.
         e.   The percentage of impervious to pervious area should be
determined accurately and be representative of the site so the composite CN
will assist the designer in accurately predicting the volume of runoff. The
designer's assumptions and calculations shall be included in the hydraulic
analysis to justify the selection runoff curve number.
      5.   Peak Runoff Rates:
         a.   A quick and reliable method of computing peak runoff rates from
agricultural drainage areas, one to two thousand (2,000) acres in size, is
through the use of the figures developed by the soil conservation service.
These figures were prepared for the solution of the general relationships
described above, are based on type II rainfall distribution and are applicable
to the state of Idaho.
         b.   The figures are only to be used for watersheds within the one to
two thousand (2,000) acre range. They provide a basic peak discharge rate for a
24-hour duration storm associated with the watershed in a natural condition.
Figure 6-9, flat slope is based on a one percent (1%) slope. Figure 6-10,
moderate slope is based on a four percent (4%) slope. Figure 6-11, steep slope
is based on a sixteen percent (16%) slope. For slopes other than one percent
(1%), four percent (4%), sixteen percent (16%), use the factors in table 6-6 to
modify the peak discharge.
         c.   The following equations relate a method of adjusting the peak
runoff rates from the charts to reflect the increase in the runoff due to
urbanization:
            (1)   Modification of peak runoff rates due to urbanization:
 QMOD      = Q (FactorIMP) (FactorHLM)
Where:
 QMOD      = Modified discharge due to urbanization.
 Q         = Discharge rate for future CN from charts.
 FactorIMP = Adjustment factor for percent impervious areas.
 FactorHLM = Adjustment factor for percent of hydraulic length modified.
 
            (2)   Figure 6-12 and 6-13 give the factors IMP and HLM for
adjusting peaks calculated from the charts on the same parameters that affect
watershed lag and time of concentration.
            (3)   The above equation for computing peak discharges is based in
part on the relationship between the hydraulic length and the watershed area
from the U.S. department of agriculture's small experimental watersheds. Figure
6-14 shows the best fit line relating length to drainage area. The equation of
the line is 1 = 209a0.6. A watershed shape factor, l/w, is then fixed for any
given drainage area. For example, for drainage areas of ten (10), one hundred
(100), and one thousand (1,000) acres the watershed shape factor is 1.58, 2.51,
and 3.98, respectively.
         d.   There are watersheds that deviate considerably from these
relationships. The peaks can be modified for other shape factors using the
following procedure:
            (1)   Determine the amount of runoff in inches for the watershed.
            (2)   Determine the hydraulic length of watershed and compute an
"equivalent drainage area" using figure 6-14.
            (3)   Using the "equivalent drainage area" determine the rate of
runoff from figure 6-9, 6-10, or 6-11 in cubic feet per second per inch.
            (4)   Using the equivalent area, obtain the slope adjustment factor
from table 6-8 and multiply by the rate of runoff obtained in subsection C5d(3)
of this section to obtain the equivalent peak discharge.
            (5)   Multiply the result from subsection C5d(4) of this section by
the actual area of the drainage basin divided by the equivalent area obtained
in subsection C5d(2) of this section.
            (6)   Compute the "actual peal discharge" for the watershed by
multiplying the result in subsection C5d(5) of this section by the amount of
runoff in subsection C5d(1) of this section.
      6.   Tabular Method Of Determining Peak Runoff:
         a.   An alternate method for determining the peak runoff rate is the
tabular method. This method computes peak discharges from urban areas using
time of concentration (Tc) and travel time (Tt). This method approximates the
more detailed hydrograph analysis, SCS, Tr-20 "Computer Program For Project
Formulation - Hydrology" developed by the engineering division of the soil
conservation service.
         b.   The tabular method can be used to develop composite hydrographs
at any point within a watershed by dividing the watershed into subareas and
computing the time of concentration for each subarea and the travel time
through each reach. The above factors also apply to the tabular method: twenty
four (24) hour rainfall amount, a given rainfall distribution, hydrologic soil-
cover complexes (CNs), time of concentration, travel time, and drainage area.
         c.   The tabular method is most effective when applied to watersheds
where hydrographs are needed to measure nonhomogeneous runoff; i.e., the
watershed is divided into subareas. It is especially useful in developed
watersheds and can be used to determine the effects of structures, combinations
of structures, and channel modifications at different locations within the
watershed.
         d.   Table 6-7 shows the tabular discharge values for the type II
rainfall distribution used in this procedure. Tabular discharges, in terms of
cubic feet per second per square mile (csm) per inch of runoff, are given for a
range of Tc from 0.1 to two (2) hours, and Tt from zero to four (4) hours. The
table was developed by computing hydrographs for one square mile of drainage
area for a range of time of concentration, routing them through stream reaches
with a range of travel times. A constant runoff curve number of seventy five
(75) and a rainfall volume sufficient to yield three inches (3") of runoff were
used.
         e.   The tabular method should not be used when large changes in the
runoff curve number occur among subareas within a watershed and when runoff
volumes are less than about 1.5 inches for curve numbers less than sixty (60).
For most watershed conditions, this procedure is adequate to determine the
effects of urbanization on peak rates of discharge for subareas up to
approximately twenty (20) square miles in size.
         f.   The computed values of time of concentration and travel time can
be rounded to the nearest value in table 6-7 or, if more refinement is
warranted, the discharges can be computed using the calculated time of
concentration and travel time through interpolation between the Tc and Tt shown
in the table. The information needed to calculate the peak discharge at a point
in the watershed is:
            (1)   The drainage area of each subarea.
            (2)   Tc for each subarea.
            (3)   Tt for each routing reach.
            (4)   The runoff curve number for each subarea.
         (5)   The twenty four (24) hour rainfall for a selected frequency.
         (6)   The runoff in inches for each subarea.
      g.   For examples of soil conservation service design method consult
"Urban Hydrology For Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55" published by
the soil conservation service, USDA, January 1975.
      Additionally, the Idaho department of transportation offers self-taught
courses in the following areas:
         (1)   Drainage design I hydrology.
         (2)   Drainage design II cross drainage.
         (3)   Drainage design III open channels.
         (4)   Drainage design IV roadway.
         (5)   Urban storm sewer design for Idaho highways.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
 
Notes
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5A of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5F of this article.
1    See subsection
  13-2G-5E of this article.
11-13G-5: REFERENCES:
   A.   Brach, John, Wayne P. Anderson, Patricia Engelking, Protecting Water
Quality in Urban Areas, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Division of Water
Quality, the Soil Conservation Service, and the Environmental Protection
Agency, St. Paul, MN (1989).
   B.   State of Idaho Transportation Department Design Manual, Section IV -
Preliminary Design, 14-450 to 14-461, Idaho Department of Transportation
Department, Boise, ID (1982).
   C.   Finklin, Arnold I. and William C. Fischer. Climate of the Deception
Creek Experimental Forest, Northern Idaho, General Technical Report INT-226.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research
Station, Ogden, UT (1987).
   D.   Berwich, R., M. Schapiro, J. Kuhner, D. Leucke and H.H. Winerman.
Selected Topics in Storm Water Management Planning for Residential
Developments. Report No. EPA/2-80-013. Office of Research and Development, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. (1980).
   E.   Soil Conservation Service, Soil Survey of Kootenai County Area, Idaho.
U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
(1975).
   F.   Conservation Service, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds. Technical
Release No. 55, U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service
Engineering Division, Washington, D.C. (1975).
   G.   Spokane County Engineers, Guidelines for Stormwater Management 1981
(with addenda). Spokane, WA (1990).
   H.   Cow, Ven Te., Maidment D.R., Mays L.W., Applied Hydrology. McGraw- Hill
Book Company, Series in water resources and environmental engineering. New
York, NY (1988).
   I.   Richard R. Horner, Ph.D., Biofiltration for Stormwater Runoff Quality
Enhancement, Course Spokane Community College, Spokane, WA (March 18, 1992).
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
ARTICLE H. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CONTENTS CHECKLIST
SECTION:
11-13H-1: Storm Water Management Plan Contents
11-13H-1: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CONTENTS:
   The majority of the listed required contents for the storm water management
plan can and should be shown on the drawings. Where additional text is desired
to describe design features or functioning for example, this information shall
be included in the project summary and design calculation section.
   A.   Project Summary And Design Calculations:
      1.   Project Summary:
         Size of site (acres or square feet).
         Structures to be constructed, including roof areas.
         Size (area) of planned roads, parking areas, and sidewalks.
         Changes in drainage.
         Changes in vegetative cover.
         Proposed construction schedule.
         Design problem.
         Constraining environmental conditions.
         Related soils, geologic, water quality, stream flow, or other data (as
available).
         Analysis of ICP needs (yes/no).
      2.   Design Calculations:
         Hydrologic model used (SCS, rational method).
         Assumption made.
         Data used.
         Off site runoff flowing on site for design storm (peak flow, and total
volume).
         Existing runoff generated on site for design storm (peak flow, and
total volume).
         Postconstruction runoff generated on site for design storm (peak flow,
and volume).
         Storm water contents planned to treat and dispose of additional flow
and volume.
         Anticipated loss rates (evaporation, infiltration) for each specific
control feature.
         Anticipated flow capacity and velocity in swales, ditches, and pipe
systems.
         Any other pertinent design consideration which will help.
         Describe the appropriate functioning of the system.
         Any other pertinent design consideration which will help.
         Describe appropriate functions of the system.
         Postconstruction runoff which will move off site.
   B.   Vicinity Drainage Plan: Vicinity drainage plan (not greater than 2,000
feet to the inch) showing:
         Storm water drainage patterns within one mile of site.
         Existing surface water bodies (streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands)
within one mile.
         Environmentally sensitive areas within one mile.
         Contaminated areas within one mile (particularly upstream) including
known types and concentrations of contaminants.
   C.   Site Plan: Site plan (not greater than 100 feet to the inch) showing:
      1.   Existing Features:
         Development site boundaries.
         Roads, sidewalks, and parking areas (indicating paved, gravel, dirt,
etc.).
         Structures (described dimensions, construction).
         Water sources (springs, wells).
         Surface water bodies and designed buffer zones.
         Water drainage channels (with flow, velocity, and volume information).
         Storm water runoff flow patterns.
         Utilities.
         Easements.
         Location and type of existing IC barriers.
         Topography (2 foot contour intervals with reference datum).
         Location of soil types (from SCS soils survey, or other available
information).
         Location of vegetative cover types (grassland, scrubs, trees,
wetland).
      2.   Proposed Features:
         Specific vegetation preserve areas.
         Areas to be cleared of vegetation.
         Areas where topsoil is to be removed and/or stockpiled.
         Areas to be graded, filled, and/or excavated (with proposed final
contours).
         Areas to be revegetated (indicating lawn, landscaping details).
         New structures (describe dimensions, construction).
         New roads, parking areas, sidewalks (indicating paved, gravel, dirt,
etc.).
         Utilities.
         Easements.
         Postconstruction storm water drainage patterns.
         Storm water control features:
            a.   For swales and open ditches show cross section(s), bottom
elevations, slope(s), length(s).
            b.   For GIAs and detention/retention basins show area, volume
cross section(s), bottom elevation(s), and inlet and overflow capacity,
location and elevation.
            c.   For culverts, and pipe systems show size, type, invert
elevation, horizontal (vertical angle points and lengths).
            d.   For any other storm water control feature show sufficient
detail to convey the design parameters and method of functioning.
         Cross section dimensions and bottom elevations of any off site
drainage channel which will either contribute runoff to the site or into which
on site runoff will pass.
   D.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: All details of erosion and
sedimentation controls shall be shown on one drawing with not greater than one
hundred feet (100') to the inch.
      1.   Existing Site Condition:
         Site boundaries.
         Roads, sidewalks, and parking areas (indicating paved, gravel, dirt,
etc.).
         Structures.
         Water sources (springs, wells).
         Surface water bodies, and designated buffer zones.
         Surface water drainage channels (with flow, velocity, and volume
information).
         Storm water runoff patterns.
         Utilities.
         Easements.
         Topography (2 foot contour intervals with reference datum).
         Location of soil types (include any contaminants present).
      2.   Proposed Site Conditions:
         New roads, sidewalks, and parking areas.
         New structures (describe dimension, construction).
         Areas to be cleared of vegetation.
         Vegetation preserve areas.
         Areas where topsoil is to be removed and/or stockpiled.
         Areas to be graded, filled, or excavated (with proposed final
contours).
         Utilities.
         Easements (including new drainage system areas).
         Postconstruction drainage patterns.
         Location of temporary erosion and sedimentation control features (jute
netting, mulching, straw bales, etc.).
         Location of permanent erosion and sedimentation control features
(grassed swales, detention basins, etc.).
         Locations of any IC barriers.
      3.   Proposed Construction And Revegetation Schedule:
         Anticipated start and completion dates for all phases of the work.
         Anticipated installation of temporary and permanent IC barriers.
      4.   Maintenance And Repair Schedule And Responsibility:
         Routine inspection schedule for during construction and afterward.
         Routine IC barrier inspection for during and after construction.
         Anticipated maintenance efforts.
         Person responsible for long term maintenance after construction is
complete.
   E.   Barrier Option Plan (BOP): All details of the BOP shall be shown on one
drawing with not greater than one hundred feet (100') to the inch. Any
information which is pertinent but is better conveyed in written form may be
submitted as part of the calculations for the BOP.
      1.   Existing Site Conditions:
         Soil test results for the site listing the concentrations of lead.
         Locations of all contaminants.
         Soil profiles of all existing soil types on the site.
         Locations, types, and conditions of all existing IC barriers.
         Hydrologic map (not less than 2,000 feet to the inch) showing all
drainage features within five hundred feet (500') and all environmentally
sensitive features within one mile including any contaminated areas upstream of
the site.
      2.   Proposed Site Conditions:
         Locations and details of all proposed disturbances of existing IC
barriers.
         Locations and types of all temporary IC barriers to be used during
construction.
         Maintenance schedule for all IC barriers on the site.
         Schedule for all IC barrier disturbances, repairs, and construction.
         Detailed dust control plan.
         Temporary and permanent access controls.
   F.   Contaminated Soil Disposal Plan: If a specific site has lead levels
exceeding one thousand (1,000) ppm (per SAP or PHD) or a development has an
average lead level exceeding three hundred fifty (350) ppm then a contaminated
soil disposal plan is required. The following elements shall be submitted:
         Calculations determining the quantity of contaminated soil to be
removed.
         Detailed plan for handling, transporting, and disposal of all
contaminated soils per BHSS BMP handbook and the appropriate RDR.
             1.   If the soil volume is less than one cubic yard then PHD will
provide container, transport, and dump site.
            2.   If the soil volume exceeds one cubic yard then the contractor
or agency performing the work is required to transport the soil to the Page
soil repository for disposal (no charges for dumping but access is via the
PHD).
            3.   A proposed travel route must be submitted for hauling the soil
in a covered vehicle. No free liquid is permitted to be transported to the Page
site (soil must have no free liquid).
         Detailed personnel and equipment decontamination plan per BHSS BMP
handbook and the appropriate RDR.
         Personnel protection plan for all workers on site and the public in
general.
         Detailed dust control plans per BHSS BMP handbook and the appropriate
RDR.
         Access control details for the site while construction is in progress.
   G.   Operation And Maintenance Plan:
      1.   Inspection schedule.
      2.   Contact person.
      3.   Maintenance activities.
(Ord. 364, 4-5-1989; amd. Ord. 637, 4-9-2025)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Authority
12-1-3: Applicability And Jurisdiction
12-1-4: Purposes
12-1-5: Enactment
12-1-6: Amendments
12-1-7: Fees And Mitigation
12-1-8: Enforcement And Penalties
12-1-9: Interpretation, Conflict, And Severability
12-1-10: Saving Provision
12-1-11: Reservations And Repeals
12-1-12: Exceptions And Waivers Of Conditions
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known, cited, and referred to as the
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF KELLOGG, IDAHO. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   This title is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City
pursuant to article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution, Idaho Code, title
67, chapter 65 and title 50, chapter 13.
   B.   The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly
growth and development and shall supplement and implement provisions of the
Kellogg comprehensive plan, and this Code. By virtue of provisions of this
title the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission and administrative staff
of Kellogg are vested with the authority to review, approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove applications for the subdivision of land. (Ord. 596,
6-13-2018)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land within the
City limits unless exempt as provided in this title. All divisions of land that
were the result of a legal conveyance in compliance with prior subdivision
ordinances of the City or County prior to the effective date hereof, and which
meet the requirements of the underlying zoning classification, shall be
considered eligible to apply for building permits. Certain provisions of this
title shall apply to the division of any tract of land outside the corporate
limits of the City, but within the area of City impact as agreed between the
City and Shoshone County pursuant to Idaho Code.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out actions constituting
the subdivision of land without first complying with the provisions of this
title, and any other provisions of this Code.
   C.   Lots created and transferred, constituting the subdivision of land as
defined or required by this title, shall not be eligible for City permits
unless created in accordance with this title and Idaho Code, title 50, chapter
13 or its successor and all required improvements have been constructed and
accepted by the City or suitably guaranteed.
   D.   Exemptions to this title include:
      1.   Divisions of a tract of land made pursuant to testamentary
provisions, the laws of descent, or similar orders of partition entered by
court proceedings to distribute undivided interests. Parcels of land so created
must comply with lot size, frontage, and other standards established by this
Code and other applicable laws to be eligible for a building permit or to
qualify for establishment of a regulated land use.
      2.   Divisions made for the purpose of lot line adjustments where no
additional lots are created and where the resultant tracts comply with the
requirements of the underlying zoning classification and the following
requirements:
         a.   Existing lots or parcels may not be reduced in size below the
minimum lot dimensions established by the applicable zoning district.
         b.   Adjusted lots or parcels must meet lot coverage requirements and
must accommodate minimum required setbacks.
         c.   Such adjustments may necessitate access and utility easements to
be recorded.
         d.   If lot line adjustments are conducted on "nonstandard" lots then
the resulting adjusted lots should better conform to the applicable zoning
standards.
      3.   Divisions made as the result of exercise of the powers of eminent
domain as defined and allowed for by Idaho Code.
      4.   Divisions made for the expansion or acquisition of road rights-of-
way by a public agency.
      5.   Divisions for conveyance of land to the City, a public entity,
homeowners' association or public utility for a public or common purpose (well
site, drainage site, fire station, school site, park site, etc.).
      6.   Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-4: PURPOSES:
   A.   Land proposed for subdivision must be suitable and safe for building
without danger from flood, or other natural or manmade hazard. It is intended
that these regulations shall complement and implement provisions and standards
contained in Building Codes, land use regulations, the comprehensive plan and
any relevant capital improvement plans of Kellogg.
   B.   These provisions are adopted to provide for the orderly division of
land within the City, and:
      1.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of Kellogg.
      2.   To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance
with the comprehensive plan.
      3.   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of
all parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development
of the community's lands.
      4.   To guide public and private policy in order to provide adequate and
efficient streets, water, sewerage, drainage, parks, and other public
facilities.
      5.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to
ensure proper legal description and monumentation of subdivided land.
      6.   To ensure that public facilities and services are available
concurrent with development and will have sufficient capacity to serve the
subdivision.
      7.   To ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share
of any cost of providing services by requiring the developer to pay fees,
furnish land, or establish mitigation measures to provide a fair share of
capital facilities needs generated by the development.
      8.   To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities to safeguard the water
table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources to
preserve the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land.
      9.   To promote the health and safety of the community, Kellogg supports
the Institutional Controls Program which is designed to protect the public
residing and working within the Bunker Hill Superfund Site. The Institutional
Controls Program (ICP) is administered by Idaho Panhandle Health District in
accordance with Idaho Administrative Procedures Act (IDAPA) 41.01.01, 500
through 543. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-5: ENACTMENT:
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and
policies, this title is hereby adopted and shall become effective upon its
passage and publication according to law. All applications for subdivision
approval, including final approval, pending on the effective date of these
regulations shall be reviewed pursuant to the ordinances in effect at the time
an original completed application was accepted for processing. Pending
applications which are allowed to lapse due to inaction by the applicant shall
be governed by this title if refiled after it becomes effective. (Ord. 596, 6-
13-2018)
12-1-6: AMENDMENTS:
When necessary to further its purposes, this title may be amended in the manner
prescribed by Idaho Code. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-7: FEES AND MITIGATION:
   A.   Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be charged.
The City Council may, by resolution, adopt fees for services associated with
review, processing and inspection of subdivisions. Such fees shall be
reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the City with respect
to the subdivision of land.
   B.   The City may, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, require
mitigation of the effects of development on the ability of the City, and other
political subdivisions, to deliver services without compromising quality or
imposing substantial additional costs to current residents. Such conditions may
not exceed the actual impact of the development unless the developer agrees to
such conditions. In lieu of such mitigation or as a complement thereto, the
developer may pay fees which will be used by the City to mitigate such impacts.
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be the authority of the planning and building official and/or
the Public Works Supervisor or his/her designees to enforce the provisions of
this title.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building
or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the
provisions of these regulations, nor shall the City have any obligation to
issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel
created or established in violation of these provisions.
   C.   Violations of the provisions of this title may be deemed an infraction,
or a misdemeanor crime, punishable as provided in this Code, with each day such
violation continues constituting a separate offense. The City shall have
recourse to such civil remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-9: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEVERABILITY:
   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be
required if it is demonstrated that such standards are necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except as provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or
other provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes the
standards most likely to protect the public health, safety and general welfare
shall control.
   C.   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, private
covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the
provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or regulation, the requirements of these regulations shall govern irrespective
of private contractual provision.
   D.   The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence,
clause, or phrase of this title is adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this title. The remainder shall be interpreted to further the
purposes of this title.
   E.   The provisions of this title serve to supersede prior ordinances
regulating subdivision of land in Kellogg. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-10: SAVING PROVISION:
The adoption of these regulations shall not abate any action now pending under
prior subdivision regulations or abate, modify, or alter any penalty accruing
or about to accrue. These regulations shall not waive any right of the City
under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption, or vacate or
annul any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation by lawful action
of the City except as expressly provided for herein. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-11: RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS:
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the subdivision
ordinance of Kellogg (ordinance 413), adopted May 8, 1996 as amended, is hereby
repealed, except as provided above. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-1-12: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS OF CONDITIONS:
   A.   When there may be alternatives or different solutions proposed for a
subdivision, other than strict compliance with these regulations and/or the
purposes of these regulations, the City Council may approve exceptions and/or
waiver of conditions to these regulations. The granting of an exception or
waiver of conditions shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of these regulations. The City Council shall not permit exceptions and/
or waiver of conditions unless it finds, based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case, that:
      1.   The granting of the exception, or waiver of conditions will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other
property.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the
property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to
other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular and
unnecessary hardship to the owner would result if the strict application of
these regulations is applied.
      4.   The change sought will not vary the provisions of this Code, except
that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law.
   B.   In approving exceptions or waivers of conditions, the City Council may
require conditions that will secure the purposes of this title. An exception is
any alternative design, or proposed change in subdivision ordinance
requirements that is requested by the developer. The exception requested must
be reviewed as an integral part of the overall review process as outlined in
this title. A request for an exception shall be submitted in writing by the
developer at the time that the subdivision application is filed and shall be
reviewed along with the subdivision. The request shall specify which ordinance
provisions shall be subject to exception along with the proposed changes and
the reasons why the changes are necessary. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall make a recommendation to the City Council specific to the exception
requested. The City Council shall render a decision on the requested exception
at the time the subdivision is reviewed.
   C.   A waiver of conditions is a request to change the conditions of
subdivision approval as agreed to in the development agreement. A request for a
waiver of conditions must be in writing and submitted to the Planning
Department prior to acceptance by the City of construction improvements or
recordation of the final plat. The request shall specify the condition needing
to be waived and the reasons the waiver would be justified. Upon receipt of a
request, the Administrator will place the request on the agenda of the Planning
and Zoning Commission for hearing. Notice of hearing shall be provided in the
same manner as hearing for subdivision approval. The request will be reviewed
and the commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The Council
shall review the recommendation and shall render a decision on the waiver of
conditions. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Definitions
12-2-2: Interpretation
12-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the meanings given in this chapter.
ADMINISTRATOR: The planning and building official or his/her designee or
another official expressly appointed by the Mayor to administer all or part of
this title.
ALLEY: A right-of-way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear
of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROACH: The location at which a driveway intersects with a public street.
BARRIER: Any physical structure, material or mechanism which breaks the pathway
between contaminants and human receptors in the institutional control program
of the Bunker Hill superfund site, including, but not limited to, walls,
floors, ceilings, soil, asphalt, concrete, or other structure or covering which
separates contaminants from contact with people or keeps contaminants in place.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct views, and/
or intercept noise, and/or to provide separation.
BLOCK: A contiguous group of lots within defined boundaries established by
plat.
BUFFER: An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel
with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or
created by the installation of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms, designed to
provide separation and limit the view of and/or sound transmission from a site
to an adjacent site.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial
streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development
and streets for circulation within such a development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land within or related to a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the
common use of the residents of the development. It may include structures and
improvements.
CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a
proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of
discussion and classification.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property, or in any combination thereof. Condominiums may be
of residential or nonresidential nature, both newly constructed or conversions
of existing construction, and including multi-unit structures or single unit
structures and shall follow procedures required under Idaho Code title 55,
chapter 15, Condominium Property Act.
CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement that more particularly
describes the duties and obligations of the parties for the development of a
subdivision or portion of a subdivision. The purpose is to establish specific
construction details and guarantees necessary for the timely construction of
public infrastructure improvements and such other improvements as may be
necessary. The construction improvement agreement may be an addendum to the
development agreement.
CONTAMINANTS: Any materials containing lead, arsenic or cadmium in excess of
Federal or State guidelines for public safety or the levels established in the
environmental health rules by Panhandle Health District 1.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having the other end for
the reversal of traffic movement.
DEDICATION: An act conveying property rights or interests to the public.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement used to calculate the number of dwelling units
per acre of land.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed, including public right-of-way.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
DEVELOPMENT: A project involving substantial property improvement and, usually,
a change of land use character within the site; the act of using land for
building or extractive purposes.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement setting forth the responsibilities of the
City and the developer, conditions applicable to the development, and
development schedules, entered into after subdivision approval has been granted
but prior to construction. Entering into a development agreement shall be a
condition of approval of any subdivision unless no improvements are to be made.
A development agreement is typically not required for a minor subdivision.
DIVIDED STREET: A street having an island or other barrier separating traffic.
EXCEPTION: Any requested alternative design or change in subdivision ordinance
requirements.
FINAL APPROVAL: The official action of the City Council taken on an approved
subdivision after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements
have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed, or guarantees properly posted for their completion.
FINAL PLAT: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is
presented for final approval (see also definition of plat).
FLAG LOTS: Lots or parcels with less frontage on a public or private street
than is required. The panhandle, or "pole" portion of such lot, is an access
corridor to lots or parcels located behind lots or parcels with normally
required street frontage. The lot width for a respective zone is the
measurement considered for the front building line.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan outlining general, rather than detailed,
development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a development
proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As such, it allows
general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the extensive costs
involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and/or building site development.
INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS PROGRAM (ICP): A locally enforced set of regulations
designed to ensure the integrity of clean soil and other protective barriers
placed over contaminants left in place throughout the Bunker Hill Superfund
site, as further defined and regulated by the Panhandle Health District, Idaho
Department of Environmental Quality, and Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, or any of their successors.
LOT: A parcel of land established by a subdivision plat filed pursuant to Idaho
law.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of the lot adjacent to street rights-of-way.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot
or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A realignment of boundary lines between adjoining lots
where no additional lots are created.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A service street which is parallel to a higher order
street which, for purposes of safety, provides access to abutting properties
and separation from through traffic.
MEDIAN: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic proceeding
in opposite directions.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: A document that memorializes the review process
and sets forth the conditions of approval of a minor subdivision that is signed
by the Administrator and the developer after approval by the City Council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing four (4) or fewer lots and
proposing no new streets, extensions to existing streets, and where
infrastructure is in place or available.
OFF SITE: Not located on the property that is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking
structure, or private driveway.
ON SITE: Located on the lot in question or on the property being developed.
ON STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space that is located on a dedicated street
right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE: Land, essentially free of structures, set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the
use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such
open space.
PARKING LANE: A lane usually located on the side of streets, designed to
provide on street parking.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Security in a form that serves as a guarantee that the
public or identified common improvements required as part of the approval of a
development are satisfactorily completed.
PLAT: The reproducible and permanent drawing of a subdivision and dedications
and easements, prepared for filing and recording with the County Recorder in
accordance with State law.
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE: A meeting among developers, City staff, and other
representatives which affords developers the opportunity to present their
proposals informally.
PRIVATE STREET: A street designed, constructed, and maintained on private
property.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A parcel of land or right of use conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the City, State or County agency, or other public body for
recreational or conservation uses by the public.
SKETCH PLAN: A rough plan of a proposed subdivision showing the general
location of streets and lots in enough detail to be reviewed.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or development,
subject to the exemptions set forth in this title.
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL: The approval status of a subdivision proposal prior to
plat approval after specific elements of a subdivision plan have been approved
by the City Council.
SUBDIVISION PLAN: A drawing indicating the proposed layout of a development
showing locations of rights-of-way and lots and blocks and related information
that is submitted for preliminary approval.
WAIVER OF CONDITIONS: A request for special conditions of subdivision approval
as requested by an applicant.
WARRANTY GUARANTEE: A percentage of the cost of public subdivision improvements
provided as cash in escrow, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to warrant
the design, construction materials, and workmanship of the improvements for a
specified period of time. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-2-2: INTERPRETATION:
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, unless the
express language of this title provides otherwise. Except as expressly defined
herein, words used in this title shall be given their ordinary meaning
consistent with common usage and context. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
12-3-1: Purpose
12-3-2: Pre-Application
12-3-3: Application
12-3-4: Application Submittals
12-3-5: Minor Subdivision Review And Approval
12-3-6: Subdivision Review And Approval
12-3-7: Zoning And Subdivision Regulations, Approval Duration
12-3-8: Phasing Or Sectionalizing Subdivisions
12-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures for review and
action on applications for subdivisions. The procedure is intended to provide
orderly and expeditious processing of subdivision applications. (Ord. 596, 6-
13-2018)
12-3-2: PRE-APPLICATION:
Prior to submittal of a subdivision application, the developer shall have
completed a pre- application conference to review the proposal. The pre-
application conference may be waived by the Administrator if the proposal is a
minor subdivision.
   A.   A developer seeking a pre-application conference shall submit three (3)
copies of a concept plan to the Administrator. The Administrator shall schedule
and hold the pre-application conference within thirty (30) days from the
submittal date unless additional time is agreed to by the developer. However,
the Administrator is encouraged to expedite this process for uncomplicated
projects.
   B.   A pre-application conference allows the developer an opportunity to
meet with Municipal staff and other representatives deemed appropriate by the
Administrator. A representative of the Public Works Department shall be invited
to all pre-application conferences. The City Engineer may be invited as
determined by the Administrator. Elected officials and Planning and Zoning
Commission members shall not be a part of this process. Items to be reviewed
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   The general subdivision process.
      2.   Overall design, lot sizes, and street layout.
      3.   Preliminary utility design.
      4.   Potential off site impacts/mitigation.
      5.   Off site/on site improvements.
   C.   Additional pre-application review may be scheduled by the Administrator
when, in the collective judgment of staff, the proposed subdivision is
extraordinarily complex, proposes large impacts to City utility systems, or
requires extraordinary staff time. Total time for pre-application review shall
not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of submittal unless additional time is
agreed to by the developer.
   D.   At the conclusion of the pre-application review process the
Administrator shall provide the developer with a written notice to proceed,
which includes a statement of issues, concerns and recommendations deemed
important by the City staff based upon the level of information available at
the time of pre-application review. Notice to proceed allows the developer to
submit an application for subdivision review. A notice to proceed states that
the proposed subdivision has been reviewed by appropriate staff and agencies
and is eligible to submit an application and does not constitute an approval in
any way. Such notice may include comments, concerns, and recommendations of the
staff and participating agencies.
   E.   A notice to proceed is valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days. The Administrator may extend the duration of notice to proceed for an
additional one hundred eighty (180) days if conditions of the pre-application
review have not materially changed. After expiration of a notice to proceed,
the developer may be required, by the Administrator, to resubmit for a pre-
application conference if conditions have changed. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-3-3: APPLICATION:
Applications for subdivisions shall be submitted and accepted at least forty
five (45) days before the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at
which it is to be reviewed. Minor subdivisions may be submitted to the
Administrator at any time. No application for a subdivision shall be accepted
until a pre-application review has been completed and a written notice to
proceed has been issued by the Administrator. The Administrator may waive the
pre-application conference for a minor subdivision.
   A.   The developer shall have the option of seeking the direction of the
Administrator as to which approvals are required and the appropriate review
process, or of filing an application the developer believes to be appropriate.
The Administrator's determination shall be presumed to be correct. (Ord. 596,
6-13-2018)
12-3-4: APPLICATION SUBMITTALS:
   A.   The documents submitted are intended to provide the approving authority
with sufficient information and data to evaluate compliance with all Municipal
codes and specifications and determine if the proposed development meets the
design and improvement standards contained in this title.
   B.   Documents to be submitted are listed and described in this section. In
specific cases and for documented reasons, the Administrator may waive the
submission of a particular document. All documents must be submitted, unless
waived in writing, before an application is accepted and processed.
   C.   An application for a minor subdivision or subdivision shall include the
following:
      1.   An application form, provided by the Planning and Building
Department, filled out completely and signed by the developer.
      2.   Plans of the proposed minor subdivision or subdivision. The number
of copies will be determined by the Administrator. In addition to the plans, a
reduced copy, eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") in dimension, shall
be provided.
      3.   Plans submitted shall include the elements listed in subsection D,
table 1 of this section.
      4.   Preliminary construction plans shall be submitted for all required
improvements including sanitary sewer, water supply, stormwater collection and
disposal, streets, dry utilities, and any other elements determined to be
necessary during pre-application review. Preliminary construction plans shall
be prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the State of Idaho. Listed elements
may be waived or additional items added by the Administrator, Public Works
Supervisor, or City Engineer at the pre-application review. The waiving or the
addition of elements to the plans shall be in writing and made a part of the
notice to proceed from the pre- application review. A list of elements to be
included on preliminary construction plans is found in subsection E, table 2 of
this section.
   D.   Table 1:
      TABLE 1
      SUBDIVISION PLAN ELEMENTS
Elements Required Subdivision Minor Subdivision
Elements Required                                 Subdivision Minor Subdivision
1.  Name of subdivision, name and address of the  X           X
    developer.
2.  A vicinity map.                               X            
3.  Existing/proposed zoning.                     X           X
4.  North arrow and scale.                        X           X
5.  Metes and bounds description with dimensions  X           X
    of the site.
6.  Acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of  X           X
    an acre.
7.  Show location of existing structures and      X           X
    setbacks from proposed lot lines.
    Location, width, and names of all existing or
8.  platted streets or other public ways within   X           X
    or immediately adjacent to the tract.
    Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of
9.  existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and   X           X
    other underground structures within the tract
    and adjacent thereto.
10. All adjacent streets including swales, curbs, X           X
    and sidewalks.
11. Location and size of proposed water and sewer X            
    lines.
12. Location of existing and proposed             X           X
    streetlights.
13. All proposed streets. Show width, curbs,      X            
    swales, and sidewalks.
    Location, dimensions, and area of all parcels
14. of land to be set aside for parks, open       X           X
    space, or other public use or for the use of
    property owners in the proposed subdivision.
15. Location, and typical size of proposed lots.  X           X
16. Any existing or proposed easements and right- X           X
    of-way dedications.
17. Development phases, or stages, if the project X            
    will be done over several years.
18. Existing vegetation (trees and significant    X           X
    vegetation).
19. Streams, watercourses, natural drainage       X           X
    patterns, wetlands, or floodplains.
20. Proposed street names.                        X            
    Topography shall be shown at an appropriate
21. contour interval. Slopes of over 5 percent    X            
    shall be shown in 5 foot intervals.
22. Data table showing number of lots, density in X           X
    lots per acre, and average lot size.
 
   E.   Table 2:
      TABLE 2
      PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION PLAN ELEMENTS
Items Required Subdivision Minor Subdivision
Items Required                                  Subdivision Minor Subdivision
    Proposed utility infrastructure plans,
1.  including sanitary sewer, water, and        X            
    stormwater management.
2.  Soil erosion and sediment control plan if   X           X
    required by the City Engineer.              If required If required
3.  Street and paving cross sections. Indicate  X           X
    slopes in excess of 5 percent.                          If required
4.  Proposed street names.                      X            
5.  Street lighting plans.                      X           X
                                                            If required
6.  Site identification signs, traffic control  X           X
    signs and directional signs.
7.  Pedestrian circulation plans.               X           X
8.  Right-of-way landscape plan and details.    X           X
9.  Traffic studies, if required by the City    X            
    Engineer.                                   If required
10. Areas of cuts or fills of more than 4 feet. X           X
 
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-3-5: MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   The purpose of minor subdivision review is to provide a simplified
procedure for processing minor subdivisions administratively. Minor
subdivisions are subdivisions of four (4) or fewer lots that create no new
streets. The process is intended for the creation of lots along existing
streets where infrastructure is available. A minor subdivision may be part of a
planned unit development. A developer proposing to create additional lots on
the same original parcel within a single five (5) year period (multiple minor
subdivisions from 1 parcel) as a minor subdivision may be required by the
Administrator to use the full subdivision review process if the Administrator
determines that the multiple minor subdivisions may have a significant impact
on public facilities to be used by the development.
   B.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Administrator shall
schedule a minor subdivision review with appropriate staff and the developer. A
date for the review will be established within seven (7) days from the date of
application acceptance.
   C.   The Administrator shall provide copies of submitted documents, as
necessary, to outside agencies and jurisdictions which, in the opinion of the
Administrator, may be affected by the proposal. In addition, the Administrator
shall provide written notice to the owners of property adjacent to the property
proposed for development. The notice shall provide the adjacent property owners
a plan of the minor subdivision, general information concerning the proposal,
and the time frame for submitting written comments. The period of time for
comment or response shall not be less than fourteen (14) days of transmittal.
   D.   The Administrator shall conduct a minor subdivision review, along with
appropriate staff, to ensure that all applicable ordinance provisions are
followed or completed. Minor subdivision review shall include, but not be
limited to:
      1.   Review of lot sizes and dimensions for conformance to the zoning
ordinance.
      2.   Determination that there are adequate provisions to serve the minor
subdivision with sewer and water.
      3.   Defining the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb,
sidewalk, paving, water, sewer, drainage, easements, right-of-way dedication,
streetlights, etc.) by City standards.
      4.   Evaluation of the location of potential rights-of-way to access
adjoining parcels pursuant to City standards.
   The Administrator shall prepare a report for the City Council stating
whether or not the proposal has met all of the requirements for minor
subdivision and whether or not it should be approved along with statements
supporting the recommendation and any appropriate conditions.
   E.   The City Council shall review the application, submittals and the
Administrator's report and decide the minor subdivision proposal. A decision to
deny shall be in writing and indicate reasons for denial and indicate what
steps are necessary to obtain approval. In the case of approval or approval
with conditions, a memorandum of understanding shall be prepared that details
the conditions of approval and the responsibilities of the developer. The
memorandum of understanding shall be signed by the developer and the Mayor, and
returned to the City within sixty (60) days of release of the document by the
City, prior to proceeding to plat review. Failure to return the signed
memorandum of understanding within sixty (60) days shall constitute an
abandonment of the application and the approval shall be of no force or effect.
   F.   The applicant or any affected party may request reconsideration of the
decision. Reconsideration is a procedure by which an applicant or other
affected person seeks to have a final decision-maker revisit the outcome or
rationale of a quasi-judicial land-use decision. A request for reconsideration
must be initiated within no more than seven (7) days after a final decision is
made and must address a specific error or omission. The determination to
reconsider rests solely in the discretion of the decision-maker. If the
decision-maker agrees to reconsider it shall specify the procedures to be
followed and inform those entitled to notice. If the decision-maker determines
that it will not reconsider, it should state the reasons why and notify those
entitled to notice. The decision not to reconsider shall be deemed a final
decision for purposes and timing of maintaining an appeal. A decision to
reconsider shall toll the time for appeal until a final decision has been
rendered after reconsideration.
   G.   The approval of a minor subdivision shall be effective for a period of
two (2) years from the date the City receives the signed memorandum of
understanding. If a plat is not submitted for approval within the two (2) year
period, the minor subdivision approval shall be null and void, and the
developer shall be required to submit a new application. Prior to the
expiration date of the effective period, the developer may request an
extension, in writing, from the Administrator. The Administrator may grant an
extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good cause by
the developer and upon finding that City regulations have not been changed
significantly from those under which the original approval was reviewed. The
Administrator shall decide a request for extension within thirty (30) days of
the receipt of the written request. The developer may appeal the
Administrator's decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   H.   At any time after minor subdivision approval and before submission of a
subdivision plat, the developer may request of the Administrator that an
amendment be made to the minor subdivision plan or to conditions of approval.
If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan and consistent with
conditions of approval, the Administrator may grant the amendment in writing
within ten (10) days of the request, unless the Administrator determines that
additional time is necessary for reasons stated in writing. If the amendment is
major or involves a change in the conditions of approval, the Administrator
shall schedule a review with staff, and notify adjoining landowners, at his/her
discretion, to review the proposed amendment. The date for the review shall be
scheduled within twenty one (21) days of the request.
   I.   Upon completion of the review for the amendment request, the
Administrator may grant the amendment if the minor subdivision is not
substantially changed and does, in fact, remain a minor subdivision. If the
proposed amendment changes the plan to cause it to become a subdivision, the
Administrator shall disapprove the amendment and notify the developer to adhere
to the approved plan or to apply for the full subdivision review process. (Ord.
596, 6-13-2018)
12-3-6: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The purpose of this process is to provide a timely and efficient review of
requests for subdivisions. A "subdivision" is any division of a lot, tract, or
parcel of land into two (2) or more lots and accompanied by proposed new
streets or extensions to existing streets, and/or extensions of Municipal sewer
and water services. A subdivision may be part of a planned unit development
(PUD). Planned unit developments require a public hearing under title 11, "Land
Use Regulations", of this Code, specifically subsection
11-7-2D of this Code.
   A.   The date that a completed application is accepted as complete by the
Administrator shall be the official submission date.
   B.   Upon receipt of a complete application for subdivision approval along
with all of the required submittals, the Administrator shall place the
application for review on the agenda before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Planning and Zoning Commission review shall be held at least forty five
(45) days after but within seventy five (75) days of the official submission
date if the agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission permits.
   C.   Notice and request for comment shall be mailed to agencies, utilities,
and other jurisdictions deemed appropriate by the Administrator or required by
Idaho Code no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the Planning and Zoning
Commission review. The notice and request for comment shall include application
information, notice of the review date, additional staff comments, and a date
by which comments are to be received. A copy of the application and a copy of
the subdivision plan shall be included.
   D.   The Administrator shall prepare a report for the Planning and Zoning
Commission that provides information about the site and the subdivision to aid
the commission in making a recommendation to the City Council. The report
should include, but is not limited to, the following information, whether part
of the application materials or otherwise:
      1.   The current zoning and comprehensive plan policies relevant to the
proposed subdivision.
      2.   Existing land use on the site of the subdivision as well as the
surrounding land use.
      3.   The location, size and adequacy of capacity of existing sewer and
water lines.
      4.   A description of the physical characteristics of the site to include
a basic inventory of vegetation and any unique features.
      5.   A description of existing streets serving the site of the
subdivision and a synopsis of the proposed streets.
      6.   A list of issues that the commission and Council can focus upon.
      7.   An analysis of the impact of the subdivision on the infrastructure
of the community. This shall include deficiencies in existing infrastructure
and what improvements would be needed to bring the infrastructure up to an
acceptable level of service.
      8.   Recommended conditions if the subdivision should be approved.
   E.   After the Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed the subdivision
plan, preliminary construction plans, staff report, and exhibits submitted at
the review, the commission shall forward a recommendation to the City Council.
The commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the review, unless
circumstances require a longer review period for reasons set forth in a motion
adopted by the commission. The Administrator shall notify the developer, in
writing, within seven (7) days of the action by the commission. Such
notification shall specify any recommended conditions or changes requested and
shall advise the developer that the subdivision will be placed on the agenda of
the City Council only upon the developer's written request.
   F.   The City Council, upon receipt of a staff report and recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Commission, and after an opportunity to review the
file and minutes of the meeting, shall act upon the request. The City Council
shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the subdivision within
thirty (30) days of the date of the Council meeting at which it is reviewed, or
in such time as it may be determined by motion approved by the City Council.
The Administrator shall notify the developer in writing of the decision of the
City Council and, in the case of approval or approval with conditions, shall
prepare a development agreement for signature by the developer and the City. If
a subdivision application is denied by City Council, a subsequent application
for subdividing the subject property cannot be submitted to the City within one
year of such denial unless a request for application resubmittal is received
and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the
Planning and Building Department, with the appropriate fee, and shall provide
the City Council with reasons why the application should be accepted and
processed. The City Council will review the request, determine whether or not
the proposal is significantly different than the one denied and permit an
application to be accepted and processed or deny the request.
   G.   Upon approval by the City Council, subsequent review and approval of
final construction plans by the City Engineer which substantially conform to
the subdivision plans approved by the City Council, and completion of a
development agreement, the developer may proceed with construction of the
subdivision.
   H.   No subdivision shall receive a recommendation of approval from the
Planning and Zoning Commission or be approved by the City Council unless
findings and conclusions are made that:
      1.   Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is
adequate in terms of quantity, and quality for the type of subdivision
proposed.
      2.   Adequate provisions have been made for a public sewage collection
system and that the existing treatment system can accommodate the proposed
sewer flows.
      3.   Proposed streets are consistent with the transportation element of
the comprehensive plan and any City transportation plans.
      4.   All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or
topographical conditions presenting hazards have been identified and that the
proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions.
      5.   The area proposed for subdivision is zoned for the proposed use and
the use conforms to other requirements found in this Code.
      6.   The developer has made adequate plans to ensure that the community
will bear no more than its fair share of costs to provide services by paying
fees, furnishing land, or providing other mitigation measures for off site
impacts to streets, parks, and other public facilities within the community.
   I.   The developer shall have construction plans prepared by a civil
engineer, licensed in the State. Such plans shall adhere to the design and
improvement standards set forth in this title as well as the City of Kellogg
public works standards. No construction of any kind shall take place on the
site of an approved subdivision until final construction plans are reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and Public Works Department, and a development
agreement and a construction improvement agreement are completed and properly
approved by the City. Systems reviewed and subject to staff approval include,
but are not limited to:
      1.   Streets, including curbs and sidewalks.
      2.   Water delivery system and water supply.
      3.   Sanitary sewer system.
      4.   Stormwater collection and treatment plans, including stormwater
management during construction.
      5.   Streetlight plans.
      6.   Off site improvements (streets, traffic signals, sidewalks,
lighting, etc.).
   J.   Time limits contained within this title are directory. Violation of
time limits established in this title shall not be the basis for damages and
shall have no effect on the approval or disapproval of a subdivision. Time
limits provided herein may be extended for good cause. The City Council
President and Mayor shall be informed of any failure of staff to meet time
limits, and shall take appropriate action to ensure that limits are conformed
to when circumstances allow. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-3-7: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS, APPROVAL DURATION:
   A.   Every subdivision shall conform to zoning and subdivision regulations
applicable at the official submission date.
   B.   The approval of a subdivision shall be effective for a period of three
(3) years from the date that the master development agreement is recorded
unless a different time period is requested by the developer, in writing at the
time of application, and agreed to by the City Council in a development
agreement. The master development agreement shall be signed and returned to the
City within sixty (60) days of release of the document by the City. By the end
of the agreed upon time period, the developer must have submitted a plat for
review and approval. If a plat is not submitted for final approval within the
three (3) year period or agreed upon time period, the subdivision approval may
be deemed null and void by City Council, and the developer may be required to
submit a new application.
   C.   Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the developer may
request an extension, in writing, from the Administrator. The Administrator may
grant an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good
cause by the developer and upon finding that City regulations have not been
changed significantly from those under which the original approval was
reviewed. The Administrator shall render a decision to grant or not grant an
extension within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal to the
Administrator. The developer may appeal the decision of the Administrator to
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   D.   At any time after subdivision approval and before submission of a
subdivision plat, the developer may request of the Administrator, in writing,
that an amendment be made to the subdivision plan or to conditions of approval.
If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan, the Administrator may
grant the amendment in writing. If the amendment is major or involves a
substantial change in the conditions of approval, the Administrator shall
submit the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a decision. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the request for the proposed
amendment in accordance with the same requirements for subdivision approval.
   E.   A review of a proposed major amendment shall be limited to whether the
proposed amendment should or should not be approved. The commission may
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any proposed major amendment
and may make any modifications in the terms and conditions of subdivision
approval reasonably related to the proposed amendment. The commission shall
render a decision on the proposed amendment within thirty (30) days from the
date of the review or in such time as it may determine by motion approved by
the commission. Any proposed changes to conditions shall be forwarded to the
City Council for review as would be the case for a new subdivision proposal.
Any changes approved by the City Council shall be included in the development
agreement or an addendum to the development agreement for the project. (Ord.
596, 6-13-2018)
12-3-8: PHASING OR SECTIONALIZING SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Large developments may be phased or sectionalized, to be developed in
portions periodically according to a proposed schedule. The developer shall
indicate plans for phasing or sectionalizing at the time of application. The
plans, subject to review and approval, shall show proposed phasing boundaries.
Proposed interim or temporary solutions to sanitary sewer and water systems and
to the handling of traffic on local streets, collectors, and arterials within
the subdivision, shall be shown on plans submitted along with a narrative
description of assurance of completion of permanent system improvements.
   B.   The development agreement for each subdivision must ensure that the
dedication of public streets and improvements will occur according to the
phasing plans, subject to conditions imposed by the City Council during
subdivision review. The Council may, in the interest of public safety and
welfare, require that certain collector streets and arterials be dedicated and
constructed in their entirety regardless of the phasing plan.
   C.   In approving a subdivision to be developed in phases, the City Council
may require that the development agreement indicate the phasing plans and that
the amounts calculated for guarantees are commensurate with the phasing plan.
The Council may require that the guarantee amount be that amount calculated for
each phase and may defer the remaining amounts of the guarantee until the
remaining sections of the subdivision are platted.
   D.   A phasing plan shall coordinate required infrastructure systems,
dedications, off site improvements, open space/parks, landscaping, private
utilities, or other elements of a subdivision. The plan may indicate times or
triggering mechanisms for improvements. Agreements between the developer and
the City concerning the acceleration or deceleration of development of the
subdivision may be included in the development agreement. Provisions of a
development agreement shall endeavor to the greatest extent possible to tie
together the contingencies of development of a phased project. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
CHAPTER 4
PLATS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Purpose
12-4-2: Application
12-4-3: Review
12-4-4: Approval
12-4-5: Recordation
12-4-6: Applicable Laws
12-4-7: Model Homes
12-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for plat review and
approval. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious
processing and recordation of subdivision plats. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-4-2: APPLICATION:
   A.   Following approval of a subdivision or minor subdivision, the developer
shall file, within the permitted time period, an application for final plat
review with the Administrator. The application for final plat review shall:
      1.   Be made on forms provided through the Planning and Building
Department.
      2.   Include the entire subdivision, minor subdivision, or section/phase
thereof as determined by a phasing plan approved during subdivision review.
      3.   Comply in all material respects with the approved subdivision or
minor subdivision plan, whichever is applicable.
      4.   Include all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of
all streets, local government uses, utilities, additional rights-of-way, parks,
and easements in a form approved by the City Attorney.
      5.   Be accompanied by a Public Works Department certification that all
the streets, water system, sanitary sewers, stormwater facilities and other
public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the
subdivision have been completed and accepted as required in these regulations,
or that a guarantee has been submitted in the proper form. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-4-3: REVIEW:
   A.   Upon submittal of the plat to the Administrator, a staff review will be
completed within twenty eight (28) days of acceptance. The review will
determine whether all conditions of the approved development agreement have
been completed and whether the plat is consistent with the approved
subdivision. Such review shall determine that:
      1.   The plat is in conformance with Idaho Code 50-1301 et seq., Plats
and Vacations.
      2.   The plat layout is as approved by the City Council during
subdivision review or as approved by the Administrator during minor subdivision
review.
      3.   A development agreement has been completed.
      4.   Language on the dedication section of the plat reflects what was
agreed to in the development agreement and that any dedications are accurately
described.
      5.   The appropriate signature blocks are on the plat and that all
signatures have been obtained except for the signatures of the City Engineer,
Mayor, City Clerk, and County Recorder.
      6.   Construction plans have been reviewed and approved.
      7.   All required on site and off site improvements have been constructed
and accepted by the Public Works Department, or have been suitably guaranteed.
      8.   Any mitigation required or determined in a development agreement,
has been satisfied or other suitable arrangements approved by the City Council
have been made. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-4-4: APPROVAL:
When staff and City Engineer review of the plat is completed and all required
terms and conditions are satisfied, staff may forward the plat to the City
Clerk recommending that it be submitted to the City Council for approval. The
City Clerk shall place the request for plat approval on the next available City
Council agenda. The Council shall review the subdivision and plat and, upon a
finding that all of the requirements have been satisfied, shall authorize the
Mayor and the City Clerk to sign. The City Engineer's signature shall be the
final approval assigned to the plat. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-4-5: RECORDATION:
After the plat is signed by the Mayor, City Clerk and City Engineer, the
developer shall record the plat with the County Recorder, and provide the
Administrator with a reproducible Mylar copy of the recorded plat. Upon
recordation of the plat and receipt of a reproducible Mylar of the recorded
plat, building permits may be issued for the lots created. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-4-6: APPLICABLE LAWS:
To obtain plat approval, the developer shall be in compliance with all Federal,
State and local laws applicable at the time that the plat is reviewed for
approval. The developer shall be in compliance with all local laws and
regulations applicable at the time that the subdivision was approved by the
City Council, or in the case of minor subdivisions, at the time the minor
subdivision was approved by the Administrator. A plat shall not be authorized
for recordation if there exists a violation to relevant ordinances or statutes.
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-4-7: MODEL HOMES:
In approved residential subdivisions, prior to plat approval but subsequent to
construction plan approval and completion of a construction improvement
agreement, and in accordance with terms of the development agreement, a
building permit or permits may be issued for the construction of a home or
homes to be used as models and not occupied until a plat is accepted. Model
homes shall not be open to the public until the Public Works Department has
determined that the homes can be safely accessed. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued, nor shall utilities be used by a resident, until streets and
utility systems are accepted by the Public Works Department and the plat is
recorded and sanitary restriction has been removed. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
SECTION:
12-5-1: Purpose And Authority
12-5-2: General
12-5-3: Elements Of Agreement
12-5-4: Covenants
12-5-5: Third Party Rights
12-5-6: Limitations On Liability
12-5-7: Developer's Compliance
12-5-8: Agreement To Run With Land
12-5-9: Amendments To The Agreement
12-5-10: Construction Improvement Agreement
12-5-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of a development agreement is to specify certain land use and
development regulations that will apply to the relevant property, to establish
conditions of approval, to establish terms of mitigation, to describe the scope
of construction improvements, and to foster an understanding between the City
and the developer. It shall be a requirement of compliance with this title that
a development agreement and construction improvement agreement be entered into
and approved by the City prior to initiating physical construction of
subdivision improvements or recordation of a subdivision plat. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-5-2: GENERAL:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the
developer of a proposed subdivision and the City (the "parties") and shall
contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required
by this title. The staff of the City, in conjunction with the City Attorney, is
authorized to negotiate development agreements on behalf of the City. The
development agreement shall be adopted by the City Council and recorded in the
County Recorder's Office. Development agreement requirements may be waived for
certain minor subdivisions upon a finding by the Administrator that they will
serve no purpose. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-3: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall be negotiated by the staff and City Attorney
and approved by the City Council prior to signature by the parties. A brief
statement shall be included describing the subdivision, its location, legal
description, number of lots, and the date of subdivision approval by the City
Council. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Any conditions of approval from the review and approval process.
   B.   Time limit, and provisions for extension or extinguishing the
agreement.
   C.   Phasing plans, if any, and a description of any required temporary
improvements and the terms of those improvements.
   D.   A description of construction improvements to be installed on site and
off site.
   E.   Covenants, if any, made by the developer to the City.
   F.   Covenants, if any, made by the City.
   G.   Details of dedications beyond those required.
   H.   Addenda, to include a construction improvement agreement. (Ord. 596, 6-
13-2018)
12-5-4: COVENANTS:
The City may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise
would constitute a breach of any covenant contained in a development agreement
if it makes a determination, on the record, that the action is necessary to
avoid a substantial risk to public health, safety, and general welfare. All
such covenants shall be subject to an additional proviso that the City may,
without incurring any liability, engage in action that would constitute a
breach of any such covenant if the action is required by Federal or State law.
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-5: THIRD PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the
development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any party who/which
is not a party to the development agreement. Purchasers of lots in approved
subdivisions are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of development
agreements. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-6: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the City shall not give rise to
monetary damages, but shall be enforceable only by resort to an action for
specific performance. No provision of any development agreement which is
contrary to law may be enforced. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-7: DEVELOPER'S COMPLIANCE:
Performance of the City's duties pursuant to a development agreement are
expressly conditioned upon the developer's substantial compliance with each and
every term, condition, provision, and covenant of the agreement, and all
applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-8: AGREEMENT TO RUN WITH LAND:
A development agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs,
and assignees of the developer. The development agreement, including addenda,
shall be filed with the County Recorder to give notice to any prospective
purchaser. The development agreement would expire at the agreed upon date set
forth within the agreement or, when the City shall file a release with the
County Recorder, when the terms of the agreement have been satisfied or are no
longer valid. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-9: AMENDMENTS TO THE AGREEMENT:
Should amendments to the agreement be necessary and if all parties are in
agreement, an addendum to the agreement shall be negotiated subject to review
by the City Attorney for signature of the parties. Either party may propose
amending the agreement by notifying other parties to the agreement in writing
of the nature of the amendment and the reasons why the amendment is necessary.
The party requesting the amendment shall be responsible for any costs
associated with the preparation of the addendum to the development agreement,
unless the parties agree to share the costs. Such cost sharing arrangement
shall be determined and agreed to, by the parties, prior to negotiating the
addendum to the agreement. Amendments must comply with the formalities of
approval, including approval by the City Council, which govern original
development agreements. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-5-10: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   An addendum to, or component of, a development agreement that sets
forth the specific public improvements to be constructed in the subdivision,
the manner and timing of the construction, duties and responsibilities of the
developer including the developer's duty to pay for the costs of operations of
the streetlights within the development for a period of one year following the
acceptance of the public improvements by the City Council, estimated costs of
the improvements, performance guarantee, maintenance, warranty, and standards
shall be deemed a construction improvement agreement.
   B.   A construction improvement agreement shall be reviewed by the City
Attorney prior to the signature of the parties (City and the developer). The
construction improvement agreement may be completed in conjunction with the
development agreement or subsequent to the development agreement.
   C.   A construction improvement agreement shall be executed prior to the
commencement of any construction related to the subdivision. Staging or
mobilization of equipment or establishing a temporary construction office or
equipment storage yard shall not be considered to be "construction" for
purposes of this section. Initiating actual construction prior to execution of
a construction improvement agreement by all parties shall constitute a
violation of this title.
   D.   A street naming and addressing plan shall be submitted for review and
approval, concurrently with construction plans. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 6
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Completion Of Improvements
12-6-2: Performance Guarantee
12-6-3: Guarantee Amount
12-6-4: Release Of Performance Guarantee
12-6-5: Dedications
12-6-6: Maintenance
12-6-7: Warranty Of Improvements
12-6-8: Warranty Guarantee
12-6-1: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All required improvements shall be completed within one year of the effective
date of the construction improvement agreement unless a different time period
is approved by City Council. Before a plat is signed by the City Engineer, the
developer shall be required to complete all street, sanitary, and other public
improvements, including lot improvements on individual lots as required in
these regulations and as approved by the City Council, or the developer shall
provide a suitable performance guarantee. No building shall be occupied, nor
shall any use be established in a subdivision, until all necessary improvements
have been installed and accepted for maintenance by the City or other public
service providers. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure to the greatest
extent possible that the health and safety of the public and the residents of
new subdivisions are protected. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-6-2: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
The developer may guarantee to complete all of the agreed upon improvements
within one year of the effective date of the construction improvement agreement
or within such alternative time period approved by City Council by providing to
the City one or more of the following instruments in an amount equal to at
least one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of improvements to be
guaranteed:
   A.   Performance Bond: The developer may provide a performance bond from a
company qualified by law to act as a surety in the State. The bond shall be in
the form approved by the City and name the City as the obligee and the
developer as principal.
   B.   Escrow: The developer may deposit funds in an escrow with a bank or
financial institution qualified by law to do business in the State. The
disbursement of the escrow funds shall be governed by an escrow agreement in a
form approved by the City.
   C.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: The developer may cause a bank or
financial institution, qualified by law to do business in the State to issue an
irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the City. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-6-3: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
   A.   The performance guarantee amount shall be one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the estimated costs of all improvements, not including those to be
constructed by private utilities. The developer's engineer shall have prepared,
documented, and certified each cost estimate. The estimated costs shall be
submitted by the developer to the City Engineer for approval. The estimated
cost of all improvements shall be the sum of the estimated cost approved by the
City Engineer.
   B.   If the developer is not in default under the terms of the development
agreement, the City may allow a proportionate reduction in the amount of the
performance guarantee in increments not less than twenty five percent (25%) of
the surety amount. The amount of the performance guarantee shall always be
greater than or equal to the amount of the cumulative required warranty amount.
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-6-4: RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
The City may release any performance guarantee which has not been used or
encumbered under provisions of the development agreement or this Code upon
final acceptance of all improvements and the posting of warranty guarantee as
set forth in this Code. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-6-5: DEDICATIONS:
Acceptance of dedication of streets or other public areas or facilities shall
be by the City Council after review and recommendation by the City Engineer and
Administrator. Any dedications for property and/or public improvements shall be
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-6-6: MAINTENANCE:
The developer shall perform capital maintenance of each required public
improvement until the City has expressly accepted the improvements. Details of
the maintenance provisions shall be included in the construction improvement
agreement. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-6-7: WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The developer shall warrant the design, construction materials, and
workmanship of the improvements installed pursuant to this title against any
failure or defect in design, construction, material, or workmanship for a
period of one year, except for sewer systems which shall be warranted until
such time as the number of active users on the system reaches twenty percent
(20%) of the approved user design capacity, but not less than one year or more
than three (3) years.
   B.   This warranty shall cover all direct and indirect costs of repair or
replacement, and damage to the property, improvements, or facilities of the
City or any other person, caused by such failure or defect or in the course of
repairs, any increase in cost to the City of operating and maintaining a City
improvement resulting from such failures, defects, or damages.
   C.   The warranty shall not extend to any failure or defect caused solely by
changes in design, construction, or materials required by the City as a
deviation from regular requirements established by this title. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-6-8: WARRANTY GUARANTEE:
To secure the developer's performance of the warranty of improvements, the
performance guarantee provided by the developer pursuant to this Code shall
remain in effect until the end of the warranty period or the developer shall
provide a warranty guarantee by one or more of the instruments described above
by the following table:
 
Actual Cost Of Improvements  Percent To Secure Warranty
Less than $500,000.00           10 percent
$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00    7.50 percent
Over $1,000,000.00              5 percent
 
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 7
SUBDIVISION DESIGN CRITERIA
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose
12-7-2: General Requirements
12-7-3: Lots And Tracts
12-7-4: Street Circulation And Design Standards
12-7-5: Pedestrian Walkways
12-7-6: Utility, Sidewalk And Drainage Easements
12-7-7: Storm Drainage
12-7-8: Utility Design And Standards
12-7-9: Street Trees
12-7-10: Residential Subdivision Design
12-7-11: Commercial/Industrial Subdivision Design
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of subdivision design is to create a functional and attractive
development that is consistent with the community's vision, goals and policies
found within the comprehensive plan and design goals set forth in this chapter
or other land use ordinances. Design standards are intended to provide
direction and ensure that subdivision improvements will be compatible with the
City's public utility and transportation systems. An express grant of
discretion to vary from these standards is empowered to the City Engineer. To
promote this purpose, subdivisions shall conform to the following general
guidance standards. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
General requirements are those that apply to all subdivisions proposed within
the corporate limits of the City of Kellogg.
   A.   Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations: In addition to the
requirements established in these regulations, all subdivisions shall comply
with the following:
      1.   All applicable statutory provisions.
      2.   This Code and adopted Building Codes.
      3.   Any rules administered or applied by the Department of Environmental
Quality and Panhandle Health District and/or appropriate State agencies.
      4.   The rules and regulations of the local highway district and the
Idaho Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained
therein abuts a State highway or highway district road.
      5.   The construction and design standards and regulations adopted by the
City of Kellogg.
   B.   Subdivision Name: The proposed name of a subdivision shall not
duplicate, or closely approximate, the name of any other subdivision in the
City or Shoshone County. Subdivision naming shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning and Building Department.
   C.   Addresses: Street addresses shall be assigned in accordance with the
addressing system in effect within the City. Addresses will be assigned prior
to issuance of any building permit on any lot.
   D.   Street Names: Names for new streets may be proposed by the developer
and must be approved as part of subdivision approval. Street names shall not
duplicate existing street names unless the proposed street is a continuation of
or is in alignment with an existing street. Street names shall be reviewed and
approved by Shoshone County prior to being entered into the emergency service
911 system. Street names shall be easily pronounced, not to be confused with
similar words.
   E.   Barrier Option Plan: If any of the land to be subdivided is within the
boundaries of the Bunker Hill Superfund Site as administered by Panhandle
Health District, the subdivision shall comply with the regulations as adopted
by the district. No construction shall commence until a barrier option plan has
been approved by the district. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-3: LOTS AND TRACTS:
   A.   Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the standards set
forth within the Kellogg zoning ordinance. Where lot sizes are more than double
the minimum required area for the zoning district, the potential for further
subdivision and impacts of further subdivision shall be considered in the
review.
   B.   Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. Lots
abutting a mid block pedestrian walkway shall be treated as a corner lot, with
regard to setbacks. The setback shall be measured from the walkway easement.
   C.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
to street centerlines or radial to curved street lines.
   D.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary, due to restricted access along collector and arterial streets,
or to overcome specific site constraints.
   E.   Tracts: Parcels of land within a subdivision set aside for non-
occupancy shall be designated as tracts.
   F.   Flag Lots: Flag lots may be created, with the approval of the
Administrator, so long as sufficient widths for access and utilities are
provided. Where multiple flag lots are created which abut one another,
easements may be required by the Administrator over the "pole" portions of such
flag lots. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-4: STREET CIRCULATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Dedication, Location And Arrangement: All collector and arterial
streets and associated rights-of-way shall be dedicated, designed, and
constructed to conform with the location and arrangement indicated within the
Silver Valley transportation plan, and provisions set forth within this
chapter. All other street classifications shall be located to provide for
roadway continuity within the community to the greatest extent possible.
      1.   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision
for the continuation of streets in the adjoining areas. Street layout shall
conform to the most advantageous development of the subject property and
adjoining areas.
      2.   To facilitate continuity of streets and/or utilities to serve
adjacent properties, the City may require dedication of rights-of-way and/or
easements beyond the current phase of a multiphase development.
      3.   Half streets shall be generally limited where allowed rights-of-way
shall be provided and streets shall be constructed to provide for street
centerline plus ten feet (10') on the opposite side of the centerline. Along
collectors and arterials that are not fully developed, rights-of-way shall be
provided and streets shall be constructed to provide for street centerline plus
ten feet (10') on the opposite side of centerline.
      4.   Stub streets will be required where a subdivision is located
adjacent to undeveloped property and street connections would provide for
transportation continuity between the properties.
      5.   Streets shall be arranged and located in relationship to existing or
planned topography to result in usable lots, safe streets, and acceptable
gradients.
      6.   Traffic calming measures may be incorporated into design of local
streets, and some minor collectors where approved by the City Engineer.
Acceptable calming measures include roundabouts, traffic circles, landscaping,
curb extensions, mid block medians, and other acceptable measures.
      7.   To facilitate vehicle and pedestrian movements, enhance emergency
service, and reduce City maintenance, the use of cul-de-sacs should be limited
to portions of developments in which street continuity is not foreseeable due
to property configurations.
      8.   Private streets may be approved as a part of a PUD or subdivision,
or by the City Council, if: a) the proposed street(s) are not required to
provide continuity or add circulation to the overall City transportation
system, and b) emergency service is not compromised. Private streets and
associated streetlights shall meet City public street and illumination
standards.
      9.   Public alleys shall be avoided except where deemed necessary by the
Council for the continuation of existing utilities.
      10.   Provisions for postal delivery services shall be incorporated into
the design of all subdivisions.
   B.   Specifications:
      1.   Streets shall be designed to comply with City standards as approved
by City Council and on file within the City Public Works Department and the
current editions of the Idaho "Standards for Public Works Construction", and
American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
"Geometric Guidelines". Street signage, striping and traffic control shall be
designed to comply with the latest version and exceptions of the "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) as adopted per Idaho Code and City
standards, as approved and on file with the Public Works Department. Streets or
highways under the jurisdiction of other agencies shall be designed to the
current standards of those agencies.
      2.   Street and rights-of-way width shall conform to the following table:
      TABLE B-1
 
Street Classification           Rights-Of-Way1 Street Width2 Curb Requirements3
Local residential (parking both 65 feet        32 feet       Yes
sides)
Local residential collector     70 feet        36 feet       Yes
(with parking both sides)
Local commercial/ industrial    75 feet        40 feet       Yes
Minor collector                 80 feet        45 feet       Yes
Arterial (3 lane)               80 feet        48 feet       Yes
Alley                           15 feet        15 feet       No
 
   Notes:
      1.    Rights-of-way may be reduced by 10 feet if appropriately located
community swales are used in place of continuous street side swales. In no case
shall rights-of- way be less than 55 feet.
      2.    Street width is measured to the face of curb, or edge of asphalt.
      3.    Rolled curb is permitted only on residential designated streets.
---------------------
      3.   Other rights-of-way and street sections may be adopted by the City
for special circumstances to meet overall City transportation needs.
         a.   Street Grades: All new roadways shall be designed with a minimum
longitudinal grade of 0.8 percent. Street grades matching into existing roadway
conditions may be allowed minimum grades of 0.5 percent when constructed with a
concrete gutter. Maximum street grades shall be eight percent (8%) with the
exception of arterials, which shall be six percent (6%).
         b.   Street Cross Slopes: Cross slopes for new roadways shall be
designed between 1.5 percent to 2.25 percent. Roadways with an inverted crown
shall be designed to a one percent (1%) cross slope. Street cross slopes may be
varied from one percent to 3.5 percent to achieve minimum longitudinal grades
and provide for proper drainage when widening or matching into existing
roadways.
         c.   Street Alignment:
            (1)   Minimum centerline radius shall be one hundred seventy five
feet (175') for local streets, with design speeds of twenty five (25) miles per
hour; collectors and arterials shall be based upon the design speeds (35 mph -
475 feet, 40 mph - 675 feet, 45 mph - 950 feet), as determined by the City
Engineer. Private streets based upon twenty (20) miles per hour design speeds
shall be one hundred feet (100'). For tangent deflections of ten degrees (10°)
or less, horizontal curves are not required.
   C.   Intersections:
      1.   Intersection Of More Than Two Streets: The intersection of more than
two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided, except where it is impracticable
to secure a proper system otherwise.
      2.   Angles: Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a
right angle (90 degrees) as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles
less than sixty degrees (60°) shall be approved. Street intersections between
sixty degrees (60°) and eighty degrees (80°) shall utilize roadway markers and
striping to orient vehicles near ninety degrees (90°).
      3.   Curb Returns: Curb returns shall be designed to accommodate the
street classification, per the following table:
 
Street Classification                          Curb Return Radius
Minimum curb return radius with typical crown:  
 Principal arterial                           35 feet
 Arterial                                     35 feet
 Minor collector                              30 feet
 Local                                        20 feet
 
   D.   Approaches: Approach locations shall take into consideration existing
and projected traffic volumes, accident history, internal circulation, drainage
requirements and physical features of lands adjoining the street. Shared
approaches, where suitable are encouraged.
      1.   T-Intersection: Drive approaches on opposite sides of all roadways
except local (residential) shall be offset to produce T-intersections, unless
center medians exist.
      2.   Restricted Access: "Restricted access" is defined as the prohibition
of one or more movements within an intersection or at an access location. Where
restricted access is required, a physical barrier that inhibits the restricted
movement and signage shall be provided. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-5: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
   A.   Rights-of-way or easements for pedestrian walkways shall be required
where necessary, to provide convenient pedestrian circulation throughout
subdivisions to major roadways, schools, parks, shopping areas, or other
pedestrian attractions. The dedicated pedestrian area shall be at least fifteen
feet (15') in width.
   B.   A five foot (5'), minimum, concrete sidewalk shall be provided along
both sides of all streets, except alleys. Wider sidewalk widths may be required
in commercial zones, along principal school routes, or in other areas where
significant pedestrian volumes are anticipated. Sidewalks shall be in
accordance with ADA standards as they exist or subsequently amended.
   C.   A grassy swale or landscape planting area shall be located to provide a
separation between the edge of pavement or curb and the sidewalk or multi-use
trail. The minimum separation shall be six feet (6'), except in cases where the
City Engineer deems that placement of the sidewalk or trail adjacent to a
concrete curb is warranted, based on similar facilities in the immediate
vicinity, constraints with available rights-of-way or conflicts with existing
buildings. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-6: UTILITY, SIDEWALK AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility, sidewalk and drainage easements shall be provided along all
rights-of-way. The easements will vary between ten feet (10') and fifteen feet
(15') depending upon the street design and available rights-of-way. Five foot
(5') utility easements shall be provided along side and rear lot lines when
requested by the utility companies.
   B.   Additional drainage easements may be required to accommodate designs
utilizing common drainage swales. The easement area shall encompass the entire
swale area (including side slopes), plus any additional area required by the
City for access and maintenance purposes.
   C.   Upon private streets, an easement encompassing the street section shall
be granted to the City, other political subdivisions, and public and private
utilities, to provide for the construction, operation and maintenance of
utilities. The City may require additional public access easements for
sidewalks and/or multi-use trails, in order to maintain pedestrian and non-
vehicular connectivity. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-7: STORM DRAINAGE:
   A.   Storm drainage shall be designed to accommodate the design storm event
and provide for the first half inch of runoff. The treatment methodology shall
comply with the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality's Best Management
Practices, primarily utilizing grassy swales. Grassy swales may be continuous
street side, community type designs, or a combination of both types; however,
all swales shall be designed to be easily visible and accessible for
maintenance.
   B.   Swales are to be irrigated and provided with grass turf or other
vegetation (including trees) that will survive in an occasional submerged or
saturated condition. The design and placement of grassy swales shall take into
consideration their effect on the overall site appearance and landscaping.
(Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-8: UTILITY DESIGN AND STANDARDS:
   A.   City sanitary sewer and water system design shall be in conformance
with the City and water district construction standards. Utility designs shall
additionally conform to local standards as set forth by City resolutions,
ordinances, and rules enforced by the Idaho Department of Environmental
Quality, Panhandle Health District, and other appropriate agencies.
   B.   City and district utilities shall be installed and extended to carry
service beyond the proposed development through extensions to property lines
and by providing appropriate line size, depth and location. When City utility
extensions are required to serve to and along developments, main or service
laterals to adjoining properties are to be provided per the City's direction.
   C.   Dry utilities (electrical, cable, gas, etc.) shall be located within
the right-of-way or easements per City standards. Dry utilities shall be
coordinated to minimize the use of available rights-of- way or easements, and
shall be installed to accommodate future roadway expansions. (Ord. 596, 6-13-
2018)
12-7-9: STREET TREES:
   A.   Street Trees Required: Street trees are required within the rights-of-
way along both sides of all streets, in accordance with an approved street tree
plan. Trees may be massed, spaced evenly along the street, or both. Within an
area between the edge of pavement and fifty feet (50') from the centerline of
the street, there is for every forty feet (40') of street frontage an average
of one deciduous tree that is suitable for street tree planting. Suitability of
trees for planting along rights-of-way shall be determined by ultimate size,
lack of interference with utilities and sidewalks, appropriate planting zone,
and common nursery standards.
   B.   Street Tree Plan: A street tree plan, prepared by a landscape architect
licensed in the State of Idaho, shall be submitted for review and approval
prior to commencement of any subdivision construction. The plan shall identify
type, size and location of trees and planting and construction details. Where
existing trees are to be retained, the plan should indicate proposed methods of
protection during construction.
   C.   Tree Locations: Tree locations shall not interfere with utilities,
sidewalks, intersection and drive approach visibility, or streetlights. Plans
may be altered to accommodate driveways or other elements upon review and
approval by the City.
   D.   Planting: The method and timing of tree planting shall be indicated
with the subdivision application, reviewed and approved, and placed in the
development agreement.
   E.   Irrigation And Maintenance: Street trees shall be irrigated and
maintained by the adjacent property owner, a homeowners' association, a
combination thereof, or as determined during subdivision review and placed into
the development agreement. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-10: RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
   A.   Residential Lot Access: Residential lots shall not front upon or
directly access streets with a classification of minor collector or higher.
Exceptions may be requested and granted in the approval process to accommodate
existing uses. If driveway access locations are indicated within the
subdivision plans, they shall comply with driveways and curb cut standards in
this Code.
   B.   Residential Lot Frontage: All residential lots shall abut a publicly
dedicated street, or an approved private street. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
12-7-11: COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
   A.   Limited Access To Arterial And Collector Streets: Access points shall
be shown on the subdivision plan and become part of the recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the decision of the City Council.
   B.   Commercial; Industrial Lots: Lots within a commercial/industrial
subdivision are not required to front on a public street but must have access
provided through an easement or other arrangement. Review and approval of
commercial/industrial subdivisions should consider the types of uses envisioned
and shall focus on infrastructure provisions, circulation design, potential
traffic impacts and mitigation, access provisions, and any other issues
identified by staff at the pre-application review that pertain to the proposed
subdivision.
   C.   Commercial; Industrial Standards: The applicant shall show that the
streets and block patterns proposed are suitable for the uses anticipated, and
considers other potential or existing uses in the vicinity. Residential uses
adjacent to commercial/industrial subdivisions shall be protected from
potential nuisances (noise, odor, light, etc.) through the use of buffers,
landscaping, setbacks, or open space. (Ord. 596, 6-13-2018)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: General Provisions
13-1-4: Administration
13-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
13-1-6: Variance And Appeal Procedures
13-1-7: Penalties For Violation
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho
Code 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a
floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies floodplains
and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains that are
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
   B.   Findings Of Fact: The flood hazard areas of the city of Kellogg are
subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
      1.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      2.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
      3.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
      4.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
      5.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters.
   D.   Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.   Protect human life, health and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions. (Ord. 560, 10-17-2012)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. An insurable building should not be classified as an accessory or
appurtenant structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet (3'),
and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, V. Also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded each year. Also known as the "regulatory flood".
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood
in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on
the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of
the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline
utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material
facilities.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: The value of improvements, requiring a
permit, are cumulated over a five (5) year period and will count collectively
toward the improvement threshold of forty nine percent (49%) of the building's
preimprovement market value.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
has been the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of
mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials;
specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term
"development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair
of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or
drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to
lawful rights and obligations.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk
and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before September 26, 2008.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 26, 2008.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by
floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration or U.S. department of housing and urban
development, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as zone A. The FHBM usually is the initial flood hazard map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard
and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any
increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, elevated above BFE.
Therefore the flood protection elevation for Kellogg is equal to BFE plus
allowed floodway elevation.
FLOODPLAIN 1 : The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is
surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood
fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge
and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY: A facility that cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The
term does not include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG related to
building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following
categories:
   A.   Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. An LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
   B.   Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data
showing, usually due to manmade changes, changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, an LOMR-F, is a determination that a structure or parcel
has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from
the special flood hazard area.
   C.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment
by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum national
flood insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend
or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway
maps, or flood insurance studies.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for LAG related
to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating,
or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could
be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space. An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
structure's lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinant for the flood
insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: For the purposes of this chapter, a structure, transportable
in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed on or after September 26, 2008.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis,
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost where the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds forty nine
percent (49%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b) in the
case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not include
either:
   A.   A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 560, 10-
17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. IC 46-1021.
13-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Kellogg.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are
otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance
study (FIS) for Shoshone County and incorporated areas, dated September 26,
2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood
insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file
at the office of the city clerk, 1007 McKinley Avenue, Kellogg, Idaho.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special
flood hazard areas established in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   E.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Kellogg or by any
officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 560, 10-
17-2012)
13-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The planning
administrator is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator who is
responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the
administrator or the administrator's designee prior to starting development
activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Application Stage:
         a.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project
area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage
facilities;
         b.   Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or
highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawl spaces or
basement, of all proposed structures;
         c.   Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed;
         d.   Design certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
13-1-5G2 of this chapter; and
         e.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
      2.   Construction Stage:
         a.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification
of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation
or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential
structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. A
finished construction elevation certificate shall be provided to the
administrator prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy.
         b.   Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain
administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the
corrections shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop
work order for the project.
      3.   Technical Review:
         a.   If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the
technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for
an independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the
letter of map revision process. The applicant will pay the costs of an
independent technical review.
      4.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
         a.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and thereafter is
pursued to completion.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator: Duties of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have
been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including section 404 of the federal water pollution
control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the endangered species act of
1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and state of Idaho stream channel alteration permits,
Idaho Code title 42, chapter 38 require that copies of such permits be provided
and maintained on file.
      3.   When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available,
then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not
available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood
hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      5.   Obtain, and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical
datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor
level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved
structures.
      6.   Obtain, and record the actual elevation, in relation to the vertical
datum on the effective FIRM to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      7.   When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
      8.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.
      9.   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the city/county clerk or his/her designee and shall
be open for public inspection.
      10.   Maintaining permit records by parcel number or address so that the
history of improvements or repairs, requiring a permit, is checked before a
permit is issued. This is done to monitor and track cumulative substantial
improvement. The construction value of permits for reconstruction and repairs
to damaged building and improvements, modifications, and additions to existing
building are counted cumulative for a period of five (5) years. This will
determine whether or not the total value of permits exceeds forty nine percent
(49%) of the preconstruction market value of the building at the time of the
first permit after adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 560, 10-17-2012)
13-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Subdivision Standards:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      2.   All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include
the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for
subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres, whichever is less.
      4.   All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
      5.   All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   B.   Construction Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the
following provisions are required:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      3.   New construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that
includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the
foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings meeting the following
criteria:
            (1)   A total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the higher of the exterior grade or floor immediately below the
opening;
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
         b.   To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of
vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
         c.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         d.   For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the
guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance,
specifically:
            (1)   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second;
            (2)   Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be
more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
            (3)   Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
lowest interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point;
            (4)   Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space.
      5.   All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all
electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/
or elevated above the base flood elevation to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding.
      6.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      7.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      8.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      9.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
that is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken
only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety
standards.
      10.   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the area of special flood hazard.
Construction of new critical facilities within the area of special flood hazard
shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above BFE or to the height
of 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access routes elevated to or above the
base flood elevation shall be provided to the new critical facility.
   C.   Manufactured Home Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where
the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for manufactured
homes and recreational vehicles that are an allowed use under the zoning
ordinance shall apply:
      1.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
         a.   On individual lots or parcels.
         b.   In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions.
         c.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a
flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood
protection elevation.
      2.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the
flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher.
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by
reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent
grade.
      3.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.
      4.   Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the
flood vent requirements in subsection B4 of this section.
   D.   Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than
five hundred (500) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following
standards:
      1.   It shall not be used for human habitation;
      2.   It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      3.   It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      4.   It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      5.   Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated
or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
      6.   It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection B4 of this
section.
   E.   Recreational Vehicle Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard,
recreational vehicles must either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
      3.   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new
construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   F.   Floodway Standards: The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:
      1.   A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment
review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must
include:
         a.   Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or
construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an
increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;
         b.   Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel
improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction, do
not cause increases in downstream flood flows;
         c.   Certification and documentation by a licensed professional
engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;
         d.   The administrator may make the encroachment determination for
minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g.,
paving a driveway or parking lot at existing grade, open fences and small
isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone pole).
      2.   Upon demonstrating that there are no alternatives, the applicant may
propose an encroachment in the floodway that will cause an increase in the base
flood elevation in excess of the allowable level provided that the applicant
obtain a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA before the development
can be approved and permitted.
   G.   Standards For Zones With Base Flood Elevations: In special flood hazard
areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following
provisions are required:
      1.   New Residential Construction And Substantial Improvements:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction
or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the
community's flood protection elevation. If solid foundation perimeter walls are
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction
standards in subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction:
         a.   New construction or the substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed
if the new construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to
the flood protection elevation or to one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed
professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
these provisions, and shall provide certification to the administrator.
      3.   Floodway Has Not Been Determined: Where the floodway has not been
determined, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted in zones A1-30 and AE on the effective
FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot (1') at any point within the community. Applicants of proposed projects
that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot (1') are required to
obtain and submit to the floodplain administrator, a conditional letter of map
revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
      4.   Changes To Flood Hazard Map: Postconstruction, the applicant must
apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map
proposed in the CLOMR.
      5.   Drainage Paths: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide floodwater around and away from proposed and existing structures.
   H.   Standards For Zones Without Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A
Zones): These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist
but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A zones), or where base
flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.
      1.   When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified
by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data
are not available from any source, only then subsections H2 and H3 of this
section shall apply.
         a.   Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood
elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot (1') shall obtain a conditional letter of map
revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
      2.   No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located
within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever
is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by
a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
      3.   In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new
construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the
lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl space)
elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade at the
building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsections B and C of this section.
   I.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Shallow flooding
areas designated AO zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base
flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with no clearly defined channel. The
following provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number
specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood depth
number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at
least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the construction standards in subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the
specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest adjacent
grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these
provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away
from all proposed and existing structures.
   J.   Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when
any change occurs within its banks.
      1.   The bank full flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bank full flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
      2.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho
department of water resources stream channel alteration program must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the
federal emergency management agency.
      3.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
      4.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in subsections K1 and K2 of this section when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.
   K.   Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
      1.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         a.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         b.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area in accordance with subsection A3 of this section;
         c.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts;
         d.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring
establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection A3 of this
section.
      2.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data
prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for
these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 560,
10-17-2012)
13-1-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the city clerk on
the form provided by the city of Kellogg and include, at a minimum, the same
information required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis
for the variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for public hearing at the next planning commission meeting
in which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper of the city of Kellogg at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice
shall be provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances may be issued upon:
         a.   A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
      5.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.   Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the city clerk within fourteen (14)
days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the administrator.
Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the
administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the
appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for
the next available city council meeting to be heard. The city council shall
consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
            (11)   The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   E.   Decision: The city council decision on appeal shall be in writing and
set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision.
(Ord. 560, 10-17-2012)
13-1-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered
unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 560, 10-17-2012)
TITLE 14
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1:      Title And Purpose
14-1-2:      Definitions
14-1-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this article shall be known as the "City of Kellogg
Development Impact Fee Ordinance." The purpose of these regulations is to
prescribe the procedure whereby developers of land shall pay an impact fee as
set forth in this article for the purpose of providing the public facilities
and system improvements needed to serve future residents and users of such
development. It is further the purpose of this article to:
A.   Ensure that adequate facilities are available to serve new growth and
development;
B.   Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform standards
by which the City may require that those who benefit from new growth and
development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development;
C.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are required
to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development and to prevent duplicate and ad hoc
development requirements;
D.   Collect and expend development impact fees pursuant to the enabling powers
granted by the provision of the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act, Title 67,
Chapter 82, Idaho Code;
E.   Provide the legal and procedural basis for the implementation of
development impact fees within the City and/or the Area of City Impact; and
F.   Ensure that any capital improvement funded wholly or in part with impact
fee revenue shall first be included in an approved capital improvements plan
that lists the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fee revenues
as well as the estimated costs and timing for each improvement. (Ord. 607, 2-
12-2020)
14-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for new construction and additions
pursuant to Section
4-1-3  of the Municipal Code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or
more, by new construction or other action, which increase the service capacity
of a public facility, or service improvement.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted and amended pursuant to the provision
of the Development Impact Fee Act, Idaho Code 67-8208 that identifies capital
improvements for which development impact fees may be used as a funding source.
The capital improvements plan is included as a part of the Development Impact
Fee Report.
CITY: The City of Kellogg, a municipal corporation duly organized pursuant to
the laws of the State of Idaho.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, the
use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires
issuance of a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home permit, which
creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written duly authorized document from the City which
authorizes the commencement of a development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed as a condition of
development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements needed to serve development. This term is also referred to as an
impact fee in this article. The term does not include the following:
   1.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review or inspection
cost associated with permits required for development;
   2.   Connection or hookup charges;
   3.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation
charges for services provided directly to the development; or
   4.   Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the City
has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the development
if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the
construction or installation of the capital improvements, unless a written
agreement is made pursuant to Section 67-8209(3), Idaho Code, for credit or
reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or
other governmental action approving or authorizing a particular development
project including, but not limited to a rezoning, which requirement compels the
payment, dedication or contribution of goods, services, land, or money as a
condition of approval.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary
impact.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the City to:
   1.   Result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will
significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated
from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development
agreement as allowed by Section 67-8214(2), Idaho Code;
   2.   Result in the need for system improvements which are not identified in
the Capital Improvements Plan; and
   3.   Have an impact which results in a lower than acceptable level of
service.
FEE PAYER: That person who pays or is required to pay a development impact fee.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or
structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct
of the business or use, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It
does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics when not used for human
occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building, carport, or the main
building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to
meet any City parking requirement nor nonresidential facilities; arcades,
porticoes, and similar open areas which are located at or near street level,
which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used
as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.
IMPACT FEE: See Development Impact Fee.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land
uses, densities, intensities, and population in the service area over at least
a twenty (20) year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and
service demand for public facilities.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile
home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this subsection except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and
complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a
manufactured/mobile home, which is constructed according to standards contained
in the International Building Code, as adopted or any amendments thereto, which
is of closed construction and is either entirely or substantially prefabricated
or assembled at a place other than the building site.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future
payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction or money.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to system improvements, project improvements
are site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide
service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use
and the convenience of the occupants or users of the project.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined
pursuant to Section 67-8207, Idaho Code, which reasonably relates to the
service demands and needs of the project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Means those types of improvements described in Idaho Code
50-1703, including but not limited to the following:
   1.   Water supply production, treatment, storage, and distribution
facilities;
   2.   Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
   3.   Roads, streets and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals,
landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways;
   4.   Storm water collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal
facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and
enhancement improvements;
   5.   Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital
improvements; and
   6.   Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency
medical and rescue and street lighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: The permit required by the City Building Department
for construction, placement, and installation of, and additions to modular
structures and manufactured/mobile homes.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, means capital
improvements to public facilities which are designed to provide service to a
service area including, without limitation, the type of improvements described
in Section 50-1703, Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of
system improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs
attributable thereto, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs
described in Section 50-1702(h), Idaho Code, to provide additional public
facilities needed to service new growth and development. For clarification,
system improvement costs do not include:
   1.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than
capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan;
   2.   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements;
   3.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
   4.   Administrative and operating costs of the City unless such costs are
attributable to development of the capital improvements plan, as provided in
Idaho Code 67-8208; or
   5.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or
other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the
City to finance capital improvements identified in the capital improvements
plan.
UNIT(S) OF DEVELOPMENT: A quantifiable increment of development activity
measured in terms of dwelling units, or other appropriate measurements
contained in the impact fee schedule incorporated in the "Report." (Ord. 607,
2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 2
APPLICATION
SECTION:
14-2-1:      Application
14-2-1: APPLICATION:
A.   The provisions of this article shall apply uniformly to all those who
benefit from new growth and development except as provided below.
B.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
   1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which was
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
   2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of service units;
   3.   Replacing a residential unit, including a modular building or
manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot,
provided that the number of service units does not increase;
   4.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
   5.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of service units;
   6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements; or
   7.   Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility bills
and tax records, to the installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile
home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a development
impact fee has been paid previously, and as long as there is no increase in
service units.
   8.   Construction or development by the city and by political subdivisions
that are classified as taxing districts pursuant to Idaho Code Section 63-201,
or its successor, shall be exempt from payment of the development impact fees
provided for herein.
C.   An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a
building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee
payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the
Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, within ninety (90)
days. Appeals of the Building Official's, or his or her duly designated agent,
determination shall be made under the provisions of 14-10 of this article
entitled "Appeals." (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 2
APPLICATION
SECTION:
14-2-1:      Application
14-2-1: APPLICATION:
A.   The provisions of this article shall apply uniformly to all those who
benefit from new growth and development except as provided below.
B.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
   1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which was
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
   2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of service units;
   3.   Replacing a residential unit, including a modular building or
manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot,
provided that the number of service units does not increase;
   4.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
   5.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of service units;
   6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements; or
   7.   Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility bills
and tax records, to the installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile
home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a development
impact fee has been paid previously, and as long as there is no increase in
service units.
   8.   Construction or development by the city and by political subdivisions
that are classified as taxing districts pursuant to Idaho Code Section 63-201,
or its successor, shall be exempt from payment of the development impact fees
provided for herein.
C.   An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a
building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee
payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the
Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, within ninety (90)
days. Appeals of the Building Official's, or his or her duly designated agent,
determination shall be made under the provisions of 14-10 of this article
entitled "Appeals." (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 3
COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE
SECTION
14-3-1:      Collection Of Impact Fee
14-3-1: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE:
A.   The development impact fee shall be paid and collected at the time of
issuance of a building permit, a site development permit, or a manufactured/
mobile home installation permit.
B.   No building permit or other equivalent City approval shall be issued for
development as herein defined unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this
article.
C.   A manufactured/mobile home unit may not locate on a manufactured/mobile
home site unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this article or has been
paid on a previous manufactured/mobile home unit on the same site.
D.   In the event payment is dishonored, the City shall have all lawful
remedies including but not necessarily limited to the withholding of utility
services, the imposition of reasonable interest and penalties, the imposition
of liens pursuant to Chapter 5, Title 45, Idaho Code, the withholding of other
City approvals required for the development of other properties owned by the
fee payor, and the issuance of "stop work" orders, and the revocation or
suspension of the building permit. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 4
CAPITAL/SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
SECTION:
14-4-1:      Capital/System Improvement Projects
14-4-1: CAPITAL/SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The capital/system improvement projects to be financed by the impact fee are
those listed in the "Report," incorporated herein by reference along with all
footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other attachments referenced. (Ord. 607,
2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 5
CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
14-5-1:      Calculation Of Impact Fee
14-5-1: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE:
A.   The City shall calculate the amount of the impact fee due for each
building permit, site development permit, and manufactured/mobile home
installation permit by the procedure set forth in the "Report" within thirty
(30) days of submittal of complete permit plans for residential development and
within sixty (60) days of submittal of complete permit plans for commercial
development.
B.   The calculation of a development impact fee shall be in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. A development impact fee shall not be
deemed invalid because payment of the fee may result in an incidental benefit
to owners or developers within the service area other than the person paying
the fee.
C.   A development impact fee shall be calculated on the basis of levels of
service for public facilities adopted in this article and in the "Report" that
are applicable to existing development as well as new growth and development.
The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or existing
public facilities for which a development impact fee is imposed must be
attributable to the capacity demands generated by the new development.
D.   If the development for which a building permit, site development permit,
or manufactured/mobile home installation permit, is sought contains a mix of
uses, the impact fee will be calculated for each type of development.
E.   Prior to making an application for a building permit, site development
permit, manufactured/mobile home installation permit, a prospective applicant
may request in writing a written certification of the development impact fee
schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall
establish the development fee for a period of one (1) year from the date of
certification. The certification shall include an expansion of facilities
considered under Section 67-8207, Idaho Code. The certification shall specify
the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used.
F.   Individual assessment of impact fees is permitted in situations where the
fee payer can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the established
impact fee is inappropriate.
   1.   Individual assessments of development impact fees may be made by
application to the Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent,
prior to receiving building permits, site development permits, manufactured/
mobile home installation permits, or other necessary approvals from the City.
The Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, shall evaluate such
individual assessments under the guidelines provided for in Section F(4) of
this Chapter. If the guidelines are met, the individual assessment shall be
approved by the Building Official, or his or her designated agent, and
forwarded to the City Council within thirty (30) days of receiving such
application.
   2.   Late applications for individual assessments may be submitted within
thirty (30) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer
makes a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or
discoverable prior to receipt of a building permit and that undue hardship
would result if said application is not considered.
   3.   The Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, shall
render a written decision regarding the individual assessment and forward it to
the City Council within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is
submitted. The decision of the Building Official, or his or her duly designated
agent, shall establish the impact fee for the project in question for a period
of one (1) year from the date said decision becomes final.
   4.   The Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, shall
evaluate an application for individual assessment and may approve the same if
fee payer has shown by clear and convincing evidence that the established
impact fee is inappropriate and that the following facts and conditions exist:
      a.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to
the development that do not apply generally to other properties in the vicinity
of the development.
      b.   An individual assessment is necessary for the reasonable and
acceptable development of the property.
      c.   The approval of the individual assessment will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in
which the development is located.
      d.   The approval of the individual assessment will not adversely affect
the capital improvement plan for the City.
         (1)   Appeals of the Building Official's, or his or her duly
designated agent's, decision regarding determination of individual assessment
shall be made to the City Council by the filing of an appeal with the City
Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing, faxing, or personal
delivery of written notice of the decision of the Building Official, or his or
her duly designated agent. Final determination regarding individual assessments
shall be made by the City Council.
         (2)   The impact fees and trip generation rates (as determined by the
latest edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers trip generation manual)
are set forth in the "Report." The City Council may set forth impact fees and
trip generation rates by resolution and modify the same by resolution as
allowed by law. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION
SECTION:
14-6-1:      General Methodology For Calculation
14-6-1: GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION:
A.   The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated using the methodology
contained in the "Report."
B.   A development impact fee shall not exceed a proportionate share of the
cost of system improvements determined in accordance with Section 67-8207,
Idaho Code. Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement
costs or reasonable estimates of such costs.
C.   A developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate
share of system improvement costs by payment of development impact fees
according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development
project's proportionate share of system improvement costs, except as provided
in Section 67-8214(3), Idaho Code. The schedule of development impact fees for
various land users per unit of development shall be as set forth in the
"Report."
D.   Proportionate Share Determination:
   1.   All development impact fees shall be based on a reasonable and fair
formula or method under which the development impact fee imposed does not
exceed a proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the
City in the provision of system improvements to serve the new development. The
proportionate share is the costs attributable to the new development after the
City considers the following:
      a.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication
of land, or construction of system improvements;
      b.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new development in the form of user fees, debt service payments, or taxes which
are dedicated for system improvements for which development impact fees would
otherwise be imposed; and
      c.   All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
   2.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements to be paid by the developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the City:
      a.   The cost of existing system improvements within the service area or
areas;
      b.   The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
      c.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to the cost
of system improvements through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system improvements
through developer or landowner contributions;
      d.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to
the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
      e.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
      f.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development;
      g.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      h.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation. The City shall develop a
plan for alternative sources of revenue, which shall include but not
necessarily be limited to plans generated during the City's annual budget
process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, implementation of user fees
and various forms of utilities. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE
SECTION
14-7-1:      Administration Of Impact Fee
14-7-1: ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE:
A.   Upon receipt of impact fees, the City Clerk, or her or his duly designated
agent, shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate accounts
as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing
accounts, within the Capital Projects Fund, in a bank authorized to receive
deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to
that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of
such account.
B.   The City Clerk, or her or his duly designated agent, shall establish
separate accounts and maintain records for each such account whereby impact
fees collected can be segregated.
C.   The City Clerk, or her or his duly designated agent, shall maintain and
keep accurate financial records for each such account for all monies received;
that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be
used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the
capital improvements program; and that shall provide an annual accounting for
each impact fee account showing the source and amount of all funds collected
and the projects that were funded.
D.   Development impact fees shall only be spent for the category of system
improvements for which the fees are collected and either within or for the
benefit of the service area in which the project is located.
E.   Unless the City Council deems some other time is appropriate, the City
shall at least once every five (5) years commencing from the date of the
original adoption of the capital improvement plan, review the development
potential of the area and update the capital improvements plan in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code Section 67-8206. The City may make
any updates as are deemed necessary as a result of: (1) development occurring
in the prior year; (2) capital improvements actually constructed; (3) changing
facility needs; (4) inflation; (5) revised cost estimates for capital
improvements; (6) changes in the availability of other funding projects; and
(7) such other factors as may be relevant.
F.   The City shall annually adopt a capital budget.
G.   As part of its annual audit process, the City shall prepare an annual
report describing the amount of all development impact fees collected,
appropriated, or spent during the preceding year by category of public facility
and service area.
H.   All other requirements of Idaho Code 67-8210, regarding earmarking and
expenditure of collected development impact fees, shall apply. (Ord. 607, 2-12-
2020)
CHAPTER 8
CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
14-8-1:      Credits And Reimbursement
14-8-1: CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
A.   In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project,
credit or reimbursement shall be given for the present value of any
construction of system improvements or contribution or dedication of land or
money required by the City from a developer for system improvements of the
category for which the development impact fee is being collected. Credit or
reimbursement shall not be given for project improvements.
B.   If a developer is required to construct, fund or contribute system
improvements in excess of the development project's proportionate share of
system improvement costs, the developer shall receive a credit on future impact
fees or be reimbursed at the developer's choice for such excess construction,
funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by future development
which impacts the system improvements constructed, funded or contributed by the
developer(s) or fee payer.
C.   If credit or reimbursement is due to the developer pursuant to this
section, the City shall enter into a written agreement, with the fee payer,
negotiated in good faith, prior to the construction, funding or contribution.
The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and
form of reimbursement.
D.   No credits shall be given for the construction of local on-site
facilities, structures, improvements, or other project improvements required by
zoning, subdivision, or other city regulations unless the improvement is
identified in the "Report" as a system improvement.
E.   Any person requesting such credit or reimbursement shall submit their
request in writing on a form provided by the City and present documentation of
costs or payments for facilities to the City Clerk, or her or his duly
designated agent, prior to issuance of a building permit, site development
permit, or manufactured/mobile home installation permit. The determination
shall be made no more than forty-five (45) days after complete documentation is
submitted to the City Clerk, or her or his duly designated agent. Any appeal
from such a determination by the City Clerk, or her or his duly designated
agent, shall be pursuant to 14-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 9
REFUNDS
SECTION:
14-9-1:      Refunds
14-9-1: REFUNDS:
A.   The current owner or contract purchaser of property on which an impact fee
has been paid may request a refund of such fee if:
   1.   Service is available but never provided;
   2.   The project for which a building permit has been issued has been
lawfully altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due;
or
   3.   The City, after collecting the fee when service is not available, has
failed to appropriate and expend the collected development impact fees pursuant
to Section 67-8210(4) Idaho Code.
   4.   A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured/mobile
home is denied or abandoned.
B.   The request for refund must be filed in writing and submitted to the
Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, on a form provided by
the City for such purpose. The owner shall provide such documentation as the
Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, may require to prove
such satisfaction, reconveyance, or releases from contract sellers, mortgagees,
lienholders, and/or others having an interest in the real property for which an
impact fee has been paid.
C.   A request for refund must be filed within the time allowed by law.
D.   Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of a request for refund,
the Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, must provide the
owner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request including the reasons
for the decision. If a right to refund exists, the City is required to send a
refund to the owner of record within ninety (90) days after it is determined
that a refund is due. A refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half
(½) the legal rate provided for in Section 28-22-104, Idaho Code.
E.   The owner may appeal the determination of the Building Official, or his or
her duly designated agent, to the City Council pursuant to the provisions in
14-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 10
APPEALS
SECTION:
14-10-1:   Appeals
14-10-1: APPEALS:
A.   A developer or fee payer may appeal the written determination of the
applicability and amount of the development impact fee, or refund, or any
discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf of the City to the City
Council.
B.   The developer or fee payer must file a notice of appeal to the City
Council with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days following the written
determination, discretionary action or inaction. When filing an appeal, the fee
payer shall submit a letter providing a full explanation of the request, the
reason for appeal, as well as all supporting documentation.
C.   The filing of an appeal shall not stay required payment of the impact fee,
however, a fee payer can pay a development impact fee under protest in order to
obtain development approval or building permit.
D.   Upon voluntary agreement by the fee payer and the City, any disagreement
related to the impact fee for the proposed development may be mediated by a
qualified independent party.
   1.   Mediation may take place at any time during the appeals process and
participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other
remedies provided for in this article.
   2.   Mediation costs shall be shared equally by the fee payer and the City.
(Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 11
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS
SECTION:
14-11-1:   Extraordinary Impacts
14-11-1: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be
paid by the developer, the Building Official, or his or her duly designated
agent, shall consider whether any extraordinary costs will be incurred in
serving the development based upon an extraordinary impact as defined in 14-1.
This determination shall be made prior to issuance of any permit for
development and shall be paid prior to any such issuance except as may be
provided pursuant to a private agreement between the parties as authorized by
Idaho Code Section 67-8214.
If the Building Official, or his or her duly designated agent, determines that
the development will result in an extraordinary impact, it shall advise the fee
payer in writing what the extraordinary impact is, the reason for the
extraordinary impact, and the estimated costs to be incurred as a result of the
extraordinary impact.
Nothing in this article shall obligate the City to approve any development
which results in extraordinary impact.
The fee payer may appeal the determination of any extraordinary impact or the
amount of extraordinary costs incurred in writing by filing of appeal to the
City Council with the City Clerk pursuant to the terms set forth in 14-10,
entitled "Appeals." When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall submit a letter
providing the reason for the appeal along with supporting documentation. The
City Council shall consider the appeal and make a final determination within
ninety (90) days of receipt of the written appeal. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 12
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE REPORT
SECTION:
14-12-1:   Development Impact Fee Report
14-12-1: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE REPORT:
Addendum "A" entitled "Development Impact Fee Report" accepted by the City
Council on February 12, 2020, along with all footnotes, exhibits, appendices,
and other attachments referenced therein, are by this reference incorporated
herein as if set forth fully. A description of acceptable levels of service for
system improvements are described in the "Report." (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 13
BONDING
SECTION:
14-13-1:   Bonding
14-13-1: BONDING:
Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificated, or other
obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other
city revenues as may be allocated by the City Council. (Ord. 607, 2-12-2020)
CHAPTER 14
EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS IMPACT FEE AS
ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT
SECTION:
14-14-1:   Effect Of Impact Fee On Zoning And Subdivision Regulations Impact
Fee As Additional And Supplemental Requirement
14-14-1: EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS IMPACT FEE
AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT:
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements, or
any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital
improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development. (Ord. 607, 2-
12-2020)
CHAPTER 15
OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED
SECTION:
14-15-1:   Other Powers And Rights Not Affected
14-15-1: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from requiring a developer
to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a development
project.
B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private
agreements between property owners or developers, the Idaho Transportation
Department, the City, and other governmental entities in regard to construction
or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including
interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project
improvements which are used or shared by more than one development project. If
it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct impact on a public
facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Transportation Department, then
the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of impact fees
collected from the developer for the improvement of the public facility by the
Idaho Transportation Department.
C.   Nothing in this article shall obligate the City to approve development
which results in an extraordinary impact. Extraordinary impacts shall be
determined and processed pursuant to 14-11.
D.   Nothing in this article shall obligate the City to approve a development
request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in the development impact fee ordinance.
To this end, the City may impose a development impact fee for system
improvement costs incurred subsequent to adoption of the ordinance to the
extent that new growth and development will be served by the system
improvements.
E.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to create any additional right
to develop real property or diminish the power of the City in regulating the
orderly development of real property.
F.   Nothing in this article shall limit the use by the City of the power of
eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures
authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general
obligation bond issues.
G.   Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the City to annex
property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its
territorial boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose
reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system
improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord. 607,
2-12-2020)
