CITY CODE
of
LAVA HOT SPRINGS, IDAHO
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-005, passed August 14, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Lava Hot Springs, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-005, passed August 14, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-2
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE LAVA HOT SPRINGS, IDAHO CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Lava Hot Springs,
Idaho as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together
with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the
official code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 9th day of August, 2007.
APPROVED this 9th day of August, 2007.
                                   
Raymond E. Bailey, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                   
Canda L. Dimick, City Clerk
Roll call Vote:
Ayes: 4
Nays:
Absent:
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
LAVA HOT SPRINGS CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official Lava Hot Springs city code. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LAVA HOT SPRINGS CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2007 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk-treasurer shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk-
treasurer. Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city clerk-treasurer. Said code books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk-treasurer when
directed so to do by order of the city council. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Lava Hot Springs, county of Bannock, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Lava Hot Springs.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Lava Hot
Springs.
COUNTY: The county of Bannock, state of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Lava Hot Springs".
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Lava Hot Springs".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person
convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code deemed a
misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any offense and may be confined in the county jail for a period
of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may
be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such
costs as the court may assess.
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no incarceration may be
imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both such fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2007 Code)
   D.   Separate Offense: A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1971-3, 2-5-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 18-113, 18-113A, 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2007 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2007
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 1
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Term
1-5-2: President
1-5-3: Compensation
1-5-4: Meetings
1-5-5: Ordinances
1-5-6: Record Of Proceedings
1-5-7: Custody Of Seal And Records
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 50-203, 50-701 et seq.
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM:
The city council, consisting of four (4) members and the mayor, shall be
elected to office for four (4) year terms at the time and in the manner as
provided by the laws of the state. The city council shall be the legislative
department of the city and shall perform such duties and have such powers as
may be delegated to it by statute. (2007 Code)
1-5-2: PRESIDENT:
At the first meeting in January following election, the city council shall
elect one of its members to serve as president of the council. (2007 Code)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION:
Commencing January 1, 2014, the salaries of the mayor and the members of the
Lava Hot Springs city council shall be as follows:
   A.   Mayor: The mayor of Lava Hot Springs shall receive a monthly salary in
the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00).
   B.   Council Member: Each member of the council shall receive a monthly
salary in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Acting Mayor: Whenever any member of the council assumes the office of
mayor during his/her absence, such council member shall receive an additional
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month while so acting. (Ord. 2013-2,
8-16-2013)
1-5-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Location: All regular meetings of the city council shall be held at
city hall. Special meetings of the council may be held at any place named in
the call for such special meeting. (Ord. 1, 9-25-1915; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on
the second Thursday of each month. The hour at which said meeting shall
commence shall be at six o’clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 2008-2, 4-10-2008; amd. Ord.
2021-4, 9-9-2021)
   C.   Special Meetings:
      1.   The mayor shall have the power to call special meetings of the city
council, the object of which shall be submitted to the council in writing; the
call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the
journal by the clerk-treasurer.
      2.   One-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council shall
have the power to call special meetings of the city council, the object of
which shall be submitted to the council in writing; the call and object, as
well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the journal of the
clerk-treasurer. (2007 Code)
      3.   All special meetings of the city council must be upon at least six
(6) hours' notice of the time, place and purpose of such meeting. Provided,
however, that if all of the members of the city council are present at any
special meeting and participate therein, no call therefor is necessary, and the
acts and proceedings of such meeting are as valid as if regularly called.
   D.   Quorum: Three (3) members of the city council shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to do business at all regular meetings of the council, and
four (4) members of the council shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to do
business at all special meetings of the council. A less number of council
members may adjourn a regular meeting of the council from time to time in order
to obtain a quorum.
   E.   Order Of Business: At all regular and special meetings of the city
council, the following order of business, as near as practicable, shall be
observed:
      1.   Call to order.
      2.   Reading and approving of minutes of previous meetings.
      3.   Unfinished business.
      4.   Petitions and communications.
      5.   Reports of committees.
      6.   Presentation and allowance of claims.
      7.   New business.
      8.   Report of officers.
      9.   Adjournment. (Ord. 1, 9-25-1915; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-5: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Presentment Of Ordinances: All ordinances shall be written or printed
and presented to the council by a member or a committee at a regular or special
meeting.
   B.   Manner Of Passing: Every such ordinance shall be read at length in
meetings of the council on three (3) different days. At each reading of such
ordinance, it shall be open to discussion and amendment and may be referred to
a committee, and shall be passed to the next reading, unless, by a vote of the
council, some other disposition is made of it. On final passage, the yeas and
the nays shall be called and recorded and a concurrence of a majority of all
the members elected to the council shall be required for its passage. Provided,
that three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the council present may dispense
with the three (3) readings and pass the ordinance at any meeting.
   C.   Endorsement After Passage: When such ordinance is passed, it shall be
signed by the clerk-treasurer, and the date of its passage by the council shall
be added thereto; within three (3) days thereafter, it shall be presented to
the mayor, or in case of his absence from the city, to the president of the
council, for his consideration. If he approves the same, he shall attach his
signature thereto, together with the date of such approval.
   D.   Veto By Mayor; Passage Over Mayor's Veto: Should the mayor not approve
the ordinance, he shall return the same to the council, with his objections to
the same in writing, on or before the date of the next regular meeting after
the same was presented to him. When an ordinance is so returned by the mayor,
the council shall proceed to reconsider the same. If, on such reconsideration,
two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected to the council vote in the affirmative,
the ordinance shall become a law notwithstanding the mayor's veto.
   E.   Passage Over Mayor's Veto: When any ordinance has been passed over the
mayor's veto as provided in subsection D of this section, the city clerk-
treasurer shall annex a certificate to the ordinance stating that the same was
vetoed by the mayor, giving the date of such veto, and, that on reconsideration
by the council, it received the required two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the
members elected to the council, together with the date of such action.
   F.   Becoming Law Without Mayor's Signature: Should the mayor refuse or
neglect to sign any such ordinance or return the same with his objections in
writing, on or before the date of the next regular meeting after the same was
submitted to him, it shall become a law without his signature.
   G.   Failure Of Mayor To Sign Or Veto: When any ordinance has become a law
without the signature of the mayor, as provided in subsection F of this
section, the city clerk-treasurer shall annex to such ordinance a certificate
to the effect that the mayor has failed to sign or veto the same, and it has,
therefore, become a law without his signature.
   H.   When Ordinance Passed: An ordinance shall be considered passed on the
date of its approval by the mayor, and in case of his vetoing an ordinance, on
the date of the passage of such ordinance over his veto, and in the case of the
failure of the mayor to sign or veto an ordinance, on the date of the next
regular meeting after such ordinance was presented to him.
   I.   Effective Date: All ordinances, unless otherwise provided in such
ordinance, shall take effect and be in force from and after their passage,
approval and publication. Publication shall be made by being inserted in one
issue of the official paper of the city. (2007 Code)
1-5-6: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
The city clerk-treasurer shall attend all meetings of the council and keep a
correct journal of its proceedings. (2007 Code)
1-5-7: CUSTODY OF SEAL AND RECORDS:
The city clerk-treasurer shall have custody of the corporate seal of the city
and all records, papers, and files relating to the proceedings or business of
the council; the clerk-treasurer shall have custody of all ordinances, and when
the same are published, he/she shall record the same at length together with
the affidavit of publication in an ordinance book which shall be designated as
"Ordinance Book Number              of the city of Lava Hot Springs". The
original of all ordinances shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk-
treasurer in an orderly file maintained for that purpose. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CORPORATE AND OFFICIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Corporate Boundaries
1-6-2: Official Newspaper
1-6-1: CORPORATE BOUNDARIES:
The corporate boundaries of the city shall be as set forth on the official map
on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. (2007 Code)
1-6-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Idaho State Journal, a newspaper published daily at Pocatello, Bannock
County, Idaho, is hereby specified as the official newspaper of the city
pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-213. (Ord. 1975-6, 6-30-1975; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Canvass Of Votes; Declaration Of Results
1-7-2: Notice Of Election
1-7-3: Oath; Bond
1-7-1: CANVASS OF VOTES; DECLARATION OF RESULTS:
On Thursday following the general election for the election of city officers,
the city council shall meet in special session for canvassing of the votes cast
and declaring the results of such election. The city council shall, at such
meeting, canvass the votes as returned by the election officers, and may, if a
majority of the council members so decide, open the ballot boxes and count the
votes cast. The council, after such canvass, shall declare the results of such
election, and enter an order in the minutes of such meeting naming the persons
elected to the respective offices. (Ord. 2, 9-25-1915; amd. 2007 Code)
1-7-2: NOTICE OF ELECTION:
The city council shall cause notice to be served upon the persons so elected of
their election, and require such persons to be present at the next regular
meeting of the council to be held on the first Tuesday following the first
Monday in November, to qualify for the office to which they were elected,
respectively. (Ord. 2, 9-25-1915; amd. 2007 Code)
1-7-3: OATH; BOND:
The persons so elected shall, on the first Tuesday following the first Monday
in November, take the oath of office and give such official bond as may be
required by ordinance or the laws of the state and, immediately thereafter,
enter upon the discharge of the duties of their office. (Ord. 2, 9-25-1915;
amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 1
SECTION:
1-8-1: Creation Of Right
1-8-2: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-8-3: Time For Filing Petitions
1-8-4: Time For Election
1-8-5: Requirements For Signature; Verification; Printing Of Petition; And Time
Limits
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-501.
1-8-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the
initiative process and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process
according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 1978-5, 10-11-1978)
1-8-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or repeal and ordinance by referendum,
there shall be attached or appended to the petition, the signatures of the
legal voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) to the total
number of voters who cast votes at the last general election in the city. (Ord.
1978-5, 10-11-1978; amd. 2007 Code)
1-8-3: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be
filed with the city clerk-treasurer not less than sixty (60) days following the
final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (Ord. 1978-5, 10-
11-1978)
1-8-4: TIME FOR ELECTION:
A special election for initiative or referendum shall be provided not more than
ninety (90) days following the certification of the petition; provided, that in
the event a city election will occur within ninety (90) days, the initiative
and referendum shall be submitted at the time of the city election. (Ord. 1978-
5, 10-11-1978)
1-8-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNATURE; VERIFICATION; PRINTING OF PETITION; AND TIME
LIMITS:
Referendum and initiative petitions shall conform with the requirements for
signature, verification of valid petitions, printing of petitions, and time
limits, except as expressly modified to meet the purposes of initiative and
referendum to be as nearly as practicable as provided in Idaho Code sections
34-1701 through 34-1705. (Ord. 1978-5, 10-11-1978)
CHAPTER 9
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Geographical Area Defined
1-9-2: Application Of Plans And Ordinances
1-9-1: GEOGRAPHICAL AREA DEFINED:
   A.   Purpose: An area of city impact is hereby established to identify a
logical urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban fringe area is
realizing, will realize or has the potential to realize development pressure
that must be planned for so that said development will occur in an orderly
manner. Idaho Code section 67-6526 requires that the city and county negotiate
an area of city impact.
   B.   Consideration: The following factors were considered by the planning
and zoning commission (land development board) and the city council in the
establishment of the area of city impact:
      1.   Trade area;
      2.   Geographic factors; and
      3.   Areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed into the city in
the future.
   C.   Geographical Area Of City Impact:
      1.   Map: The officially adopted geographic area of city impact is shown
on the map entitled, "Area Of City Impact For Lava Hot Springs, Idaho" attached
to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk-
treasurer.
      2.   Legal Description: The area of city impact is more particularly
described as follows:
The officially adopted geographic area of city impact includes all land outside
the city limits but located within the following boundary: Beginning at the NE
corner of Section 22, T. 9S, R. 38E., B.M., thence south to the 1/2 section
line of Section 34, T. 9S., R. 38E., B.M., at approximately 42°35'43.93" North
longitude; thence west to the west boundary of Section 32, T. 9S., R. 38E.,
B.M., thence north to the NW corner of Section 29, T. 9S., R. 38E., B.M.,
thence west to the SW corner of Section 20, T. 9S., R. 38E., B.M., thence east
to the point of origin.
   D.   Amending Procedure: Ordinance 1978-1, with its attached map and that
area designated therein, may be amended once every six (6) months by mutual
consent of a majority of the city council and a majority vote by the county
board of commissioners. Such vote shall be taken independently of the other
governing board. Public hearing procedures for adoption, amendment and repeal
shall be consistent with that required in Idaho Code section 67-6509 and other
applicable local ordinances. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978)
1-9-2: APPLICATION OF PLANS AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose is to establish those plans and ordinances
regulating land use and development within the established area of city impact
of the city but outside the city's corporate limits as the governing
ordinances. The area of city impact is realizing, will realize, or has the
potential to realize development pressure that must be planned for so that
development will occur in an orderly manner. Idaho Code section 67-6526
requires that the city and county negotiate the extent of each governing body's
ordinance within the area of city impact.
   B.   Area Of City Impact Service Commission:
      1.   Established: A joint board, hereafter referred to as the area of
city impact service commission, is hereby established.
      2.   Membership: The board shall include the three (3) commissioners who
comprise the county board of commissioners and three (3) members of the city
council.
      3.   Duty: This commission shall consider applications for joint zoning
changes and for planned unit developments.
      4.   Voting: Four (4) of the six (6) votes of the commission shall be
required to establish the zoning in said area, to approve any change in zoning,
and to consider any planned unit development recommended by the county planning
and zoning commission.
      5.   Public Hearings: The commission shall, as often as necessary, hold
public hearings as required by law. Public hearings related to establishing
zoning and to zoning changes shall be held and shall satisfy the requirements
of Idaho Code section 67-6509. Zoning changes and planned unit developments not
approved by this commission shall be denied or returned to the corresponding
planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Provisions: The comprehensive plans of the city and county shall be
utilized. When conflicts arise in the interpretation or implementation in
provisions of comprehensive plans, the duly adopted comprehensive plan of the
city shall take precedence. The land development and land use ordinances of the
city shall prevail within the area of city impact, except, in those instances
in which the county land development ordinance is more restrictive, at which
time the county ordinances shall prevail. All land use development matters
shall be considered by the city in a manner like that of the provisions set
forth in Idaho Code section 50-1306.
   D.   Amending Procedure: Provisions set forth in this section may be amended
once every six (6) months by mutual consent of a majority of the city council
and a majority vote by the county board of commissioners. Such vote shall be
taken independently of the other governing board. Public hearing procedure for
adoption, amendment and repeal shall be consistent with that required in Idaho
Code section 67-6509 and other applicable local ordinances. (Ord. 1978-2, 3-8-
1978)
CHAPTER 10
PROCEDURES TO CONTEST VIOLATION NOTICES AND COLLECTION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Procedures To Contest Violation Notices And Collection
1-10-1: PROCEDURES TO CONTEST VIOLATION NOTICES AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Time Limit For Required Action: In order to contest a violation notice,
the person receiving the violation notice must do the following:
      1.   Provide written notice to the City Clerk of intent to contest a
violation notice, received in the office of the City Clerk within fourteen (14)
days after the date on which the violation notice was issued;
      2.   Information Required: A notice of intent to contest a violation
notice shall contain the following information:
         a.   The name, residence address, email address and phone number of
the person contesting the violation notice;
         b.   The reasons for which the violation notice is being contested set
forth in detail; and
         c.   Whether the person intends to be represented by legal counsel at
the hearing and, if so, the name, business address and phone number of legal
counsel.
      3.   Accept service by mail at the residence address contained in the
written notice or by email at the email address contained in the written notice
of a notice of hearing setting the matter for hearing at a time and place
scheduled by the City Clerk.
         a.   The hearing will be scheduled not more than fourteen (14) days
and not less than seven (7) days after the City Clerk receives the written
notice; and
         b.   Failure to Appear: If the person submitting a timely written
notice fails to appear in person, or in such other manner designated by the
City Clerk, at the hearing the contest will be denied.
   B.   Failure to strictly comply with these requirements prohibits the person
receiving the violation notice from contesting the violation notice.
   C.   The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the City Council or the City
Attorney as the designated "hearing officer" to conduct and hear violation
notice contests. The burden of proof to establish that the violation notice was
wrongfully issued to the person contesting the violation notice shall be on the
person contesting the violation. The hearing will be informal, but all persons
presenting testimony shall be placed under oath and shall affirm that the
testimony they give is truthful. Rules of evidence shall not govern the
admissibility of evidence, but the hearing officer shall have full and complete
discretion regarding the weight and reliability to give any evidence offered at
the hearing. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision whether to
grant or deny the contest within five (5) business days after the conclusion of
the hearing. The hearing officer may, but is not required to explain the
reasons for the decision. If the decision is to grant the contest, any fee or
penalty assessed for the violation shall be nullified and, if fee has already
been paid, it shall be returned to the person contesting the violation notice.
If the decision is to deny the contest, the fee or penalty assessed for the
violation shall be paid forthwith to the City Clerk if it has not already been
paid to avoid collection remedies available to the City. The hearing officer
shall serve the written decision on the Mayor, the City Clerk and the person
who contested the violation notice. (Ord. 2020-4, 8-13-2020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Purpose
2-1-2: Definitions
2-1-3: Created; Membership
2-1-4: Qualifications
2-1-5: Term; Vacancies
2-1-6: Officers
2-1-7: Meetings
2-1-8: Reimbursement Of Expenses
2-1-9: Rules
2-1-10: Technical Services
2-1-11: Authority
2-1-12: Special Conditions Or Restrictions
2-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and public welfare of the city through the identification, evaluation,
designation and protection of those buildings, site areas, structures, and
objects which reflect significant elements of the city's, state's and nation's
historic, architectural, archaeological and cultural heritage. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-
11-1987; amd. 2007 Code)
2-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless
the context indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Lava Hot Springs.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Lava Hot
Springs.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, areas or sites significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the city, state or nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the city, state or nation.
(Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-3: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a historic preservation commission which shall consist
of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or
knowledge in history or historic preservation. The mayor shall endeavor to
appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in
the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, urban
planning, archaeology, engineering, law or other related disciplines. (Ord.
1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-5: TERM; VACANCIES:
Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one 1-year
term; two (2) 2-year terms; two (2) 3-year terms. Commission members may be
appointed to serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments and the appointees shall serve for the
remainder of the unexpired terms. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-6: OFFICERS:
The commission shall elect officers from among commission members. The chairman
shall preside at all meetings and the vice chairman in his or her absence.
(Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-7: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the commission shall be open, in accordance with the open
meetings statutes of the state 1 . (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-2341 et seq.
2-1-8: REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES:
Members of the commission may be reimbursed by the city for actual expenses
incurred in connection with their duties, subject to approval by the mayor and
city council. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-9: RULES:
The commission shall have the power to make rules necessary for the execution
of its duties as set forth in this chapter. Rules of procedure shall be made
available to the public in accordance with the applicable open records statutes
of the state. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
2-1-10: TECHNICAL SERVICES:
The commission may recommend to the mayor and city council, within the limits
of its funding, the employment for contracting of third parties for technical
services necessary to fulfill the functions of the commission. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-
11-1987)
2-1-11: AUTHORITY:
The commission shall be advisory in nature, and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Survey local historic properties;
   B.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent and associated lands, by purchase, bequest or
donation;
   C.   Recommend procedures necessary to preserve, restore, maintain and
operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the city;
   D.   Recommend the lease, sale or other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to the rights of public access and other covenants in a
manner which will preserve the property;
   E.   Contract, with the approval of the mayor and city council, with the
state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other
organization;
   F.   Cooperate with federal, state and local governments in pursuing the
objectives of historic preservation;
   G.   Make recommendations in the planning and zoning processes undertaken by
the city, county or state or subdivisions of these entities;
   H.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purpose
of historic preservation in the city;
   I.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in the city;
   J.   Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter
private property in the performance of their official duties only with the
express permission of the owners or occupants thereof;
   K.   The commission may review nominations of properties to the National
Register of Historic Places within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 1987-2,
3-11-1987)
2-1-12: SPECIAL CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS:
The city may provide by ordinance, as necessary, special conditions or
restrictions for the protection, enhancement and preservation of historic
properties. (Ord. 1987-2, 3-11-1987)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Created
2-2-2: Membership
2-2-3: Qualifications
2-2-4: Term; Vacancies
2-2-5: Removal
2-2-6: Meetings
2-2-7: Officers
2-2-8: Rules
2-2-9: Technical Services
2-2-10: Authority
2-2-11: Conflicts Of Interest
2-2-12: Zoning Ordinance Procedures
2-2-13: Compensation Of Members
2-2-1: CREATED:
There is created a commission to be known and designated as the Planning and
Zoning Commission of Lava Hot Springs. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The Commission shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
All members of the Commission shall be residents of the City or of the area of
city impact as the same is prescribed by the Mayor and City Council.
Representation on the Commission from the area of city impact shall reflect the
proportion of population living within the city as opposed to the population
living within the area of city impact. If an area of city impact has been
adopted, at least one member of the Commission shall reside within the city
impact area. A member of the Commission must have resided within the city for
at least two (2) years prior to his or her appointment, and must remain a
resident of the city during his service on the Commission. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-
1996)
2-2-4: TERM; VACANCIES:
Two members of the Commission shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years;
two members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years; and one member
shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies occurring otherwise
than through the expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as by
the original appointment. No person shall serve more than two (2) full
consecutive terms without specific concurrence by two-thirds (2/3) of the City
Council adopted by motion and recorded in the minutes. Members of the
Commission shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and may
receive such mileage and per diem compensation as provided by the City Council.
To avoid terms of office ending for members in the same year and to insure that
experienced members remain on the Commission, commencing in the year 2010, the
members serving three (3) year terms and the member serving a five (5) year
term shall be reappointed to four (4) year terms. If a member does not wish to
be reappointed to a four (4) year term, the member may resign or the City
Council may remove said member and appoint a new member for a four (4) year
term. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-7, 11-25-2008)
2-2-5: REMOVAL:
Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the
City Council. Membership for any member of the Commission shall be
automatically terminated if he shall be absent from three (3) or more meetings
of the Commission in one year without good cause or excuse. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-
10-1996)
2-2-6: MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held on the 4th Monday of each and
every month of the year. Additional or special meetings of the Commission may
be held by the Commission as it shall deem necessary to exercise its proper
functions and duties. The majority of the voting members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996; amd. Ord. 1997-2, 5-5-
1997; Ord. 2011-3, 10-13-2011; Ord. 2018-2, 5-10-2018)
2-2-7: OFFICERS:
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and create and fill any other office that
it may deem necessary. The Commission may establish sub-committees, advisory
committees or neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out its
responsibility as set forth in this chapter, and under Title 67, Chapter 65,
Idaho Code. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-8: RULES:
The Commission shall prepare organization papers or bylaws consistent with this
chapter and Title 67, Chapter 65, Idaho Code, for the transaction of business
of the Commission. The Commission shall maintain a record of meetings,
hearings, resolutions, studies, findings, permits, and actions taken. All
meetings and records shall be open to the public at reasonable times and places
and in accordance with law. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-9: TECHNICAL SERVICES:
Upon approval of the Mayor and City Council the Commission may receive and
expend funds, goods, and services from the federal government or agencies and
instrumentalities of state or local governments or from civic and private
sources and make contract with these entities and provide information and
reports as necessary to secure aid. Expenditures by the Commission shall be
within the amounts appropriated by the City Council, and the Commission may
hire employees, technical advisers, planners, engineers, architects, and legal
assistance, if approved by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-
1996)
2-2-10: AUTHORITY:
The Commission shall actively participate in the planning and zoning for the
city; shall review all subdivision applications, preliminary plats and final
plats, and make recommendations on the same to the City Council; shall study
all requests for zoning changes within the city and make recommendations to the
council for any zoning changes or boundary changes in zoning; shall review all
applications for variances or conditional uses and make recommendations to the
City Council for such variances or conditional use permits; shall maintain
current studies of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
Ordinance of the city, as well as the city impact area, and make
recommendations concerning changes in the same as they may be needed; and shall
exercise such other duties and functions as may be delegated by the council to
the Commission by ordinance or otherwise. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-11: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
No member of the Commission shall participate in any proceeding or action when
that member, his employer, employee, business partner, business associate, or
any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within the second degree
has an economic interest in the procedure or action being considered by the
Commission. Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be
disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or
considered. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-12: ZONING ORDINANCE PROCEDURES:
Prior to the amendment of the Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, text of
the Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map, Comprehensive Plan, variances, conditional
use permits, preliminary plats, final plats, or any other matter which is
commonly taken up a Planning and Zoning Commission or which is now controlled
by the City Council, shall first be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission under the same prerequisites and procedures as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance for the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
abide by the provisions of Section 67-6509, Idaho Code, relating to public
hearings prior zoning text amendments, zoning map amendments, special use
permits. The Commission shall, after considering the above, make
recommendations to the City Council as to what action the Commission believes
the council should take in the matter under consideration, and the council
shall follow those procedures as previously set forth in the ordinance which
are now required by the City Council to perform. (Ord. 1996-5, 10-10-1996)
2-2-13: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
Effective October 1, 2019, the appointed members of the Lava Hot Springs
Planning and Zoning Commission shall each be paid per diem compensation of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each regular monthly meeting attended by that
member. (Ord. 2008-4, 9-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-4, 10-10-2019)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND SPECIAL EVENT REGULATION CODE
CHAPTER 1
LICENSING OF BUSINESSES AND REGULATION OF EVENTS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Statement Of Purposes; Short Title
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Conduct Of Business
3-1-4: Exemptions
3-1-5: Application For Annual Business License And Thirty Day Business License;
Temporary Approval
3-1-6: Fees
3-1-7: Additional Information Required From Some Applicants
3-1-8: Review, Approval And Issuance
3-1-9: Term Of License
3-1-10: Transferability
3-1-11: Consent To Compliance Inspection
3-1-12: Business Location
3-1-13: Display Of Licenses
3-1-14: Businesses Must Comply With Certain Additional Conditions
3-1-15: Revocation
3-1-16: Special Event Permits
3-1-17: Appeals
3-1-18: Violation Notices, Penalties, Infraction Citations And Other Remedies
3-1-19: Additional Remedies Preserved
3-1-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSES; SHORT TITLE:
It is found and declared that:
   A.   The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys and other
public property is for use by vehicles and pedestrians;
   B.   Reasonable regulation of businesses and special events on public
streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property and on private property is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of residents,
business owners and operators and visitors;
   C.   The economic base of the city is tourism and business which serve
tourists, but maintaining a strong, local presence of permanent residents is
important to the general welfare of the community;
   D.   Maintaining, preserving and enhancing the appearance, character, and
beauty of the City is necessary to protect and promote the economic base and
the general welfare of the community;
   E.   It is the policy of the City to promote the protection of public
health, safety, and welfare by the regulation of all businesses and events
operating inside the City limits;
   F.   Reasonable regulation of businesses and events is necessary to ensure
that all business are operating in a way which is safe, orderly, and harmonious
with the appearance and character of the residential and commercial
neighborhoods in the City;
   G.   Reasonable regulation of events is necessary to provide for safe and
adequate pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and to protect the safety, health
and welfare of Residents of the City as well as visitors to the City;
   H.   Reasonable regulation of businesses is necessary to protect and
conserve the economic base of the community, including property values, and to
protect the safety, health and welfare of Residents of the City as well as
visitors to the City;
   I.   The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to prohibit
or hamper speech which is protected by the first amendment, but merely to
regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature;
   J.   Due to the limited geographical size of Lava Hot Springs, the proximity
of commercial zones to residential zones and the limited number of residential
homes it is necessary for the City to implement such reasonable regulations as
deemed necessary to safeguard public safety, health, and general welfare and to
protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods.
   K.   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Lava Hot Springs Business
and Special Event Regulation Code. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BED AND BREAKFAST: A dwelling where, for compensation, meals are provided on
site for no more than fifteen (15) persons who are not immediate members of the
household family residing in the dwelling, and is owner or manager occupied. An
owner or manager is required to be present, in person, on site, when guests are
present.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS TRAINING: Training which meets the requirements for OSHA's
bloodborne pathogens training programs as referenced in the federal OHSA
bloodbome pathogens standard (29 C.F.R. 1910.1030) which prescribes safeguards
to protect workers and customers against health hazards, including exposure to
blood and other potentially infectious materials, and to reduce risk from any
exposures.
BODY ART: The practice of physical body adornment including body piercing,
tattooing, permanent cosmetics, microblading, branding, and scarification.
Practices or procedures that are considered a medical procedure by a state
board of health shall not fall under this definition of body art.
BODY ARTIST: Any person performing body art services as defined herein.
BODY ART FACILITY: Any business, establishment, or premise, whether temporary
or permanent, where the practice of body art is performed, regardless of
whether money is exchanged for any particular service(s) rendered.
BODY PIERCING: Puncturing or penetrating the skin or mucosa of a person and
inserting jewelry or other adornment in the opening. Body piercing for the
purposes of this chapter shall not include piercing of the leading edge or
earlobe of the ear with earpiercing equipment, such as a piercing gun or other
mechanical device which pierces the ear with a sterile, disposable, single-use
needle.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector designated by the Mayor and Council
to enforce the building and other safety codes adopted by the City.
BUSINESS: The selling or rental of any personal or real property for
compensation and providing any service for compensation, including the
solicitation, advertisement or offering of such sales, rentals or services.
BUSINESS DAYS: A day when the City offices are open for business. A business
day is normally Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding
holidays.
BUSINESS LOCATION: The physical location of the business with the City limits
of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho identified in the application for a permit or
business and/or the special event permit or business license.
CITY: The City of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The duly appointed city clerk-treasurer of the city.
CITY COUNCIL: The duly elected city council of the city.
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER: The person designated by the Mayor and City Council to
enforce City ordinances.
CONTRACTOR: Those persons defined as a "contractor" in the Idaho Contractor
Registration Act, Title 54, Chapter 52, Idaho Code.
DOOR-TO-DOOR: Any business which sells items or solicits work and/or services
door-to-door without express prior permission from the residents.
FIRE CHIEF: The fire chief of the city.
MAYOR: The duly elected Mayor of the City.
MEANS OF EGRESS: A continuous and unobstructed path of vertical and horizontal
egress travel from any occupied portion of a building or structure to a public
way.
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION: The formal designation of the primary purpose of the
building, structure or portion thereof.
OCCUPANT LOAD: The number of persons for which the means of egress of a
building, structure, or portion thereof is designed.
OPERATOR: Any individual, including an employee, manager or agent of a group of
persons, limited liability company, partnership or corporation, or any other
business entity, who is the individual recognized by the City as the person
responsible for the management and operation of a business or special event.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, association or other
organization, or any combination thereof acting as a unit.
PUBLIC: Customers, visitors, guests, or any other person or persons occupying a
building, structure, or portion thereof.
PUBLIC WAY: All areas legally open to public use such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, parks, public rights of way,
parking lots, as well as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings or
other places owned or occupied by the City, or in, on or over which an easement
exists in the name of or occupied by the City or which exists for the benefit
and use of the public.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES: Shall include ATV's, UTV's, Side-by-Side vehicles,
Golf Carts, Motorbikes, snowmobiles and any other similar vehicle capable of
transporting an operator with or without passengers and whether designed for
highway or off-highway operation.
RENTAL UNIT: Rental unit means a structure or the part of a structure that is
used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person who maintains a
household or by two or more persons who maintain a common household, and which
household pays rent for the use and occupancy for periods of thirty (30)
consecutive days or more.
RESIDENT OF THE CITY: A Resident of the City shall mean for purposes of the
Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code an individual who
owns property within the City limits; an individual who has a written lease for
a term of property located with the City limits of greater than thirty (30)
days; or is the individual or the authorized representative of a person to whom
a current and valid business license has been issued.
SPECIAL EVENT: An occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows,
parades, concerts, exhibitions and festivals, which will take place on City
property and are expected to last for a period of time not to exceed three (3)
consecutive days and events which will take place on private property which are
expected to have one hundred (100) or more participants and could reasonably be
expected to require the services of public health and/or safety personnel and/
or equipment or the use of other resources for traffic control, emergency
medical services, fire suppression, erection of barriers and/or use and
maintenance of public facilities.
STAND: Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, trailer, vehicle,
tent, pushcart or any other fixture or device which is used for the display,
storage or transportation of articles offered for sale or advertisements
describing articles or services for sale by a business.
TEMPORARY AND/OR NON-PERMANENT BUSINESS LOCATIONS: Those locations where a
person conducts business in other than a permanent building, or deck and/or
courtyard attached to or accessory to a permanent building. Temporary and/or
non-permanent business locations shall include, but are not be limited to,
trailers, stands, carts, booths, displays, vehicles, or any other structure
which is not attached to a permanent foundation.
VACATION RENTAL/TOURIST HOME: Shall include single family dwelling units or
multiple family dwelling units, built or converted, where, for compensation,
lodging facilities are provided for a duration of less than thirty (30) days,
but not including a tent, recreational coach, motor home, camper, hotel, motel,
hospital, yurt or nursing home.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or off a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-2, 4-13-2023; Ord. 2025-002, 7-10-2025)
3-1-3: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   No person shall, wholly or in part, engage in or operate a business
within the City, unless exempted by the provisions of this Lava Hot Springs
Business and Special Event Regulation Code, without first obtaining and
maintaining, in full force and effect, a current valid annual or thirty day
business license issued in accordance with this Code.
   B.   Every business conducted at different physical locations by the same
person or operator shall be required to have a current valid annual or thirty
(30) day business license, unless the business activity is specifically
exempted by the provisions of this Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event
Regulation Code.
   C.   Different businesses conducted in the same building or on the same
parcel of property even when conducted by the same person or operator shall
each be required to have a current valid annual or thirty (30) day business
license.
   D.   Door-to-door businesses are required to have a current valid annual or
thirty (30) day business license.
   E.   Unless exempted by Section
3-1-4, the conduct of business without a license shall be a violation of the
Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-
13-2020)
3-1-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Special Events: The provisions of section
3-1-3 shall not apply to the participants, organizers, promoters or sponsors of
a Special Event if the City has issued a special event permit.
   B.   License Exemptions: The provisions of section
3-1-3 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   The regular distribution and delivery of newspapers or the
occasional distribution and delivery of magazines, classified listings,
advertisements, telephone books, directories or free samples.
      2.   Sales or auctions conducted pursuant to Court order.
      3.   The sale, distribution or delivery of goods to commercial businesses
for resale.
      4.   Those persons exempted from registration by the Idaho Contractor
Registration Act, Title 54, Chapter 52, Idaho Code, except an owner who acts as
his/her own general contractor and contracts for work to be performed by
subcontractors on the owner's own property shall be required to obtain a
business license and except public utilities.
      5.   The solicitation of contributions to political causes or candidates
or to 501(c)(3) charitable organizations or to religious organizations where
the person being solicited to contribute personally knows the identity of the
person soliciting the contribution or the name of the group or organization the
solicitor represents.
      6.   Fundraising solicitations and events by or for schools, youth
activities, service clubs, or service groups such as, but not limited to, Elks,
Kiwanis, Lions, Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts, 4-H clubs, school groups, church
groups, senior citizen groups, etc.
      7.   The conduct of garage, yard or similar sales by persons at their
residence not exceeding twice in one calendar year and not to exceed three (3)
days each, which sales shall not include business inventory or items that have
been purchased for the purpose of resale.
      8.   The occasional private sale between private parties.
      9.   Self-employment services provided by any individual under the age of
eighteen (18) years old for his/her own enrichment (e.g. lawn care, house
cleaning, car washes or other personal services).
      10.   Performances by entertainers at bars, restaurants and private
parties by invitation where no admission fees are charged.
      11.   Photographers, caterers, and servers contracted by a private party
or business for an event or occasion.
      12.   Delivery of goods purchased from businesses which are not
physically located within the City. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-5: APPLICATION FOR ANNUAL BUSINESS LICENSE AND THIRTY DAY BUSINESS LICENSE;
TEMPORARY APPROVAL:
   A.   Application:
      1.   Form And Required Information: The form for a new annual business
license application, or the renewal of an annual business application, or for
an extension of a thirty (30) day business license (collectively referred to
herein as "business license(s)") shall be furnished by the City and must be
fully completed prior to submission to the City Clerk. The required information
for a completed application will be identified in the application form. As part
of completing the application, an applicant may be required to provide
additional documentation to support the application, including but not limited
to: (1) proof of a valid and current license or permit issued by the State of
Idaho if the business intends to engage in a business activity regulated by the
bureaus and boards of the State of Idaho; (2) proof of liability insurance; and
(3) proof of ownership or lease of the building and/or real property on which
the business is to be conducted. The City Clerk has the authority to require
such additional information before submitting the application to the City
Council and/or the City Council has the authority to require such additional
information during its investigation and consideration of the application for
approval.
      2.   Time Of Filing: Applicants for a business license shall submit a
completed application for a business license with the City Clerk. The City
Clerk shall check the application for completeness and has the authority to
reject the application for being incomplete. The City Council has the authority
to approve a completed application for a business license. The City Council
meets once per month. Therefore, to be considered at a City Council meeting,
the completed application must be delivered to the City Clerk at least seven
(7) business days prior to the date on which the regular monthly City Council
meeting is scheduled. A business shall not engage in or conduct business until
a license has been issued.
   B.   Temporary Approval Pending City Council Action:
      1.   Temporary Approval Authority: The Mayor or Council President in the
absence of the Mayor, shall have the power and authority to consider and
provide temporary approval of completed applications for business licenses, but
the temporary approval authority is limited to approving business licenses for
contractors, service repair providers and equipment maintenance providers as
the Mayor or Council President in the absence of the Mayor deems necessary and
appropriate where the applicant has paid the appropriate business license fee.
Such approval is temporary only and shall be valid only until the City Council
meets to consider and approve or deny the completed application for a business
license. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-6: FEES:
The license fee shall be paid in advance at the time of filing the application
and the fee for such license shall be as follows:
   A.   Annual License:
      1.   New: Each person applying for a new annual business license shall
pay a license fee of fifty five dollars ($55.00) with submission of the
completed application to the City Clerk.
      2.   Renewal: If renewed prior to January 1, each person applying for a
renewal license shall pay a license fee of forty five dollars ($45.00) with
submission of the completed renewal application to the City Clerk.
      3.   Renewals postmarked after January 1 will be rejected and the
applicant shall be required to complete a new annual business license
application and pay a license fee of fifty five dollars ($55.00) with
submission of the completed application to the City Clerk. Conducting business
prior to approval of the new business license is prohibited and will be
considered a violation of this chapter.
      4.   Thirty (30) Day Business License: Each person applying for a thirty
(30) day business license shall pay an initial license fee of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00), renewable for one (1) additional period of thirty (30)
consecutive days for an additional renewal fee of seventy five dollar ($75.00)
if paid prior to expiration of the thirty day business license. Failure to pay
the renewal fee shall be grounds to deny the renewal of a temporary thirty (30)
day business license.
      5.   The license fees listed above shall not be prorated and are not
refundable if the application is approved with conditions, denied or withdrawn.
      6.   The City Council may revise, amend and change the license fees by
resolution. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-7: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM SOME APPLICANTS:
   A.   If recreational motor vehicles are provided as part of the business,
the applicant shall, in addition to any other information required in the
application for a business license, provide the following: (1) Identify the
number, make and model of recreational motor vehicles which will be used in the
business; (2) Proof that the recreation motor vehicles are properly registered
and licensed if required by the laws of the State of Idaho; and (3) Proof of
insurance showing that each recreational motor vehicle is insured with a
minimum limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence,
and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) total aggregate liability for bodily
injury and property damage caused by the operation of said recreational motor
vehicles naming the City as an additional named insured.
   B.   If the business consists of a rental unit or bed and breakfast or
vacation rental or tourist home, the applicant shall, in addition to any other
information required in the application for a business license, provide the
following: (1) The address and the zoning ordinance zone in which the rental
unit or bed and breakfast or vacation rental or tourist home is located; (2)
Information identifying the number of bedrooms, restrictions on the number of
occupants and how occupant restrictions will be enforced; (3) Information
identifying limitations on activities, noise, light and/or other uses by
renters which could disturb occupants of nearby properties and how such
activity/use restrictions will be enforced; and (4) If the application is for
the first new business license for a rental unit or bed and breakfast or
vacation rental or tourist home, the applicant shall provide evidence
acceptable to the City Clerk and/or the City Council of an inspection within
the last sixty (60) days by a building inspector and the City fire chief
showing that the rental unit or bed and breakfast or vacation rental or tourist
home is in compliance with applicable building and fire codes.
   C.   If the business consists of a bed and breakfast, the applicant shall,
in addition to any other information required in the application for a business
license, provide the following: The name of the owner or manager who will be
residing on site with contact information. If the name of the owner or manager
who will be residing on site changes while the license is in force, the
business must notify the City Clerk within seventy-two (72) hours of the
change. Current contact information, including a working phone number, for the
owner and manager shall be prominently displayed on a sign located near the
entrance of the bed and breakfast and visible from the street nearest the
entrance.
   D.   If the business consists of a person or entity operating a vehicle for
hire or a vehicle transporting the public in conjunction with any business
being operated by the business, the applicant shall, in addition to any other
information required in the application for a business license, provide the
following: (1) Proof of liability insurance for said operation in a minimum sum
of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) total aggregate liability for bodily injury and
property damage caused by the operation of said recreational motor vehicles
naming the City as an additional named insured.
   E.   If the business consists of providing the services of a "contractor"
required to register pursuant to the Idaho Contractor Registration Act, Title
54, Chapter 52, Idaho Code, in addition to any other information required in
the application for a business license, the applicant shall provide the
following: A copy of their current contractor registration certificate and
registration number.
   F.   Any owner who acts as his/her own general contractor and contracts for
work to be performed by subcontractors on property owned or leased by the owner
shall be required to obtain a business license and must provide proof that the
subcontractors to be used on the project are registered in accordance with the
requirements of the Idaho Contractor Registration Act, Title 54, Chapter 52,
Idaho Code. A copy of their current contractor registration certificate and
registration number for each subcontractor shall be included with the
application.
   G.   Any person who provides service, repair and maintenance of equipment
and appliances shall obtain a business license before providing service, repair
or maintenance of equipment and appliances in the City.
   H.   If the business is a food establishment as defined in the Idaho Food
Code, in addition to any other information required in the application for a
business license, the applicant shall provide a current and valid "food
establishment license" issued by the Southeastern Idaho Public Health
Department.
   I.   If the business involves the sale or dispensement of alcoholic liquor,
including liquor, beer and wine, in addition to any other information required
in the application for a business license, the applicant shall provide current
and valid applicable state, county and City licenses for the business activity
proposed to be conducted by the applicant.
   J.   If the business will be conducted in a temporary and/or non-permanent
business location, in addition to any other information required in the
application for a business license, the applicant shall submit the following:
(1) a photograph or drawing of the business location showing that any structure
will be set back no less than five feet (5') from any and all property lines of
the property on which it will be located and will include weather protection
which prevents water from dripping or snow from sliding onto areas where
pedestrians gather and circulate or onto adjacent properties; and (2)
provisions for garbage storage on-site and a plan for regular garbage removal.
   K.   If the business involves the rental of river float tubes, in addition
to any other information required in the application for a business license,
the applicant shall submit the following: (1) proposed arrangements for
dressing room facilities for customers; and (2) proposed arrangements for
restroom facilities for customers.
   L.   If the business involves transportation of people, in addition to any
other information required in the application for a business license, the
applicant shall submit the following: (1) the type of vehicle, trailer or
method of conveyance that will be used to transport people; (2) the maximum
number of passengers on/in each vehicle, trailer or other method of conveyance;
(3) precautions which will be enforced to protect passengers from injury while
being transported; and (4) how maximum passenger limits will be enforced. (Ord.
2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-8: REVIEW, APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   The City Council shall review all applications for business licenses
and approve or deny the same based on its judgment as to what is necessary to
protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
and visitors to the City and/or reasonably lessen the adverse impact on
existing residential homes or businesses within the City.
   B.   The City Council may delay action to approve or deny an application if
the City Council determines that understanding the impact on the health, safety
and welfare of residents and visitors and/or determining the impact on
residential homes or businesses within the City require additional information
or investigation to properly review and consider the application for approval.
   C.   The City Council may consider the following list of criteria when
reviewing applications for business licenses, but the following is not intended
to be and is not an exhaustive list since what is necessary to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City
and/or impact on existing residential homes or businesses within the City is
not susceptible to a finite list of criteria and will vary depending on a wide
range of circumstances. Granting business licenses is discretionary and the
City Council is vested with broad discretion to consider any and all factors
and criteria which it believes are necessary to protect and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City and/or
reasonably lessen any adverse impact on existing residential homes or
businesses within the City. The following is a partial list of criteria which
may be considered along with the unique circumstances that are shown to exist
at the time the City Council considers applications for business licenses:
      1.   The City Council may deny an application if the applicant is under
eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The City Council may consider that the applicant has failed to
truthfully answer a question on the license application or failed to provide
information and documentation required by this Lava Hot Springs Business and
Special Event Regulation Code or requested by the City Clerk or the City
Council in the course of considering or investigating the application.
      3.   The City Council may consider whether the applicant's business
location is in compliance with the Building Code Ordinance of the City of Lava
Hot Springs, Idaho.
      4.   The City Council may consider whether the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City will be endangered by the
operation of the proposed business.
      5.   The City Council may consider whether there are practical methods to
reasonably lessen any adverse impact on existing residential homes or
businesses within the City by the operation of the proposed business and impose
the same as conditions to approval of the business license.
      6.   The City Council may consider whether the applicant refuses to agree
to accept, or is unlikely to follow or enforce, reasonable limits on the
operation of the proposed business which would reasonably mitigate the danger
to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to
the City and/or would lessen the adverse impact on existing residential homes
or business within the City.
      7.   The City Council may consider that the applicant for a new or
renewal business license to operate a hotel, or a rental unit, or a boarding
house, or a bed and breakfast or a vacation rental or a tourist home have
failed to adequately provide for the health and safety of occupants, safeguard
the general welfare of nearby property owners or residents; and protect the
integrity of residential neighborhoods. If the applicant for a renewal business
license to operate a hotel, or a rental unit, or a boarding house, or a bed and
breakfast or a vacation rental or a tourist home has increased the number of
bedrooms, the number of permissible occupants and/or decreased the off-street
parking, the renewal will be rejected and the applicant will be required to
process the application as an application for a new business license rather
than a renewal business license.
      8.   When considering the renewal of business licenses and extensions of
thirty (30) day business licenses, the City Council may consider whether the
applicant, or the Mayor, or the City Clerk, or the City Code Enforcement
Officer have received complaints regarding the operation of the business in the
twelve (12) months preceding the renewal application or in the thirty (30) days
preceding the extension application. If the applicant has received complaints
regarding the operation of the business, the applicant shall disclose the
complaints in the renewal/extension application and/or shall be prepared to
explain the circumstances surrounding any complaints received by the Mayor, or
the City Clerk, or the City Code Enforcement Officer. The applicant will be
expected to explain to the City Council at the meeting in which the renewal/
extension is considered what, if any, remedial actions the applicant has taken
to remedy the complaints and will take in the future to prevent a recurrence of
such complaints which the City Council finds to be credible dangers to the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City
and/or finds as credible adverse impacts on the integrity of residential
neighborhoods and commercial areas in the City. Failure to adequately address
complaints and provide remedial action to the satisfaction of the City Council
may be grounds to deny a renewal/extension of a business license.
   D.   After approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall issue a
business license to the applicant. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-9: TERM OF LICENSE:
Business License: Business licenses are valid for the following time periods:
   A.   Annual Business License: An annual license shall be valid for the
calendar year in which it was issued and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
   B.   Thirty Day Business License: A thirty (30) day business license is
valid until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the thirtieth (30th) consecutive
day after the day it was either temporarily or finally approved, whichever is
earlier. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-10: TRANSFERABILITY:
A business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not
be transferable. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-11: CONSENT TO COMPLIANCE INSPECTION:
   A.   Every holder of a business license in the City consents to reasonable
compliance inspections during its regular hours of business by the Mayor, or
the City Code Compliance Officer, or the Fire Chief, or officers of the Bannock
County Sheriffs Department or Building Code Inspectors or their respective
designees to enter, free of charge, any place of business or to stop, in
accordance with the law, any vehicle for which a business license has been
issued. The compliance inspections are solely for the purpose of determining
whether the activity is being carried on in compliance with State laws and City
ordinances and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public.
   B.   Refusal to permit a compliance inspection or interference with a
compliance inspection shall be a violation of the Lava Hot Springs Business and
Special Event Regulation Code.
(Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-2, 4-13-2023)
3-1-12: BUSINESS LOCATION:
   A.   Once a business license is issued, the business must only be conducted
at the business location identified on the business license.
   B.   Conduct of business at a location other that which is designated on the
business license shall be a violation of the Lava Hot Springs Business and
Special Event Regulation Code. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-13: DISPLAY OF LICENSES:
   A.   The business license shall be displayed in such a way that the license
may be easily read by the public and any person performing a compliance
inspection.
   B.   If the operation of the business requires additional licenses from the
State, County or City, those licenses also must be displayed in such a way that
the license may be easily read by the public and any person performing a
compliance inspection.
   C.   Failure to display licenses in such a way that the license may be
easily read by the public and any person performing a compliance inspection
shall be a violation of the Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event
Regulation Code. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-14: BUSINESSES MUST COMPLY WITH CERTAIN ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Temporary and/or Non-Permanent Business Locations shall not:
      1.   Impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent building
or adjacent property;
      2.   Obstruct handicap access by conducting business within fifteen feet
(15') of any handicap parking or accessible spaces;
      3.   Allow trash or debris from the business activities to accumulate on
the business location;
      4.   Allow trash or debris from the business activities to accumulate on
private property, public streets, sidewalks or alleys within one hundred (100)
feet of the business location;
      5.   Obstruct access to any fire hydrant or driveway of a fire station;
or
      6.   Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on public streets,
sidewalks or alleys.
      Violation of any of these restrictions may be grounds to revoke or refuse
to renew/extend a business license.
   B.   Businesses with a business license are restricted and prohibited from
disturbing the comfort, peace, health or safety of persons who are not
voluntary listeners by noise, including sound or vibrations, whether produced
by a device, or the human voice, or vehicles, or equipment, or instrument,
whether the disturbance is due to its volume, its duration, its location, or
the hour when it is produced. Any business which makes, continues, or causes to
be made, or allows to be made from any business location any noise disturbance
which is excessively loud, annoying or offensive and plainly audible, or in the
case of vibrations plainly perceived, at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more
from its source shall be presumed to be in violation of this business license
restriction. Violation of this restriction may be grounds to revoke or refuse
to renew/extend a business license.
   C.   Businesses with a business license must comply with the Lava Hot
Springs Sign Code contained in Title 9, Chapter 4 of the City Code of Lava Hot
Springs, Idaho. Violation of this condition may be grounds to revoke or refuse
to renew/extend a business license.
   D.   Businesses with a business license must comply with the off-street
parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Lava Hot Springs.
Violation of this condition may be grounds to revoke or refuse to renew/extend
a business license.
   E.   Businesses with a business license must remain in compliance with the
Building Code Ordinance of the City Of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho at all times.
Violation of this condition may be grounds to revoke or refuse to renew/extend
a business license.
   F.   Every building, structure, or portion thereof to be occupied by the
public shall be assigned an occupancy classification and an occupancy load by
the City Code Compliance Officer and/or Fire Chief as established by the
International Building Code and the International Fire Code. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, the owner's representative(s) and manager(s) to
comply with and shall be the duty of the Code Compliance Officer and/or Fire
Chief to enforce the occupancy classification and occupancy load assigned.
   G.   Additional Requirements For Body Art Facilities:
      1.   To help protect the public health, safety, and welfare, including by
preventing spread of disease via bloodborne pathogens such as bacterial/viral
infections, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and Hepatitis B, and to help
prevent unsanitary and unhealthy practices, body art facilities operating
within the City shall adhere to the following requirements to obtain and renew
a valid business license.
      2.   In providing body art services, body art facilities shall adhere to
guidelines established in the OSHA standards for bloodborne pathogens training.
All body artists who perform any body art services shall first undergo
bloodborne pathogen training through an OSHA compliant program, and shall renew
such certification or training on an annual basis. Adequate proof of completion
of these trainings shall be provided to the City as part of any business
license application or renewal.
      3.   As part of their business license application, the owner(s) or
operator(s) of a body art facility shall provide to the City in writing the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of themselves and any employees or
independent contractors who will be performing body art services, and shall
keep this information current with the City.
   H.   Failure to comply with the conditions identified in this section shall
be a violation of the Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation
Code.
(Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-2, 4-13-2023; Ord. 2025-002, 7-10-2025)
3-1-15: REVOCATION:
   A.   In addition to any other fees, penalties or fines for a violation or an
infraction or any other remedy available to the City, a business license may be
revoked if, after notice and hearing before the City Council, the City Council
determines that any of the following causes exist:
      1.   The applicant for the business license has given false or misleading
information or has withheld important information in the application which was
presented to the City Council for consideration or in the investigation
conducted by the City Council during its deliberations and consideration of the
application.
      2.   The person conducting the business is exceeding and/or violating the
terms and conditions of the business license approved by the City Council.
      3.   Any change in condition which causes the business to exceed and/or
violate the terms and conditions of the business license approved by the City
Council.
      4.   Revocation or suspension of any license issued by the State of
Idaho, Bannock County or the City to conduct the business for which the
business license was issued.
      5.   Cancellation or non-renewal of any insurance required for the
issuance of the business license.
      6.   Cancellation or termination of any lease of any real property, or
sale of any real property, on which the business is licensed to operate.
      7.   Cancellation or termination of any lease of any real property, or
sale of any real property, on which parking was located which causes the
business to be in non-compliance with the off-street parking requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Lava Hot Springs.
      8.   Erection or use of a sign which violates the Lava Hot Springs Sign
Code contained in Title 9, Chapter 4 of the City Code of Lava Hot Springs,
Idaho.
      9.   Any condition which cause the business to be in non-compliance with
the Building Code Ordinance of the City of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho.
      10.   Refusal to permit a compliance inspection.
      11.   Failure to take adequate precautions or make adequate changes or
modifications which will reasonably protect the health, safety and welfare of
customers and/or occupants of the business.
      12.   Failure to adequately safeguard the general welfare of nearby
property owners or residents by allowing, or failing to prevent excessive or
inappropriate noise, light, disturbance or other conduct that disturbs the
peace and good order of nearby property owners, occupants or residents.
      13.   Failure of the business to adequately protect the general health,
safety and welfare of the neighboring residents and businesses from business
related activities by allowing, or failing to prevent the following: (1)
excessive on-street parking by guests and customers; (2) impediments to the
free flow of traffic on City streets; (3) impediments to snow removal on City
streets and sidewalks; (4) conduct which blocks alleys or driveways; (5)
conduct which unreasonably interferes with adequate on-street parking for
residents and other businesses, (6) conduct which creates excessive
accumulation of trash and rubbish; (7) conduct which produces offensive smoke
or odor; (8) conduct which creates inappropriate displays which interfere with
the quiet enjoyment of neighboring properties; and (9) other conduct which is
inconsistent with the general health, safety and welfare of residents in the
neighborhood in which the business is located.
      14.   Failure of the owner or manager or operator of a recreational motor
vehicle rental business to take appropriate action to prevent operators from
trespassing on private property, creating excessive erosion and damage to
public property, driving recklessly, driving at excessive speeds, failing to
obey traffic regulations, driving on sidewalks and otherwise creating hazards
for pedestrians and vehicular traffic in the City.
      15.   Engaging in illegal activity at the business location and/or
failing to take appropriate action to prevent customers, guests and/or renters
from engaging in illegal activity at the business location.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: If the Mayor, City Clerk or the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that one or more of the causes listed in this section exist, the
City Clerk shall send notice of the hearing to the person to whom the business
license was issued by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, at the business address
listed on the business license, which notice shall include a written statement
setting forth the reasons for the proposed revocation and the time and the
place of the hearing. In lieu of mailing the notice, the City Clerk may cause
the notice to be delivered to the business location, leaving it in a
conspicuous place. Such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the business
location and left in a conspicuous place at least ten (10) business days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
   C.   Hearing: The City Council shall hold a hearing to determine whether any
one of the causes for revocation listed in subsection "A" above exist. The City
Council shall issue its written decision within twenty (20) days after said
hearing, which shall include the City Council's written findings which support
its action. The time for entering of the City Council's decision may be
extended by the City Council in cases where the complexity of the case requires
additional time for proper review and consideration by the City Council. The
City Council shall transmit a copy of the decision to the business in the same
manner as provided for serving the notice of hearing.
   D.   Forfeiture of Fee; Reapplication: If a business license is revoked, the
fee already paid for the business license shall be forfeited. The person whose
license has been revoked under this section may not apply for a new license for
a period of one year from the date the revocation took effect. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-
13-2020)
3-1-16: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall, wholly or in part, participate in, promote, sponsor or
organize a special event within the City without first obtaining a special
event permit issued in accordance with this Code.
   B.   To obtain a special event permit, a completed application shall be
submitted to the City Clerk, together with all required documentation and
payment of the nonrefundable fee indicated on the City Clerk licensing fee
schedule.
   C.   The City Clerk shall check the application for completeness and has the
authority to deny the application for incompleteness. The City Council has the
authority to approve a completed application for a special events permit. The
City Council meets once per month. Therefore, to be considered at a City
Council meeting, the completed application must be on file at least seven (7)
business days prior to the date on which the regular monthly City Council
meeting is scheduled.
   D.   Application Content: The required information for a completed
application will be identified in the application form. The City Clerk is
authorized to require additional information, including but not limited to a
security plan, a traffic control plan and/or a trash plan as a part of any
application. An applicant's failure to include any plan required by the City
Clerk shall be grounds for denial of a special event permit application.
   E.   Required Insurance And Indemnification:
      1.   Every application for a special event permit shall include
documentary proof that the applicant obtained a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a minimum limit of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per occurrence, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) total
aggregate liability for bodily injury and property damage caused by the event
activities, or such higher amount or additional insurance coverage as required
by the City Council.
      2.   The required insurance policy shall:
         a.   Name the City as an additional insured;
         b.   Be the primary policy, not contributing with or in excess of any
coverage the City may carry;
         c.   Be written by a company authorized to write insurance policies,
of the type and in the amount required within the State;
         d.   The insurance shall cover the entire period of the special event,
including set up and take down;
      3.   The insurance requirements of this section may be waived by the City
Council upon submission of proof that:
         a.   The applicant is unable to procure insurance at a price that is
reasonable as demonstrated by the filing of a minimum of two (2) price quotes
for insurance and a written explanation why the applicant is unable to procure
insurance at that price.
      4.   Every applicant shall indemnify the City for, and shall defend and
hold the City harmless from, any liability, damage or loss occurring during the
course of the special event, including set up and take down, caused by the
negligent or intentional act or omission of any applicant or any officer,
employee, agent, volunteer or contractor of the applicant.
      5.   Projected Attendance: Every application for a special event permit
shall include a good faith estimate of the projected attendance for the special
event. The estimate shall include a statement from the applicant describing
known factors that may affect attendance, including:
         a.   Historical attendance at the same (or similar) events in the
past;
         b.   The extent and type of advertising and promotion for the special
event; and
         c.   Any other factor or circumstance that may affect attendance at
the special event.
   F.   Additional Information: The City Clerk is authorized to request
additional content neutral information, documentation or clarification from an
applicant when applications are incomplete or lack sufficient detail for the
City Council to consider whether a special event permit should be issued for
the event. Failure by the applicant to timely fulfill such request to the
satisfaction of the City Clerk shall be grounds for denial of a special event
permit.
   G.   Approval:
      1.   City Clerk Review for Completeness: Upon submission of an event
permit application, the City Clerk shall review the application for
completeness and, if found to be complete, forward it to the City Council for
consideration. Completed applications are those that are timely submitted with
all required information, documentation and fees.
      2.   City Council Review: The completed application shall be considered
by the City Council at the next scheduled City Council meeting after the City
Clerk has determined that the application is complete, but only if it is
considered complete at least seven (7) days prior to the date on which the next
regular meeting is scheduled. The seven (7) day deadline is required so that
there is sufficient and adequate time to make up the agenda, add the times to
the agenda, meet the time period requirement to post the agenda according to
the law and give the City Council members time to review the items on the
agenda. It is highly recommended that the person seeking an event permit be
present at the City Council meeting to provide information deemed necessary by
the City Council for a decision on the application.
   H.   Protection of the health, safety and welfare of City residents and
visitors to the City and impact on residential homes and businesses: The City
Council may consider the following list of criteria when reviewing,
deliberating and deciding whether to approve applications for special event
permits, but the following is not intended to be and is not an exhaustive list
since what is necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare of
the residents of and visitors to the City and/or impact on existing residential
homes or businesses within the City is not susceptible to a finite list of
criteria and will vary depending on a wide range of circumstances. Granting a
special event permit is discretionary and the City Council is vested with broad
discretion to consider any and all factors and criteria which it believes are
necessary to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of and visitors to the City and/or reasonably lessen any adverse
impact on residential homes or businesses within the City. The following is a
partial list of criteria which may be considered along with the unique
circumstances that are shown to exist at the time the City Council considers
applications for special events:
      1.   Whether the time, place and manner of the event will protect and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors
to the City and/or reasonably lessen any adverse impact on residential homes or
businesses within the City;
      2.   Whether content neutral restrictions and conditions are acceptable
to the applicant which the City Council feels are necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of persons and protect the property rights of
persons adjacent to the location of the special event;
      3.   Whether content neutral conditions and guidelines are acceptable to
the applicant which the City Council feels are necessary for the control of
traffic and safety of the traveling public;
      4.   Whether applicant is agreeable to allow the use of traffic cones or
barricades arranged as required by the Mayor, the City Council, the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or the Bannock County Sheriffs Department to ensure the
safety of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic;
      5.   Whether applicant has made arrangements for first aid and/or the
presence of emergency medical care or treatment during the special event;
      6.   Whether restrictions and conditions are acceptable to the applicant
which the City Council feels are necessary to limit the number of people based
on the requirements of in the event area based upon the maximum capacity of a
facility or any of the requirements in any of the codes adopted by the City in
the Building Code Ordinance of the City Of Lava Hot Springs;
      7.   Whether restrictions and conditions regarding the number or type of
vehicles, animals, structures or equipment are acceptable to the applicant
which the City Council feels are necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of persons attending the special event and protect the property rights
of persons adjacent to the location of the special event;
      8.   Whether the applicant has made necessary arrangements for the
number, type and size of garbage and/or recycling containers which will be
necessary to prevent accumulation of trash or debris which is expected to be
produced by the special event;
      9.   Whether restrictions and conditions regarding noise control and
light pollution are acceptable to the applicant which the City Council feels
are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons attending
the special event and protect the property rights of persons near the location
of the special event;
      10.   Whether a requirement that the applicant provide notice to
residents and/or businesses is acceptable to the applicant which the City
Council feels are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
persons attending the special event and protect the property rights of
residents and businesses near the location of the special event;
      11.   Whether a requirement that the applicant restrict the sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages is acceptable to the applicant which the
City Council feels are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
persons attending the special event and protect the property rights of
residents and businesses near the location of the special event;
      12.   Whether the City Council is able to secure availability of
sufficient City personnel or equipment for the special event which the City
Council feels is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons
attending the special event and protect the property rights of residents and
businesses near the location of the special event;
      13.   Whether conditions and limitations which the City Council believes
are necessary to limit fire or other safety concerns are acceptable to the
applicant which the City Council feels are necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of persons attending the special event and protect the
property rights of residents and businesses near the location of the special
event; and
      14.   Whether conditions and limitations which the City Council believes
are necessary to limit damage or disruption to public property, including but
not limited to landscaping, turf and painted surfaces are acceptable to the
applicant which the City Council feels are necessary to protect public
property.
   I.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Upon a determination by the City Clerk and the City Council that an
application is complete and that in the judgment of the City Council the
health, welfare and safety of residents of and visitors to the City is
reasonably and adequately protected, and that the applicant paid the required
nonrefundable fee listed on the City Clerk license fee schedule, a special
event permit may be issued.
      2.   Upon a determination by the City Clerk or the City Council that an
application is incomplete, or that in the judgment of the City Council the
health, welfare and safety of residents of and visitors to the City cannot be
reasonably and adequately protected, or for any other reason listed in
subdivision H (1) above, or that the applicant has not paid the required
nonrefundable fee listed on the City Clerk license fee schedule, a special
event permit may be denied.
   J.   The following standard conditions shall apply to all special event
permits issued by the City Council and need not be listed specifically and
expressly in the permit:
      1.   The actual time, place and manner of the special event shall not
vary from the time, place and manner approved by the City Council.
      2.   Unless other arrangements are agreed to in advance by the City
Council, the facility and/or area in which the special event is held shall be
returned to pre-event condition within twenty four (24) hours after the end of
the event, unless the City Clerk establishes permit specific timelines. The
tasks involved in returning the facility and/or area to pre-event condition
shall include, but shall not be limited to:
         a.   Removal and appropriate disposal of trash and recyclables;
         b.   Removal of vehicles, structures, portable toilets and all other
equipment used in connection with the special event; and
         c.   Removal of vehicular and pedestrian traffic control devices,
cones, barricades and markings within and alongside all streets and sidewalks.
   K.   Any person or operator participating in, promoting, sponsoring or
organizing a special event within the City without first obtaining a special
event permit or conducts the special event in violation of the conditions
required by this section and/or the special event permit shall be in violation
of the Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code. (Ord. 2020-
3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-17: APPEALS:
   A.   Right of Appeal: An applicant or resident of the City or any person to
whom a current and valid business license has been issued, aggrieved by the
action of the City Council ("Appellant") in granting or denying the issuance of
a business license or a special event permit to an applicant or non-renewing a
business license, or revoking a business license shall have the right to appeal
such action to the Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code
Board of Appeals.
   B.   Notice of Appeal: Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City
Clerk, within fifteen (15) days after the City Council decision granting or
denying the issuance of a business license or a special event permit to an
applicant, or non-renewing a business license, or revoking a business license.
The Notice of Appeal shall set forth in detail all reasons why the appeal
should be granted.
   C.   Notice of Hearing: The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event
Regulation Code Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the Appellant, the
applicant and/or the business by sending notice by U.S. mail, postage prepaid,
giving the time and the place of the hearing. In lieu of mailing the notice,
the notice may be delivered to the Appellant, the applicant and/or the business
in person. Such notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) business
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   D.   Stay of Action: The Mayor may only stay the following actions of the
City Council while an appeal is pending, if in the judgement of the Mayor, the
stay will not endanger the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
of and visitors to the City and/or adversely and unreasonably impact public and
private property or property rights:
      1.   Revocation of a business license;
      2.   Issuance of a special event permit;
      3.   Issuance of a business license;
      4.   Extension of a thirty (30) day business license; or
      5.   Renewal of a business license.
   E.   Hearing: The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation
Code Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing to determine if the decision by the
City Council was made in error. The decision of the City Council shall be
entitled to a strong presumption of validity, including the City Council's
application and interpretation of the Lava Hot Springs Business and Special
Event Regulation Code. The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event
Regulation Code Board of Appeals shall only reverse the decision of the City
Council if it finds that its decision was arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of
discretion. The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code
Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to issue or deny a business
license or a special event permit, or renew a business license, or revoke a
business license, but in the event it reverses the decision of the City Council
it shall have authority only to remand the matter to the City Council with
instructions to the City Council to reconsider the decision which was appealed
and, upon reconsideration, to consider the findings and conclusions of the Lava
Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code Board of Appeals.
   F.   The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code Board
of Appeals shall consist of four (4) members appointed by the Mayor when
necessary to hold a hearing on an appeal, or in the absence of the Mayor for
any reason, by the President of the City Council: (1) a Resident of the City;
(2) an authorized representative of a person to whom a current and valid
business license has been issued; (3) a current officer from the Lava Hot
Springs Chamber of Commerce; and (4) the City Attorney. Each member so
appointed shall confirm prior to the hearing that he/she does not have a
conflict of interest which would interfere with making an unbiased decision on
the matter which will be heard by the Board of Appeals. The City Attorney shall
not be a voting member, but shall participate in an advisory role to the Board
of Appeals on matters of form, process and procedure.
   G.   Board of Appeals Decision: The Lava Hot Springs Business and Special
Event Regulation Code Board of Appeals shall enter its written decision within
ten (10) business days after the hearing. All decisions shall be by a 2/
3 majority. The time for entering the decision may be extended by the Board of
Appeals in cases where the complexity of the case requires additional time for
proper review and consideration by the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
shall transmit a copy to all persons that participated in the appeal, the City
Clerk, the Mayor and the President of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-
2020)
3-1-18: VIOLATION NOTICES, PENALITES, INFRACTION CITATIONS AND OTHER REMEDIES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the City Code Enforcement Officer employed by
the City to issue notices of violations of the Lava Hot Springs Business and
Special Event Regulation Code, or in the discretion of the City Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Uniform Citation for an infraction, or to take
such other actions which may necessary to utilize all lawful remedies which may
be available to prevent or stop the violation, or in the discretion of the City
Code Enforcement Officer to issue a cease and desist order.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this Lava Hot Springs Business
and Special Event Regulation Code and has been issued a violation notice by the
City Code Enforcement Officer employed by the City may avoid being prosecuted
in the Magistrate Division of the Sixth Judicial District of the State of Idaho
in and for the County of Bannock for the violation alleged in such notice by
electing to pay to the City Clerk of the City of Lava Hot Springs, as a penalty
for such violation, the fee established and set forth for such violation by
resolution adopted by the City Council. If the alleged violator fails to
respond to the violation notice within thirty (30) days or refuses to pay the
violation fee, a uniform citation for an infraction may be issued for failure
to appear or pay the violation fee, or the unpaid fee for the violation may be
sent to a professional collection bureau for collection, at the discretion of
the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor at the discretion of the President of
the City Council.
   C.   Separate Offense: Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense, punishable as provided in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Civil Enforcement: Appropriate actions and proceedings may be commenced
in the Sixth Judicial District of the State of Idaho in and for the County of
Bannock to prevent any violation of the provisions of the Lava Hot Springs
Business and Special Event Regulation Code to restrain and enjoin a violation,
to recover damages, to correct or abate a violation and to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City and/or
to prevent unreasonable impacts on existing residential homes or businesses
within the City. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
3-1-19: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
The issuance of a notice of violation or an infraction shall not be the
exclusive remedies for enforcing the rules and regulations of the Lava Hot
Springs Business and Special Event Regulation Code and all other lawful
remedies are preserved and reserved for use by the City, including filing a
civil complaint for nuisance; or a civil complaint to enforce a cease and
desist order; or a civil complaint seeking an order for the removal and
impoundment of merchandise or equipment or food items or stands, facilities and
other structures constructed in violation of the provisions of this Code; or a
civil complaint to recover damages. (Ord. 2020-3, 8-13-2020)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2A-1: State Statute Adopted
3-2A-2: License Required
3-2A-3: Fee
3-2A-4: Application
3-2A-5: Investigation Of Applicant
3-2A-6: State License Required
3-2A-7: Council Action
3-2A-8: Term Of License
3-2A-9: Transfer Of License
3-2A-10: Sale Away From Licensed Premises
3-2A-11: Gambling Prohibited
3-2A-12: Restrictions On Sales
3-2A-13: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-14: Responsibility Of Licensee
3-2A-15: Revocation
3-2A-16: Penalty
3-2A-1: STATE STATUTE ADOPTED:
All the provisions of Idaho Code title 23 are adopted as part of this chapter
insofar as they are applicable and except as modified by this chapter. (Ord.
1947-4, 6-23-1947)
3-2A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person shall first obtain a license from the city as hereinafter provided
before selling liquor by the drink within the corporate limits. (Ord. 1947-4,
6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-3: FEE:
The license fee for such license to sell liquor by the drink, shall be two
hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) per year, payable in advance. (Ord. 1947-
4, 6-23-1947; amd. 1983-8, 12-21-1983)
3-2A-4: APPLICATION:
   A.   Form: Application for license pursuant to this chapter shall be filed
with the city clerk-treasurer upon forms to be furnished by the clerk-
treasurer.
   B.   Required Information: Such application shall give the name of the
licensee, a description of the premises to be licensed, the owner of said
premises and such other relevant data as the city council may require or as
required by Idaho Code. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Required: No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an
investigation by the police department of all applicants hereunder. (Ord. 1983-
6, 12-21-1983)
   B.   Report: After investigation, the report on the applicant will be
forwarded to the city council with a recommendation from the chief of police.
If the chief of police recommended that the application be denied, he shall
state, in writing: (Ord. 1983-6, 12-21-1983; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for denial; and
      3.   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 1983-6, 12-21-1983)
3-2A-6: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No license shall be granted to any applicant unless such applicant has first
procured a state license for the sale of liquor by the drink as provided by
Idaho Code title 23. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-7: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   Time Limitation: The city council shall grant or deny the application
within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the city clerk-treasurer.
   B.   Denial: Whenever the mayor and city council deny an application, they
shall specify, in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   C.   Hearing Required: Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee
shall be afforded a hearing according to Idaho Code section 23-1016.
   D.   Record Of Hearing:
      1.   Transcribable Record Required: In all cases where the city council
is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a
transcribable verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made.
      2.   Retention Of Record: If the applicant for a license, transfer, or
renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the
matter.
      3.   Request For Transcript: Upon written request and within the time
period provided for retention of the record, any person may have the record
transcribed at his expense.
      4.   Minutes: The city council shall also provide for the keeping of the
minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as
otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 1983-8, 12-21-1983)
3-2A-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and the city council for a period of
one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. (Ord. 1983-8, 12-21-1983)
3-2A-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license shall be transferable from one location to another, or from one
licensee to another, without the consent of the city council, which consent
must be in writing in the proceedings of the council at a regular or special
meeting. In case any licensee desires a transfer, he shall make application to
the city council, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for the
consideration of the application, and shall be retained by the city whether or
not such application is granted. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-10: SALE AWAY FROM LICENSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give away, dispense, vend, or
deliver any liquor in any fashion or by means or device except upon the
licensed premises. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947)
3-2A-11: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee granted a license under the authority of
Idaho Code title 23, to permit, conduct, play, carry on, open or cause to be
opened any gaming in or upon the licensed premises or in or upon any premises
directly connected by a door, hallway, or other means of access from the
licensed premises. Any licensee authorized under the authority of Idaho Code
title 23 and who is also authorized by other Idaho law to conduct the lawful
activities of lottery, bingo, raffles, and parimutuel betting on the licensed
premises, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection as long as the
lawful activities are conducted in conformity with statute and rules
promulgated pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-12: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES:
No person licensed pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, or his or its employed
agents, servants or bartenders shall sell, deliver or give away, or cause or
permit to be sold, delivered, or given away, or allowed to be consumed, any
alcohol beverage, including any distilled spirits, beer or wine, to:
   A.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, proof of which shall
be a validly issued state, district, territorial, possession, provincial,
national or other equivalent government driver's license, identification card
or military identification card bearing a photograph and date of birth, or a
valid passport.
   B.   Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
   C.   A habitual drunkard.
   D.   An interdicted person. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-13: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed
premises during the following hours: (Ord. 1997-3, 6-26-1997)
   A.   Christmas Day from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
the following day; (Ord. 2008-8, 12-11-2008)
   B.   On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. (Ord. 1997-3, 6-26-1997)
3-2A-14: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE:
Every licensee shall be responsible for all acts of his employees, and the
violation of this chapter or Idaho Code title 23 by any employee shall be
deemed a violation by licensee. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947)
3-2A-15: REVOCATION:
Any revocation by the director of the Idaho state police of the state license
shall be an automatic revocation of the city license. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947;
amd. 2007 Code)
3-2A-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1947-4, 6-23-1947; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B. WINE
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: Application
3-2B-4: Qualifications
3-2B-5: License Fee; Term
3-2B-6: Issuance
3-2B-7: Assignment Or Transfer
3-2B-8: Consumption On Premises
3-2B-9: Possession
3-2B-10: Misrepresentation Of Age
3-2B-11: Revocation
3-2B-12: Penalty
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this article, are hereby defined as follows:
DIRECTOR: The director of the Idaho state police.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation acting as a unit and includes the
plural as well as the singular unless the intent to give a more limited meaning
is disclosed by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the commissioner authorizing a person
to sell wine at retail for consumption off the licensed premises.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than sixteen percent (16%)
alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of natural sugar content of
fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar.
WINE BY THE DRINK: A license to sell wine by the individual glass or opened
bottle at retail, for consumption on the premises only. (Ord. 1973, 2-7-1973;
amd. Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978; 2007 Code)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail for consumption off
the licensed premises or to sell by the individual glass or opened bottle for
consumption on the premises within the corporate limits of the city without
first having obtained a license therefor under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978)
3-2B-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a retail wine license or wine by the drink license shall be in
writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant upon application forms furnished
by the clerk-treasurer. Such application shall be filed by the clerk-treasurer
and presented to the city council at the next regular meeting of the council
for their approval, rejection, or further consideration. (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-
1978)
3-2B-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a retail wine license shall possess all of the qualifications
necessary to obtain a license from the director of state police as prescribed
by the laws of the state and maintain such qualifications throughout the period
for which such license is issued. The possession of licenses regularly issued
by the state police and the county, in addition to a city beer license, shall
be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license
hereunder. (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2B-5: LICENSE FEE; TERM:
   A.   Retail Wine License: The license fee imposed and collected for a retail
wine license shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. Such
license year shall be from one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. January
1 through December 31.
   B.   Wine By The Drink: The license fee imposed and collected for a wine by
the drink license shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
Such license year shall be from one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.
January 1 through December 31. (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2B-6: ISSUANCE:
Upon filing the application for a retail wine license or wine by the drink
license and production of evidence as required by section
3-2B-4 of this article as to the qualifications of the applicant and by the
payment of the required license fee, the clerk-treasurer shall, upon approval
of the council, issue to the applicant a retail wine license or wine by the
drink license to sell wine at retail in accordance to the license issued within
the city for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-
1978)
3-2B-7: ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided by
Idaho Code section 23-1317 and shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer.
The fee for such assignment or transfer of a retail wine license or wine by the
drink license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978; amd.
2007 Code)
3-2B-8: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
   A.   Retail Wine License: Retailers who do not possess a valid license for
the retail sale of liquor by the drink or wine by the drink license shall not
permit consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may sell the wine only
in its original unbroken sealed container for consumption off the premises.
Wine sold by the retailer for consumption off the premises of the retailer may
be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the ordinances
of the city 1 .
   B.   Wine By The Drink: Persons holding a valid wine by the drink license
may sell wine for consumption on the premises only. Wine sold for consumption
on the licensed premises may be sold only during hours that beer may be sold
pursuant to the ordinances of the city 2 . (Ord. 1978-3, 4-12-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-2A-13 of this chapter.
2 2. See section
  3-2A-13 of this chapter.
3-2B-9: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a
public highway of this state or upon any city street, sidewalk, park or
building, consume or have in their possession any unsealed or opened container
of alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 1973-3, 2-7-1973; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2B-10: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
   A.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may purchase, consume
or possess wine.
   B.   No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years.
   C.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall by any means
represent to any retailer or distributor, that he or she is twenty one (21)
years or more of age for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor,
or his agent, employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
   D.   No person shall by any means represent to any retailer or distributor
or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, that any other person
is twenty one (21) years or more of age, when in fact such other person is
under the age of twenty one (21) years for the purpose of inducing such
retailer or distributor or agent or employee to sell, serve or dispense wine to
such person. (Ord. 1973-3, 2-7-1973; amd. 2007 Code)
3-2B-11: REVOCATION:
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the city council, and the
city council may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any license for
fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for the violation of any of
the provisions of this article or for any conduct or act of the licensee or his
employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the premises where
such business is conducted, or in connection therewith or adjacent thereto,
tending to render such business or such premises where the same is conducted a
public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety or general welfare of
the city; provided, that revocation or suspension of the state license by the
director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence for
revocation or suspension of the license issued herein. (Ord. 1973-3, 2-7-1973;
amd. 2007 Code)
3-2B-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of this article shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1973-3, 2-7-1973; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE C. NONINTOXICATING LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2C-1: License Required; Fee
3-2C-2: Application
3-2C-3: Penalty
3-2C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation having a place
of business in the city of Lava Hot Springs to sell or offer to sell to the
public any 3.2 percent beer or any other malt or vinous liquor defined by law
as nonintoxicating without first procuring a license as herein provided.
   B.   For each place of business in the city of Lava Hot Springs the license
fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year and no license shall be
granted for less than one year from date of application. (Ord. 75, 7-5-1933)
3-2C-2: APPLICATION:
Each applicant for a license shall first make application to the city council
for the granting of said license, and the city council shall have the right to
refuse said applicant a license for any reason whatsoever. (Ord. 75, 7-5-1933)
3-2C-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the city of Lava
Hot Springs who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), and may be refused a license by
the city council at any time thereafter. (Ord. 75, 7-5-1933)
CHAPTER 3
NONPROPERTY TAXES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Findings
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Imposition Of Certain Nonproperty Taxes
3-3-4: Duration Of Taxes
3-3-5: Use Of Taxes
3-3-6: Creation Of Property Tax Relief Fund
3-3-7: Authorization For City Clerk Or Designee To Administer, Regulate And
Collect Taxes
3-3-8: Permits; Issuance
3-3-9: Method Of Payment Of Taxes
3-3-10: Audits; Deficiency Determinations
3-3-11: Redetermination Of Deficiency
3-3-12: Appeals, Interest On Deficiency
3-3-13: Collection And Enforcement
3-3-14: Refunds, Limitations And Interest
3-3-15: Responsibility For Payment Of Taxes
3-3-16: Period Of Limitation Upon Assessment And Collection
3-3-17: Successor's Liability
3-3-18: General Administration By City Clerk
3-3-19: Penalties
3-3-20: Penalty Charge
3-3-1: FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Lava Hot Springs hereby finds that the city has
a population less than ten thousand (10,000); derives the major portion of its
economic well being from people catering to recreational needs and meeting
needs of people traveling to the city for an extended period of time; that the
city has a significant economic dependence upon visitors and travelers passing
through or staying in the community and the city; and that said visitors and
travelers require services of the city which place an undue burden upon the
taxpayers of the city. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING MATERIALS: Includes all tangible personal property which is used in
constructing, altering, repairing or improving real property.
GROCERIES: Any edible food or foodstuffs intended for human consumption except:
   A.   Alcoholic beverages;
   B.   Tobacco; and
   C.   Any food product which is prepared and sold for consumption at any
"eating place" as defined in Idaho Code section 39-1602; or
   D.   Any sandwiches and foods prepared and sold by retailer for immediate
human consumption; or
   E.   Any food product sold through a vending machine if the sales price is
more than fifteen cents ($0.15).
HOTEL-MOTEL: Any business including hotels, motels, condominiums, tourist
homes, campgrounds, and any other business which in the regular course of
business rents or leases for occupancy temporary lodging to individuals with or
without meals, except where residence is maintained continuously under terms of
a lease or similar agreement for a period in excess of thirty (30) days.
IN THE CITY OF LAVA HOT SPRINGS: Within the exterior boundaries of the city of
Lava Hot Springs, Bannock County, Idaho.
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK: Any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol,
spirits, or wine and susceptible of being consumed by human beings, for
beverage purposes. This term, as used in this chapter, includes:
   Alcohol: The product of distillation of any fermented liquor, rectified
either once or more often, whatever may be the origin thereof, or synthetic
ethyl alcohol.
   Beer: Any alcohol beverage obtained from the fermentation of sugar, barley,
hops, malt, yeast and similar ingredients.
   Spirits: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed
with drinkable water and other substances in solution, including, among other
things, brandy, rum, whiskey, and gin.
   Wine: Any alcohol obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content
of fruits (grapes, apples, etc.) or other agricultural products containing
sugar (honey, milk, etc.).
PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
ROOM OR SPACE OCCUPANCY CHARGE: The total amount charged for the rental use or
temporary occupancy of a room, camping space or unit, valued in money, whether
paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction.
SALE OF LIQUOR BY THE DRINK: The terms "sale", "retail sale", and "sale at
retail" mean the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises,
and include any transfer of money, title, exchange, barter or credit,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever as
consideration.
SALES PRICE: The total amount for which liquor by the drink is sold, and the
total amount of any room or space occupancy charge, and the total amount for
which tangible personal property, including services agreed to be rendered as
part of the sale, is sold, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise,
without any deduction.
SELLER OF LIQUOR BY THE DRINK: Any individual, partnership, corporation,
organization or association that engages in sale of liquor by the drink for
consumption on the premises, whether by agent, employee or principal.
TAXPAYER: Any person subject to or liable for any tax or payment of any tax
imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-3: IMPOSITION OF CERTAIN NONPROPERTY TAXES:
The city of Lava Hot Springs hereby imposes and shall collect, as set forth
herein, certain nonproperty taxes as follows:
   A.   Hotel-Motel/Space Occupancy: A tax is hereby imposed at the rate of
five percent (5%) on the occupancy charge for each hotel-motel room or camping
space rented or leased within the City of Lava Hot Springs, Bannock County,
Idaho. Said occupancy tax shall apply to, be computed on and collected on all
occupancy charges including all credit, installment, conditional or similar
rental or lease fees at the time the fee for rental is charged. Said occupancy
tax shall be collected by the owner of said property or his authorized agent
from the renter or lessee. One percent (1%) of the five percent (5%) hotel-
motel/space occupancy tax shall be used for that purpose set forth in
subsection
3-3-5 F of this chapter.
   B.   Liquor By The Drink Tax: A tax is hereby imposed at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the sales price upon each sale at retail of liquor by the
drink. The tax shall apply to, be computed on and collected for all sales
including credit, or similar sales at the time of the sale, and shall be
collected by the retailer from the consumer.
   C.   Sales: A tax is hereby imposed at the rate of two percent (2%) on the
sales price upon each sale made at retail, exempting only those sales already
exempt by state law under chapter 36, title 63, Idaho Code and exempting
"groceries" and "building materials" as defined in section 3-3-2 of this
chapter and exempting from said tax sales, lease-purchase agreements or leases
with the option to purchase motor vehicles. The tax shall apply to, be computed
on and collected for all sales including credit, or similar sales at the time
of the sale, and shall be collected by the retailer from the consumer.
   D.   Monies Held In Trust: All monies collected and/or retained under the
provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust for the City of Lava Hot
Springs and for payment thereof to the City Clerk or the City Clerk's designee,
in the manner and at the times in this chapter provided. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-
2015, eff. 11-20-2015; amd. Ord. 2024-005, 12-30-2024)
3-3-4: DURATION OF TAXES:
The Nonproperty Taxes authorized and collected under this chapter are hereby
imposed for as long as such taxes are authorized by Idaho law or until City
voters vote to change or eliminate the specific taxes, rates of tax, and
purposes. (Ord. 2018-1, 1-11-2018)
3-3-5: USE OF TAXES:
The Nonproperty Tax revenue derived from and collected under this chapter shall
be used for the following purposes:
   A.   Capital improvements: roads, water, sewer, parking;
   B.   Emergency services: police, fire, ambulance;
   C.   Open space acquisition and recreation;
   D.   Administrative and legal;
   E.   Direct costs to collect and enforce tax;
   F.   Tourism development and promotion.
   G.   Land acquisition and municipal building construction.
   H.   Engineering and city planning services including development and
application of a comprehensive plan for the City;
   I.   Law enforcement services which are currently provided by the Bannock
County Sheriffs office as well as current City Code enforcement services to
maintain the safety and welfare of the community;
   J.   Maintenance of infrastructure and capital improvements; and
   K.   Storm water capital improvements/maintenance. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-
2015, eff. 11-20-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-7, 11-14-2019; Ord. 2022-3, 12-8-2022)
3-3-6: CREATION OF PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
   A.   There is hereby created in the office of the city clerk a fund to be
designated as the "municipal property tax relief fund". All monies collected
under this chapter, and not otherwise budgeted by the city council, shall be
placed by the city clerk into the municipal property tax relief fund. All
monies collected and placed into said fund shall be used to replace city
property taxes in the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-
20-2015)
3-3-7: AUTHORIZATION FOR CITY CLERK OR DESIGNEE TO ADMINISTER, REGULATE AND
COLLECT TAXES:
   A.   The city clerk of the city of Lava Hot Springs is hereby authorized and
empowered to administer, regulate and collect payment of all nonproperty taxes
adopted and imposed by this chapter. Said clerk shall have all of the powers
set forth in this chapter together with those additional powers necessary and
proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The city clerk of the city
of Lava Hot Springs may also designate and collect said nonproperty taxes. In
the event the city clerk designates to the Idaho state tax commission the role
of administration regulation and collection under this provision, all
references to the city clerk shall be deemed to refer to the Idaho state tax
commission. The costs incurred by the state tax commission shall be reimbursed
from the proceeds collected. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-8: PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business of renting a
hotel-motel room or camping space, selling liquor by the drink, or engaging in
nonexcluded retail sales within this city shall file with the city clerk an
application for a municipal nonproperty tax permit for each place of business.
A separate permit is required for each place of business within the city. Every
application for said permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city
clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or
intends to transact business, the location of the business or places of
business, and such other information as the city clerk may require. The
application shall be signed by the owner, if he is a natural person; or, in the
case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner, in the case of a
corporation, by an executive officer or other person authorized by the
corporation to sign the application. Initial permits shall be issued upon
completion of the application and payment of a five dollar ($5.00) application
fee for each permit sought.
   B.   Upon filing an application meeting the requirements set out above, the
city clerk shall issue to each applicant a permit for each place of business. A
permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose
name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated
therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the location for
which it was issued. Issuance of a permit may be subject to additional
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
   C.   On the face of the permit shall be fixed a municipal nonproperty tax
number which shall be used by the applicant as an identifying number on all
filing, payment and correspondence with regard to the nonproperty tax imposed
under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-9: METHOD OF PAYMENT OF TAXES:
   A.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed and paid for each
calendar month. Said taxes are due and payable to the city clerk on or before
the twenty fifth day of the succeeding month. The amount of tax paid shall be
computed on the total dollar value of liquor by the drink sold and/or hotel-
motel/campground occupancy charges and/or retail sales. Each person required to
hold a municipal nonproperty tax permit and number shall file a municipal
nonproperty tax return and a copy of their Idaho state sales tax return for the
month at the same time said taxes are paid to the city clerk, unless said
person has been permitted in writing by the Idaho state tax commission to file
quarterly sales and use tax returns. Persons who have been permitted to file
other than quarterly returns shall notify the city clerk in writing and the
city clerk thereupon may require reporting of state tax returns over some other
period.
   B.   The first payment of taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable
together on December 25, 2015, for the period beginning November 20, 2015, and
ending November 30, 2015. Thereafter all payments shall be made monthly.
   C.   A municipal nonproperty tax return shall be filed each and every month
by every person engaging in the sale of liquor by the drink and/or hotel-motel/
campground rental or lease or retail sales regardless of whether or not any tax
is due. Returns shall be signed by the person required to file the return or by
a duly authorized agent. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-10: AUDITS; DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   The city clerk may order an audit of any taxpayer under this chapter
for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any return
or payment.
   B.   If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other
way, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount of tax due upon the
basis of facts obtained from such information within its possession and assert
a deficiency. One or more deficiency determinations may offset overpayment
against amount due. Furthermore, said determinations shall be made for the
period or periods in respect to which the person fails to make a return and
shall be based upon any information which is in the city clerk's possession.
   C.   The city clerk shall give written notice of its determination and the
amount of its deficiency, including interest, at the rate of eighteen percent
(18%) per annum from the date due, to the person from which such deficiency
amount is due. Such notice may be personally delivered or mailed postage
prepaid to the person at the address furnished to the city clerk in the
nonproperty tax permit application. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-11: REDETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY:
   A.   Any person against whom a deficiency determination is made under this
chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition in writing for a
redetermination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice
thereof. If the petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty
(30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the
period.
   B.   If a petition for redetermination is filed within the thirty (30) day
period, the city clerk shall reconsider the determination and, if the person so
requests in the petition, grant the person oral hearing and give said person
ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing personally or by
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at the address furnished to the
city clerk in said person's application for a nonproperty tax permit. (Ord.
2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-12: APPEALS, INTEREST ON DEFICIENCY:
   A.   When a redetermination is made, the city clerk shall give notice to the
taxpayer against whom the redetermination is made. Within thirty (30) days of
the date upon which such notice of redetermination is mailed or served, the
taxpayer may file an appeal with the city council or may file a complaint with
the district court for review of the city clerk's redetermination. There shall
be no right of review to the city council nor to the district court on the
determination of taxes due made by the city clerk unless a petition for
redetermination has been timely filed. No assessment of a deficiency in respect
to the tax imposed by this chapter or proceeding to collect for its collection
shall be made, begun or prosecuted until such notice has been mailed to the
taxpayer and expiration of such thirty (30) day period after notice of
redetermination, or if a protest is filed until a decision on the protest
becomes final. If the taxpayer does not protest to the city council or file an
action in district court within the time prescribed in this section, the
deficiency shall be assessed and shall become due and payable upon notice and
demand from the city clerk.
   B.   Interest upon any deficiency shall be assessed at the same time as the
deficiency and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the
city clerk and shall be collected as part of the tax at the rate of eighteen
percent (18%) per annum from the date prescribed for payment of the tax. (Ord.
2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-13: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   As soon as practical after the monthly municipal nonproperty tax return
and payment is filed, the city clerk shall examine same and determine the
correct amount of the tax. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of
any payment determining the amount of tax due where none has been made,
determining liability of any person for any tax payable under this chapter, or
the liability at law or in equity of any person in respect to any tax provided
by this chapter or collecting any such liability, the city clerk, or duly
authorized deputy, is authorized: 1) to examine the books, papers, records or
other data which may be relevant or material to the inquiry; 2) to summon the
person liable for the tax or any officer, agent or employee of such person, or
any person having possession, custody or care of books or accounting containing
entries relating to the business of the person liable for the tax, to appear
before the city clerk, or deputy, at a time and place named in its summons to
produce such books, papers, records or other data and/or give such testimony
under oath as may be relevant or material to such inquiry. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-
12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-14: REFUNDS, LIMITATIONS AND INTEREST:
   A.   If the city clerk determines that any amount due under this chapter has
been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, the city clerk shall set forth that fact in its records and the
excess amount paid or collected may be credited on any amount due or payable to
the city clerk for nonproperty taxes from that person, and any balance refunded
to the person by whom it was paid or to his successors, administrators or
executors.
   B.   No such credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one year from
the time the payment was made unless before the expiration of such period a
claim therefor is filed by the taxpayer.
   C.   Interest shall be allowed on the amount of such credits or refunds at
the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date which such tax was paid.
   D.   Appeal from the city clerk's decision denying in part or in whole a
claim for refund shall be made in accordance with the laws of the state of
Idaho with regard to claims against municipalities. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015,
eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-15: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
   A.   Every person with a duty to account for or pay over any tax imposed by
this chapter on behalf of a corporation as an officer or employee of the
corporation, or on behalf of a partnership, as a member employee of the
partnership shall be personally liable for payment of such tax, plus penalties
and interest. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-16: PERIOD OF LIMITATION UPON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within
three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax assessed to be due
was or should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a
deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed
time, such tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after
assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be
suspended for the period during which the city clerk is prohibited from making
the assessment or from collection or proceeding in court due to a petition for
redetermination or an appeal therefrom, and for thirty (30) days thereafter.
   B.   In the case of taxes due during the lifetime of a decedent, the tax
shall be assessed and proceedings for collection begun within six (6) months
after written request therefor (filed after the return is made) by the
executor, administrator, or other fiduciary representing the estate of such
decedent unless the assessment is stayed by a petition for redetermination or
any appeal therefrom.
   C.   In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax,
or of a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in
court for collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time
within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts
constituting the fraud, or discovery of the failure to file. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-
12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-17: SUCCESSOR'S LIABILITY:
   A.   If a vendor liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells out
his business or stocks and goods, the vendee shall make an inquiry to the city
clerk and withhold from the purchase price any amount of tax that may be due
under this chapter until such time as the vendor produces a receipt stating
that no amount is due.
   B.   If the purchaser of business or stock of goods fails to withhold from
the purchase price as above required, he is personally liable for the payment
of the amount required to be withheld by him which amount shall be immediately
due and payable with interest as herein provided and suit may be filed within
the time limits set forth in section
3-3-16 of this chapter to collect the same. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-
20-2015)
3-3-18: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION BY CITY CLERK:
   A.   The city clerk shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may
prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to its
administration and enforcement. The city clerk may employ qualified auditors
for examination of taxpayers' books and records, and shall also employ such
accountants, investigators, assistants, clerks, and other personnel as are
necessary for the efficient administration of this chapter, and may delegate
authority to its representatives to conduct hearings, or perform other duties
imposed by this chapter.
   B.   Every hotel-motel and campground owner and seller of liquor by the
drink or seller at retail in this city shall keep such records, receipts,
invoices, and other pertinent papers as the city clerk may require. Every such
hotel-motel and campground owner and seller of liquor by the drink or seller at
retail who files tax payments required under this chapter shall keep all such
records for not less than four (4) years after making such payments unless the
city clerk in writing authorizes their destruction.
   C.   The city clerk, or any person authorized in writing by the clerk, may
examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any person selling liquor
by the drink and any hotel-motel and campground owner or seller at retail or
any person liable for any tax, and may investigate the character of the
business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or
if no return is made by the person to ascertain and determine the amount
required to be paid. Any hotel-motel or campground owners or persons who sell
liquor by the drink or seller at retail whose pertinent records are kept
outside of the city must bring the records to the city for examination by the
city clerk upon request of the latter, or by agreement with the city clerk
permit an auditor designated by the city clerk to visit the place where the
records are kept and their audit of such records. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015,
eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-19: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year in the county jail, and/or a
three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine or both. Furthermore, each month in which a
person fails to report, or intentionally fails to accurately compute, or
intentionally fails to accurately disclose the total amount of sales or rentals
or the amount of tax to be paid, as imposed under this chapter, shall be
considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have his
municipal nonproperty tax permit and tax number revoked. The city clerk shall
send written notice of revocation of said permit and tax number to the permit
holder by mailing the same by certified mail to the address given on the permit
application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said
notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the city council,
challenging said revocation. If no appeal is timely made said revocation
becomes final. Whenever a person subject to this chapter has had said permit
and tax number revoked, the city clerk shall not reissue said permit nor issue
a new permit to said person until said person places with the city clerk a bond
or other sufficient security in the amount equal to three (3) times the actual,
determined or estimated average monthly amount of tax payable by such person
pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   The city clerk, whenever it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter, may require any person subject to this chapter to place with
it such security as it may determine. The amount of said security shall not be
greater than three (3) times the estimated average monthly amount payable by
such persons pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security may be
increased or decreased by the city clerk at any time, subject to the
limitations set forth above.
   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have all
municipal beer license(s), wine license(s), retail liquor by the drink license
(s) and business license(s) revoked.
   E.   Any amount of tax due under this chapter for which a person fails to
report or accurately compute, shall become a lien upon the property of said
taxpayer on the date that the same becomes due, and the city may seek to
enforce said lien and collect all taxes and interest due together with the
reasonable costs of collection, including attorney fees, in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   F.   For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter, and to
prevent evasion of said nonproperty taxes, the burden of proving that a sale of
liquor by the drink or rental of a hotel- motel room or campground space or
retail sale is not a sale under this chapter is upon the person who makes the
sale or rental in question.
   G.   No city clerk of the city of Lava Hot Springs, Bannock County, Idaho,
nor any duly authorized deputy city clerk, agent or employee shall divulge or
make known to any persons, in any manner, any information whatsoever submitted
or obtained directly or indirectly, pursuant to this chapter, or to permit any
nonproperty tax return or information supplied with regard thereto, or any copy
thereof, or any paper or book so obtained to be seen or examined by any person
except as provided by law; provided that in any action or proceeding brought
for the collection, remission, cancellation, or refund or the whole or any part
of a tax imposed under this chapter, or for enforcing the penalties prescribed
for making false or fraudulent returns, any and all information contained in or
provided with said returns, may be made accessible to the elected or appointed
officials, officers and representatives of said city charged with enforcing or
defending same, all such returns, information, statements and correspondence
relating thereto may be produced into evidence in any action, civil or
criminal, directly pertaining to such returns or the tax imposed on the basis
of such returns; provided, the Lava Hot Springs city council, under such rule
and provisions as it may prescribe, may permit, notwithstanding the provisions
of this chapter as to secrecy, the commissioner of internal revenue of the
United States or his delegate or the proper officer of any state imposing a tax
to inspect the nonproperty tax returns or information provided or obtained in
connection therewith, or may furnish to such officer or his authorized agent
copies of an abstract thereof; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
a taxpayer, or authorized representative, upon proper identification, from
inspecting and copying his own nonproperty tax returns and information supplied
therewith. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015, eff. 11-20-2015)
3-3-20: PENALTY CHARGE:
   A.   Any person who is required to collect, truthfully account for, and pay
over any tax imposed by this chapter and who wilfully fails to collect such a
tax or truthfully account for or pay over such a tax or wilfully attempts in
any manner to evade or defeat such a tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition
to other penalties provided by law, be liable to pay a penalty equal to the
amount of the tax evaded, or not collected, or not accounted for and paid over.
The city clerk shall determine and assess such penalties, and the same shall
become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city clerk. The city
clerk shall send written notice of such penalty charge to the permit holder by
mailing the same by certified mail to the address given on the permit
application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said
notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the city council
challenging said penalty charge determination. If no appeal is timely made,
said penalty charge determination becomes final. (Ord. 2015-11, 11-12-2015,
eff. 11-20-2015)
CHAPTER 4
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: Declaration Of Policy
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: License Required
3-4-4: License Fees
3-4-5: Application And Procedure
3-4-6: Term Of License
3-4-7: Posting
3-4-8: Assignment Or Transfer
3-4-9: Increasing Number Of Devices
3-4-10: Evidence Of Ownership
3-4-11: Revocation
3-4-12: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 50-307, 50-308.
3-4-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The mayor and city council find and hereby declare that the health, safety, and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city require the licensing and regulation of
coin operated amusement devices, in the exercise of the authority granted to
the cities by the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any amusement machine or device operated by
means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of
amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does
not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement
features, nor does the term include any coin operated mechanical musical
devices.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who sets
up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of
operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such setting up for
operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the
basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, who, as the owner, lessee or
proprietor has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in
or at which any device as herein defined is placed or kept for use or play, or
on exhibition for the purpose of use or play. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of an "operator" or "proprietor" of
"coin operated amusement devices" as the terms are herein defined, without
having first obtained the proper license therefor from the city. (Ord. 1977-3,
7-18-1977)
3-4-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Operator: The license fee for each operator shall be five dollars
($5.00) per year for each device set up for operation, leased or distributed to
a proprietor. All operators' license fees shall be paid annually in advance. In
no case shall any portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee.
   B.   Proprietor: The license fee for each "proprietor" as herein defined
shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year for each device used or played, or
exhibited for use or play. All proprietors' license fees shall be payable
annually in advance. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid
to the licensee. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-5: APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Form; Required Information: Application for license hereunder shall be
filed, in writing, with the city clerk-treasurer in any form which contains the
following information:
      1.   The names and addresses of the applicant, and if a firm,
corporation, partnership, or association, the principal officers thereof and
their addresses.
      2.   The address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be
operated, together with the character of the business being carried on at such
place.
      3.   The trade name and general description of the devices to be
licensed, the name of the manufacturer and serial number of devices to be
licensed.
      4.   The name and address of the operator of the devices, if other than
the proprietor.
   B.   Fee: The proper license fee, in the form of cash, certified check or
money order, shall accompany such application.
   C.   Referral To Mayor And Council; Investigation: Application for license
hereunder shall be first referred by the city clerk-treasurer to the mayor and
council who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as they deem
necessary. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
   D.   Issuance: If the application is approved by the mayor and council, the
license shall be issued by the clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977; amd.
2007 Code)
   E.   Denial: If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the
applicant.
   F.   Appeal: If an applicant or other interested party contests action taken
by the city with respect to any application, a hearing may be requested in the
manner set forth with respect to revocation of licenses as provided below.
(Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses under this chapter shall expire on April 30 following their
issuance. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-7: POSTING:
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the
licensee. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-8: ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER:
Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and, in the case of a
proprietor, shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued.
(Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-9: INCREASING NUMBER OF DEVICES:
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this chapter desires,
after the expiration of any portion of any license period, to increase the
number of devices to be used or played in his establishment, he shall tender
his license to the city clerk-treasurer who shall issue a new license showing
the number of devices licensed thereunder upon payment of the license fee
therefor. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-10: EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP:
Any proprietor who owns such devices on the effective date hereof shall file
with the city clerk-treasurer such evidence of ownership prior to the issuance
of a license. Any proprietor purchasing devices after the effective date hereof
shall file with the city clerk-treasurer evidence of ownership thereof before
exhibiting or placing such devices for use or play. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-11: REVOCATION:
   A.   Power To Revoke: The mayor shall have the right to revoke any license
issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation: Notice of revocation shall be sent by certified
mail to the affected licensee at the address for said licensee indicated in his
application.
   C.   Request For Hearing: Within fifteen (15) days following issuance of the
notice of revocation, the licensee may submit, in writing, to the city clerk-
treasurer a request for hearing before the mayor and city council at the
council's next regularly scheduled meeting.
   D.   Hearing: At such hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall be
given the opportunity to show cause why action taken by the city should be
rescinded or modified.
   E.   Court Action: If any action is brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction, by the city, a licensee or other interested person for the
purpose of enforcing or obtaining relief from the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to award of its costs, plus a
reasonable attorney fee in the event that it prevails in such action. (Ord.
1977-3, 7-18-1977)
3-4-12: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. Criminal prosecution for said violation may be
either in lieu of or in addition to the taking of an administrative action to
enforce this chapter or the commencement of any civil action relating to this
chapter. (Ord. 1977-3, 7-18-1977)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definition
4-1-2: Prohibited
4-1-3: Public Nuisances Designated
4-1-4: Abatement Notice
4-1-5: Service Of Notice
4-1-6: Appeal
4-1-7: Abatement Required; Time Limit
4-1-8: Abatement By City
4-1-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 18-5901 et seq.
4-1-1: DEFINITION:
 
                      For the purpose of this chapter, as unused or discarded
                      matter having little or no substantial market value,
WASTE MATTER:         which is exposed to the elements and/or is not enclosed
                      in any structure or otherwise completely concealed from
                      public view, and which consists (without limitation or
                      exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:
                      Includes crates, cartons, metal and glass containers,
                      cigarette butts, newspapers, boxes, wood shavings, lumber
Rubbish:              scraps, bedding, lawn clippings, furniture, home
                      appliances, washers, dryers, freezers, refrigerators,
                      dilapidated outbuildings, fragments of buildings; and
                      Includes asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, dirt, and/or
Rubble:               gravel piles, unused building or mobile home foundations;
                      and
                      Includes automotive bodies, trailers, tires, farm
Vehicular Components: equipment, and commercial equipment components and/or
                      parts thereof. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991; amd. Ord. 2021-2,
                      6-10-2021)
 
4-1-2: PROHIBITED:
No owner of any lot, place or area within the city, or occupant or person in
control of same shall permit on such lot, place or area or upon any street,
sidewalk or public right of way abutting the same, a "public nuisance" to exist
herein defined and found to exist by the fire chief or his authorized
representative or the chief of police or his authorized representative. (Ord.
1991-1, 6-13-1991)
4-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES DESIGNATED:
   A.   All weeds, dry grasses, trees, shrubs and other vegetation, rubbish,
refuse, garbage, trash or any material present upon the streets, sidewalks,
adjacent public rights of way or upon private property within the city, which
by reason of size, manner of growth, or location constitutes a fire hazard to
any building, improvement, crop or other property, as well as weeds and other
vegetation, which by reason of promiscuous propagation are likely to cause
damage to public streets and sidewalks, or which interferes with the reasonable
enjoyment of property by the neighbors are declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Regularly cultivated, mowed and useful grasses and pastures shall not
be declared a public nuisance. However, if the fire chief or his authorized
representative determines it necessary to protect adjacent improved property
from fire exposure, an adequate firebreak may be required.
   C.   "Waste matter" as herein defined, which by reason of its location and
character is unsightly or which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
property by the neighbors, or which would materially hamper or interfere with
the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, or any adjoining
premises or the abatement of a "nuisance" as defined by this chapter is
declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991)
4-1-4: ABATEMENT NOTICE:
If it is determined by the fire chief or his authorized representative, or the
chief of police or his authorized representative that a "public nuisance", as
herein defined, exists on any lot, place or area, or upon any street, sidewalk,
or public right of way abutting the same, the chief of the fire department or
the chief of police or an authorized representative shall cause a notice to be
issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "Notice To Clean
Premises"; shall contain a description of the property in general terms
reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance; shall describe
the nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same; shall direct
the abatement of the nuisance; shall specify the penalty provision as provided
herein; and shall specify the appeal process as provided herein. Such notice
may be on a form prescribed by the city. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991)
4-1-5: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The notice required by section
4-1-4 of this chapter may be served in the following manner:
   A.   Personal Service: By personal service on the owner of said lot, place,
or area if the owner lives within the city and by personal service on the
occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be
identified; or
   B.   Registered Mail: If said owner does not live within the city, by
registered mail to the owner at the address shown on the last available
assessment roll, or as otherwise known; and by personal service on the occupant
or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be
identified; or
   C.   Posting; Publication: Should the owner not be known or have an
available address, by posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting a
public right of way and by publication of said notice at least once a week for
the period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
and by personal service on the occupant or person in charge or control of the
property if such person can be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall
be a general notice that property in the city has been posted in accordance
with this chapter and contain a general statement of the effect of such
postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in
computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991)
4-1-6: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the date of posting or mailing such notice, the
person occupying or controlling such lot, place or area affected may appeal to
the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
city clerk-treasurer. At the regular meeting or recessed meeting of the city
council, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty six (26) days
thereafter, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal,
and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991; amd. 2007 Code)
4-1-7: ABATEMENT REQUIRED; TIME LIMIT:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person occupying or controlling any lot,
place or area in the city which has been declared a public nuisance as provided
herein, within ten (10) days from the date of notification as provided herein,
or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten (10) days from the
determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as
stated. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-1991)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Upon the failure to abate a stated nuisance within the time limits of section
4-1-7 of this chapter, the city may remove the same, doing whatever is
necessary to accomplish the abatement cleanup, removal and related work. The
costs thereof may be assessed against the property and collected as provided by
law, particularly as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 10, for special
assessments, or the city may collect the costs by civil action. (Ord. 1991-1,
6-13-1991)
4-1-9: PENALTY:
Failure to abate the stated nuisance shall be a misdemeanor. The provisions of
this chapter are not exclusive remedies, and the city may invoke all remedies,
civil and criminal, provided for abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 1991-1, 6-13-
1991)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Short Title
5-1-2: State Law Adopted
5-1-3: Posting Bond
5-1-4: Consumption Of Intoxicating Liquor In Public Parks
5-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the LAVA HOT SPRINGS CRIMINAL
CODE. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
5-1-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption: There is hereby adopted by the city, Idaho Code title 18,
crimes and punishments, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended,
three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer
for public inspection.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, or the
statutes adopted herein, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2007 Code)
5-1-3: POSTING BOND:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer and cited for a misdemeanor
as designated in this chapter or the Idaho Code, the officer may require the
person to post bond in accordance with a bonding schedule maintained by the
city clerk-treasurer when the person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of
identity or when the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the
person will disregard his promise to appear in court. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
5-1-4: CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PARKS:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to consume
beer, wine, or intoxicating liquor while occupying or traveling upon any
street, highway, vehicular way, pedestrianway, public parking lot or other
thoroughfare open to the public. (Ord. 1983-4, 8-10-1983)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Animal Control Officer
5-2-3: Cruelty To Animals
5-2-4: Commanding An Animal To Attack
5-2-5: Wild And Exotic Animals
5-2-6: Dog And Cat Licenses
5-2-7: Kennels
5-2-8: Rabies, Diseases And Quarantine
5-2-9: Running At Large
5-2-10: Disturbance By Animals
5-2-11: Waste Matter
5-2-12: Nuisance
5-2-13: Vicious Dogs
5-2-14: Impoundment
5-2-15: Sick Or Injured Animals
5-2-16: Removal Of Animal Carcasses
5-2-17: Treatment Of Fowl Or Rabbits
5-2-18: Use Of Animals To Attract Trade
5-2-19: Sale Of Turtles
5-2-20: Interference With Animal Control Officer
5-2-21: Keeping Livestock
5-2-22: Swine
5-2-23: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 25-2801 et seq., 25-3501 et seq., 50-319.
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms defined shall have the meaning as
clearly required by the context. "Shall" is mandatory, not discretionary.
ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or
negligent conduct resulting in the animal's bruising, bleeding, malnutrition,
dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones, subdural hematoma, soft
tissue swelling, or death.
ALLOW: To forbear or neglect to restrain or prevent. With regard to an animal
running at large, it requires no intent or participation by defendant but is
rather malum prohibitum.
ANIMAL: A mammal, bird, reptile, fish or amphibian.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER: Any premises designated by the city for the purpose of
impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person appointed by the city for the purpose of
impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
ANIMAL EXHIBIT: Any exhibition or act featuring performing animals.
ANIMAL RUNNING AT LARGE: Any animal not under the control of its owner or
custodian, remaining upon the streets, alleys or public places of the city, or
upon any other premises not its own. All animals off their own property must be
either leashed or in a motor vehicle. In addition, they must be under the
supervision and control of the owner or custodian.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure, which is
designated or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of animals.
CITY: The city of Lava Hot Springs.
COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL: Any place of business for the care of dogs including,
but not limited to, the boarding, grooming, breeding, training, or selling of
dogs.
COUNCIL: The Lava Hot Springs city council.
CUSTODIAN: Any person having custodial care of an animal, on a temporary basis,
at the request or with the consent of the owner or by that person's choice.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least five feet (5') in height, forming
or causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be
taken by the owner, such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed, locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom; it
shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
IMPOUNDMENT: The taking of an animal by an animal control officer or other
person on whose property an animal, other than his own, trespasses; impoundment
begins from the moment of capture.
LIVESTOCK: Cows, sheep, horses, goats, poultry, rabbits, pigs, hogs, ducks and
geese.
MISUSE: Intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task which
could be dangerous or harmful to the animal or to any person.
NONCOMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL: An establishment or premises where three (3) or more
dogs, over six (6) months of age, are kept or harbored for the hobby of the
householder.
OWNER: Any person who owns an animal or who harbors or keeps an animal within
the city limits for five (5) or more consecutive days. The legal responsibility
for an animal owned by a person under the age of eighteen (18) shall reside in
the heads of the household.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, business trust,
organization, corporation, company or other entity.
RESEARCH FACILITY: Any college, university or other research institution which
uses live animals in research, tests, or experiments.
SANITATION DIRECTOR: Any person appointed by the city to hold such position or
his employee.
VETERINARIAN: A duly licensed doctor of veterinary medicine.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Any animal which, when unprovoked in a taunting or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon
the streets, sidewalks, any public grounds or places, or private property not
owned or possessed by the owner of the animal; or
   B.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
   C.   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or
   D.   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting, or any animal trained for fighting; or
   E.   Any dog which has been trained as an attack dog, except dogs used by
law enforcement agencies.
Notwithstanding the above definitions of a vicious animal, no animal may be
declared vicious if any injury or damage is sustained by a person over the age
of eighteen (18) who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be
declared vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within
the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
WILD ANIMAL OR EXOTIC PET: Any nondomesticated animal.
ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN: Any park or zoo operated by a person or public body. (Ord.
1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   Authority: Animal control officers shall be selected and authorized to
enforce this chapter with the authority to issue Idaho uniform citations under
the supervision of the animal control director.
   B.   Interference: No person shall hinder the animal control officer in the
discharge of his duties.
   C.   Duty Performed By Other Officer: Whenever a power is granted to, or a
duty imposed upon, the animal control officer, the power or the duty may be
performed by a deputy of the officer or by a police officer. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-
9-1993)
5-2-3: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Definition: "Cruel manner" includes, but is not limited to, the
following specific acts and omissions:
      1.   Failure by an owner to provide such animal with:
         a.   Sufficient good and wholesome food;
         b.   Proper shelter and protection from the weather;
         c.   Proper veterinarian care to prevent suffering or treat disease;
         d.   A clean and wholesome environment in which to live; or
         e.   Protection from the abuse of other persons.
      2.   Any of the following specific acts with an animal by any person:
         a.   Abuse or other mistreatment;
         b.   Torture;
         c.   Misuse;
         d.   Overload or override;
         e.   Abandonment; or
         f.   Exposure to unreasonable danger to health or life.
      3.   The wilful killing, maiming or disfigurement of any animal, or
administration of poison, or causing to be ingested any foreign object by any
animal or exposing any animal to any poisonous substance with the intent that
it shall be taken by any animal except pests of public health.
      4.   The setting of any trap within the city which is likely to be
injurious to domestic animals. Humane traps are available from the animal
control center.
   B.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a cruel
manner to any animal within the city.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to animal
control officers; agents of the animal control center; or to police officers
when they are engaged in carrying out the duties assigned to them by this
chapter; or to a research facility; or to licensed veterinarians when requested
by the owner to dispose of an animal owned by him or her, in which case such
veterinarian must do so by a humane method.
   D.   Impoundment:
      1.   Duty To Impound: It shall be the duty of the police officer, animal
control officer, or other designated city employee to take possession of any
animal for which he has probable cause to believe falls under this section and
deliver such animal to the animal control center.
      2.   Costs: All costs incurred for the maintenance of such animal shall
be paid by the person charged with the offense.
   E.   Separate Offense: Each day a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-4: COMMANDING AN ANIMAL TO ATTACK:
Except where great bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it is
unlawful for any person to command, encourage, or aid by word or conduct, any
animal to bite, chase, attack, or attempt to bite, chase, or attack another
person or animal. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-5: WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, maintain, or possess any wild or
exotic animal. Animals that are considered to be "wild" or "exotic" include
animals such as, but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, ligers, panthers,
jaguars, lynxes, pumas, mountain lions, cougars, cheetah, ocelots, bear,
wolves, foxes, coyotes, nonhuman primates, crocodiles, alligators, as well as
any poisonous reptile, and any hybrid or cross breed of these or other
dangerous species. (Ord. 1996-3, 4-11-1996)
5-2-6: DOG AND CAT LICENSES:
   A.   License And Certificate Of Ownership Required: The owner or custodian
shall obtain a license and certificate of ownership for every dog and cat owned
by him or her or in his or her custody which has reached the age of three (3)
months.
   B.   Exceptions: Exceptions to licensing provisions shall be as follows:
      1.   Individual dogs and/or cats on sale in a bona fide pet shop or
commercial kennel, or individual dogs and/or cats in a veterinary hospital. All
such dogs and cats must be enclosed or leashed at all times. City inspectors
shall have the right to inspect all such facilities at any reasonable daytime
hour.
      2.   Dogs and/or cats who are visiting in the city for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days and whose owner does not reside in the city.
   C.   Animal Census: The city council may, by resolution, waive the license
fees indicated in subsection E of this section for a specified period of time
when deemed necessary for the purpose of conducting an animal census. In lieu
ofthe license fee, a lesser registration fee set by the resolution shall apply
and shall cover the costs of the animal census.
   D.   Licensing Authority: The license granting authority in the city shall
be the city office.
   E.   Tags; License Fee: Upon payment of the license fee, the granting
authority shall issue to the owner of each dog and/or cat a receipt and
metallic tag for each animal. Fees shall be according to the following
schedule. Animals that have been spayed or neutered must have a certificate
from a licensed veterinarian confirming the procedure:
Unspayed females                      $20.00
Unneutered males                      10.00
Spayed females                        10.00
Neutered males                        10.00
Each dog in excess of 2 at any single 20.00
premises
Each cat in excess of 2 at any single 20.00
premises
Commercial guard dogs                 No fee
Noncommercial dog kennels             $ 5.00
Noncommercial cat kennel              $ 5.00
Commercial dog kennel                 Current city business license fee
Commercial cat kennel                 Current city business license fee
 
   A microchip can be used for the purpose of a city tag if the owner/custodian
has provided proof of the animal’s registered microchip to the city office.
License fees from this time forth shall be established by resolution of the
council upon the passage of this chapter. These fees shall be reviewed from
time to time.
   F.   Collar Required: Every dog and cat shall at all times wear a
substantial durable collar to which shall be securely attached the required
license tag. A microchip can be used in place of a collar if currently
registered with the city office.
   G.   Replacement Tag: If the tag is lost, the owner or custodian may obtain,
for the sum of five dollars ($5.00), a replacement tag upon satisfactory proof
of loss.
   H.   Use Of Tag On Another Dog and/or Cat Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to allow any dog and/or cat owned, kept, or harbored by him or her to
wear a license tag received on account of a former license or to wear any
imitation of the license tag issued by the city for that year. The owner or
custodian of the dog and/or cat shall neither allow such dog and/or cat to wear
a license tag which has not been lawfully issued under this section, nor allow
such dog to wear a rabies vaccination tag which has not been issued by a
licensed veterinarian, nor allow such dog to wear a license or rabies
vaccination tag which has expired or is calculated to deceive in any way.
   I.   Term Of License; Renewal: All licenses shall be valid for a period of
one year from January 1 to December 31. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of each and every dog and/or cat to obtain a new license annually within
thirty (30) days of the expiration date.
   J.   Record Of Licenses And Certificates Of Ownership: The animal control
center shall keep a record of all licenses and the certificates of ownership
issued under the terms of this section, which shall show the name, address, and
phone number of each owner or custodian, the number of the license, the name,
sex, breed, age, and color of each animal, the date issued, and the amount
paid. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
   K.   Penalty:
      1.   Notice Of Violation; Fee: The owner or custodian of any animal found
to be within the city and found to be not licensed shall be issued a notice of
violation and assessed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence to be
collected by the Lava Hot Springs city office.
      2.   Independent Of Criminal Fine: The fee shall be independent of any
criminal fine which might be assessed by any court having jurisdiction due to
misdemeanor prosecution for a dog not licensed.
      3.   Increased Fee: The fee shall increase to sixty two dollars fifty
cents ($62.50) if it remains unpaid for a period of ten (10) days.
      4.   Head Of Household Responsible: If the owner of the dog or cat is a
minor, the head of the household in which the minor resides shall pay any fees
or fines. (Ord. 2001-6, 10-11-2001; amd. Ord. 2019-6, 12-12-2019)
5-2-7: KENNELS:
   A.   Commercial Kennels:
      1.   License Required: An owner of a commercial kennel shall obtain a
city business license and comply with the terms specified in this subsection A.
      2.   Compliance With Zoning: The premises of a commercial kennel must
conform with zoning statutes and ordinances adopted by the city.
      3.   Issuance Of License; Fee: When the premises are in conformity with
applicable zoning requirements and regulations, the commercial kennel will be
issued a business license upon payment of the license fee.
      4.   Transfer Of License; Renewal: Business licenses for commercial
kennels shall not be transferable and shall be subject to annual renewal.
      5.   Restraint Of Animals: All dogs and cats covered by a business
license for a commercial kennel shall be maintained and kept within the kennel
or under leash at all times.
   B.   Noncommercial Kennels:
      1.   License Required: The owner of a noncommercial kennel shall obtain a
noncommercial kennel license from the animal control center according to the
terms specified in this subsection B.
      2.   Application: The application for a noncommercial kennel license
shall include the name and address of the owner and the number of dogs and cats
to be kept.
      3.   Written Consent Required: A noncommercial kennel license shall be
issued only when the application for such license is accompanied by the written
consent to such noncommercial kennel by at least seventy five percent (75%) of
all the owners and/or occupants of the premises within three hundred feet
(300') of the premises upon which the noncommercial kennel is to be maintained.
      4.   Fees: In addition to the above requirements, a noncommercial kennel
licensee shall pay all individual dog and/or cat license fees required by
resolution of the Council.
      5.   Transferability: Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be
transferable and shall be subject to annual renewal as specified in subsection
5-2-6I of this chapter.
      6.   Increase In Number Of Animals: Whenever an owner desires to make an
addition to the number of dogs and/or cats for which the noncommercial kennel
license has been issued, the licensee shall follow the same procedure specified
in subsections B1 through B5 of this section. Whenever puppies and/or kittens
are born, the issue of a dog and/or cat theretofore counted in computing the
license fee, such puppies and/or kittens shall not be counted as additions
until three (3) months old.
      7.   Not Exempt From Other Provisions: The owner of a noncommercial
kennel shall not be exempt from other provisions of this chapter, including the
requirement for individual dog and/or cat licensing, nor shall any of the
provisions of this chapter be deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning
regulations of the city.
      8.   Revocation; Suspension:
         a.   Grounds: The holder of any noncommercial kennel license who
shall: 1) neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
with the conditions under which any license shall be issued; 2) violate any
provision of this code; or 3) violate any provision of the animal laws of the
state, shall be subject to having his or her license suspended or revoked.
         b.   Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation: The city office shall give
notice of suspension or revocation to the holder of the noncommercial kennel
license, which notice shall set forth specifically the charges or grounds for
which the license was suspended and the facts on which such suspension is
based; such notice shall be served on the holder of such license.
         c.   Hearing: The notice of suspension shall designate the time and
place that a hearing will be held before the council.
         d.   Findings Of Council: If the council finds that the basis of
either the suspension or revocation is substantiated, the license shall be
suspended or revoked. If such license is suspended, the license and all
evidence thereof shall be surrendered by the holder of such license and shall
be held by the clerk-treasurer until the end of the period of suspension; and
in the event that a license issued under this chapter is revoked, the holder
shall be ineligible to obtain another noncommercial kennel license for the
period of one year from the date of such revocation.
   C.   Inspections: The animal control center may inspect, or cause to be
inspected, commercial and noncommercial kennel facilities for which licenses
under this section have been issued as often as it may be necessary for the
adequate control and supervision of such facilities. The animal control center
shall have the right to enter all such facilities at any reasonable time for
the purpose of making investigations and inspections and shall be charged with
the responsibility of enforcing and administering the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2019-6, 12-12-2019)
5-2-8: RABIES, DISEASES AND QUARANTINE:
   A.   Vaccination Required: All dogs within the city limits, shall have proof
of a current rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian beginning at six (6)
months of age. Every owner, or custodian must, upon request of an animal
control officer or police officer, produce proof of such rabies vaccination.
(Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Owning, Harboring Or Keeping Afflicted Animal Prohibited: It is
unlawful for a person other than a veterinarian, a hospital for small or large
animals, or the animal control center to own, keep, or harbor any animal
afflicted with rabies.
   C.   Afflicted Animals:
      1.   Duty To Secure: The animal control center or the owner shall secure
disposition of any animal afflicted with rabies.
      2.   Failure To Surrender: If an owner or custodian refuses to surrender
such animal, the animal control center is empowered to seize such animal and
transport it to a licensed veterinarian.
      3.   Costs Of Confinement And Disposal: The owner or custodian shall be
responsible for all costs and fees for confinement and disposal.
   D.   Symptoms Present; Animal Bite:
      1.   Duty To Surrender: It shall be the duty of every owner of, or person
keeping or harboring, an animal showing symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten
any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to surrender the animal for
confinement and isolation at the animal control center or to a licensed
veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days or to confine the animal on the
owner or custodian's premises.
      2.   Impoundment: The place of impoundment is at the discretion of the
animal control center. If the animal to be impounded is left with the owner or
custodian and if the animal is found outside the quarantine area designated by
the owner or custodian, the animal shall be impounded by the animal control
center and shall be subject to disposal.
      3.   Examination By Veterinarian; Vaccination: Immediately following the
ten (10) day quarantine, the animal shall be taken by the owner or custodian to
a licensed veterinarian for examination to confirm the animal does not have
rabies and to obtain a rabies vaccination if the owner or custodian has not
produced a current, valid certificate. A copy of such examination and rabies
vaccination shall be delivered to the animal control center.
      4.   Costs: Costs of such confinement, examination and vaccination are to
be borne by the owner or custodian.
      5.   Determined Free Of Rabies: If such animal shall be determined free
of rabies, it shall be returned to the owner or custodian upon payment of the
regular fee for keeping such animal impounded. If such fee is not paid, the
animal shall be subject to disposal.
      6.   Killing Suspect Animal:
         a.   Prohibited: No police officer, animal control officer or other
person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any animal suspected of being rabid,
except after the animal has been placed in quarantine and notification has been
made to the public health department for pathological examination and
confirmation of diagnosis.
         b.   Exception: The only exception to this shall be if the animal in
question is so vicious or wild that it cannot be restrained and the police
officer or animal control officer feels that further pursuit would result in
losing the animal; then the animal can be killed with gunshot not aimed at the
head of the animal. After the animal is dead, the head is to be severed from
the body and sent to the public health department for examination and
diagnosis.
      7.   Contagious Or Infectious Disease: It is unlawful for any person to
permit or allow any animal with a contagious or infectious disease to run at
large upon the public streets, roads and ways of this city; or to be within and
upon any public transportation facility or any other public building or place,
or to expose such animal in any public building or place, whereby the health,
safety, and well being of the public, or any member thereof, may be affected.
(Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-9: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   Prohibited: An animal owner or custodian shall be in violation of this
section if his or her animal is found to be "running at large" as defined in
section
5-2-1 of this chapter. No animal shall be considered running at large if:
      1.   Such animal is under the complete control of a person holding a
leash not exceeding ten feet (10') in length which is attached to the animal;
or
      2.   Such animal is confined in a motor vehicle.
   B.   Power To Impound: Any animal running at large may be impounded. (Ord.
1993-7, 12-9-1993)
   C.   Seeing Eye, Hearing Ear, Guide Dog Or Other Assistance Animal: It is
unlawful for a person to permit, allow, keep or carry any animal in, upon, or
within a public transportation facility or any other public building or
facility, particularly a building or facility in which food or drink is
prepared or stored, except that a special needs person shall not be denied the
use of any common carrier or public transportation facility or admittance to
any cafe or any other public building or place by reason of his being
accompanied by a seeing eye, hearing ear, guide dog or other assistance animal
specially trained for such purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to permit
and authorize a special needs person to have a seeing eye, hearing ear, guide
dog or other assistance animal specially trained with him or her in such places
and while using such facilities without being required to pay any additional
charges for his seeing eye, hearing ear, guide dog, or other assistance animal,
but such special needs person shall be liable for any damage or disturbance
caused by such seeing eye, hearing ear, guide dog, or other assistance animal.
(Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Use Of Public Ways Or Property Prohibited: No person shall lead, drive,
or ride any horse, pig, sheep, goat, mule, cattle or other animal over, across,
or upon any sidewalk, parkway, or public parking area, or over or across any
public park, except for special events approved by city council, including the
annual Founder's Day Parade. Herding any animal on or over any city street or
alley, except U.S. Highway 30, is prohibited. Any violation of this provision
will be considered a misdemeanor.
   E.   Penalty:
      1.   Notice Of Violation; Fee: The owner of any animal found to be
running at large within the city shall be issued a notice of violation and
assessed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence to be collected by the
Lava Hot Springs city office. Any animal left unattended or tied to any city
property, public utility property, or other property not the property of the
owner and/or custodian will be considered running at large and will be subject
to violations and penalties. (Ord. 2013-1, 1-10-2013)
      2.   Independent Of Criminal Fine: The fee shall be independent of any
criminal fine assessed by any court having jurisdiction due to misdemeanor
prosecution for an animal running at large violation.
      3.   Increase In Fee: The fee shall increase to sixty two dollars fifty
cents ($62.50) if it remains unpaid for a period of ten (10) days.
      4.   Head Of Household Responsible: If the owner of the animal is a
minor, the head of the household in which the minor resides shall be
responsible for any fees or fines. (Ord. 2001-6, 10-11-2001)
5-2-10: DISTURBANCE BY ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited: No owner or custodian shall permit his or her animal to
utter frequent or long continued noise which unreasonably disturbs or annoys a
person who lives or is in close proximity to the location of such animal.
   B.   Second Conviction: Upon the second misdemeanor conviction for allowing
the same animal to utter long continued noise, the court shall order the
impoundment and disposal of such animal. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-11: WASTE MATTER:
No animal owner or custodian shall permit an animal to deposit solid waste
matter on any property other than his or her own. It shall be a defense to this
section if the animal owner or custodian immediately removes the solid waste.
(Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-12: NUISANCE:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper
care and control of his animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance.
   B.   Nuisances Enumerated: Every person shall be guilty of allowing an
animal to become a nuisance when he or she allows:
      1.   The animal to make excessive, continuous, or untimely barking or
noise;
      2.   The animal to molest passersby or to chase vehicles;
      3.   The animal to attack other domestic animals;
      4.   The animal to trespass upon public or private property in such a
manner as to damage the property; or
      5.   The excessive accumulation of animal feces, on the owner or
custodian's property or not, in such a manner as to affect the health or
enjoyment of another. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-13: VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Confinement Required: No owner or custodian of a dog shall keep a
"vicious animal" as defined in section
5-2-1 of this chapter within the city limits unless such dog is confined within
an absolutely secure enclosure.
   B.   Specifications Of Confinement Structure: A vicious dog is unconfined if
the dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or
structure must have secure sides and either: 1) a secure top attached to the
sides, or 2) be not less than ten feet (10') in height. If the pen or structure
has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground
no less than one foot (1'). All such pens or structures must be adequately
lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It is unlawful for any
owner to maintain a vicious animal upon any premises which does not have a
locked enclosure. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
   C.   Muzzle And/Or Chain Or Leash Required: The owner of the vicious dog
shall not allow or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless
the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a "chain" or "leash" as defined
below. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from
biting any human or animal. The vicious dog shall be restrained with a chain
having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not
exceeding three feet (3') in length and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner of the vicious dog. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993; amd. 2007
Code)
   D.   Warning Sign Required: The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a
prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign
indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Such sign shall be in
large enough lettering to be read from the street. A similar sign is required
to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal.
   E.   Power Of Animal Control Officer: An animal control officer is empowered
to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and any such animal control officer is empowered to
seize and impound any vicious animal whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. In the event that the owner of the animal refuses
to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control
officer may request a police officer to obtain a search warrant and to seize
the animal upon execution of the warrant.
   F.   Assault: Any dog which, when unprovoked, assaults any human or domestic
animal is vicious. Assault includes, but is not limited to, lunging, excessive
barking or growling, or baring of the teeth at any human or domestic animal
through, by or near a fence.
   G.   Liability Of Owner:
      1.   Adult Owner: An adult owner of the vicious animal shall be liable
for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal
caused by an unprovoked attack by any vicious animal, plus all costs, civil
judgments or penalties, criminal fines, final terms and any other penalties and
orders.
      2.   Minor Owner: In the event that the owner of the vicious animal is a
minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be liable for all injuries
and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an
unprovoked attack by any vicious animal, plus all costs, civil judgments or
penalties, criminal fines, final terms and any other penalties and orders.
   H.   Dogfights; Attack Animals: No person shall possess, harbor or maintain
care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dogfighting, or train, torment,
badger, bait, or to use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the
dog to attack human beings or domestic animals.
   I.   Duty To Report Animal Bites:
      1.   Owner Or Custodian: When an owner or custodian of an animal has
knowledge that his or her animal has bitten a human being, such owner or
custodian shall notify the animal control center of such bite, the time and
circumstances of such bite, and the name and address of the person bitten, if
known.
      2.   Person Bitten: Any person who is bitten by an animal shall notify
the animal control center of such bite, giving description of the animal, the
time and circumstances of the bite, and the name and address of the owner, if
known.
      3.   Medical Personnel: When a doctor, veterinarian, hospital employee or
other person has information that a person has been bitten by an animal, such
person shall notify the animal control center.
   J.   Penalty:
      1.   Misdemeanor: Any dog which, when unprovoked, attacks, scratches,
kills, wounds, bites or otherwise injures any human or domestic animal is
vicious and such action constitutes a misdemeanor for the owner.
      2.   First Offense: If this is a first offense for the animal, then the
court shall set the matter for sentencing and notify the office of the city
attorney of the date, time and place of sentencing. In addition to any fine and
jail time imposed, the court may order as part of the sentence that the dog be
turned over to the animal control center for destruction. If the court does
order the destruction of the dog, then it shall also order the animal control
center to seize the dog in the event that it is not turned over to animal
control within five (5) days of the order. Each day following the day of the
order that the dog is not turned over to the animal control center is a
separate misdemeanor.
      3.   Second Offense: If this is a second offense for the animal, then the
court, without notice to the office of the city attorney, shall order as a part
of the sentence, that the dog be turned over to animal control center for
destruction and shall simultaneously issue an order to the animal control
center to seize the dog in the event it is not turned over within five (5) days
unless the office of the city attorney or the animal control center requests in
writing that no destruction order be given. Each day following the day of the
order that the dog is not turned over to the animal control center is a
separate misdemeanor. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-14: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer shall use all legal
means available to impound any animal whose owner or custodian has violated any
section of this chapter or has allowed his or her animal to violate any section
of this chapter.
   B.   Property Owner Trespassed Upon: Any person whose property has been
trespassed upon by any animal in violation of this chapter may immediately
apprehend such animal upon his or her premises and hold the animal until
delivery to the animal control officer or to any police officer. Any person who
so impounds an animal on private property shall immediately notify the animal
control center (if no answer, the police department) of such impoundment.
   C.   Impoundment For Adoption Or Disposal:
      1.   Upon request, the animal control officer shall impound for adoption
or for disposal by the animal control center any animal no longer wanted by its
owner; such owner must sign a statement attesting to the truth and legality of
his or her ownership of the animal and pay a fee sufficient to defray shelter
costs.
      2.   An animal owner may deliver an animal owned by him or her to the
animal control center; such owner must sign a statement attesting to the truth
and legality of his ownership of the animal and pay a fee sufficient to defray
shelter costs.
      3.   No person shall take any animal owned by the person, or any animal
owned by another person, out of the custody of any other person lawfully
impounding such animal.
   D.   Impoundment For Running At Large: The animal control center is
empowered to impound any animal found either running at large or without a
current license or without current rabies tag. The owner or custodian of such
animal shall pay all costs incurred by the animal control center, relating to
the impoundment of such animal. If any impounded animal is unclaimed within
three (3) days of its impoundment, such animal may then be sold or otherwise
disposed of.
   E.   Duty Of Animal Control Center:
      1.   The animal control center shall provide suitable and adequate food
and water for all animals impounded under the provisions of this section.
      2.   The animal control center shall keep any animal impounded for the
period of time specified in this section.
      3.   Except as provided in this section, the agents of the animal control
center shall notify the owner or custodian of an animal, if known, as soon as
possible after impoundment:
         a.   That such animal has been impounded;
         b.   The conditions under which such animal may be redeemed;
         c.   The period of time that the animal will be held; and
         d.   The consequences of failure to redeem.
   F.   Impoundment Records: The animal control center shall keep a record of
all animals impounded under the provisions of this section. Such record shall
include a description of the animal, date of impoundment, date of notification
of impoundment, method of notification, date of redemption, and record of fees
paid or date of disposal or adoption. In the case of adoption, the record shall
include the name, address and phone number of the person buying or adopting any
animal.
   G.   Redemption:
      1.   Proof Of Ownership; Payment Of Fees: Redemption of an impounded
animal shall be made by exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying
the required fees and charges which shall include, but not be limited to,
impoundment fee, daily care fee, any required license fees, and medical costs.
All such fees, with the exception of medical costs, shall be set from time to
time and adopted by the city council by resolution. Copies of such resolutions
shall be kept on file and made available in the office of the city clerk-
treasurer.
      2.   Unlicensed, Unidentified Animals: Any animal not wearing a license
tag, or an animal for which the owner or custodian cannot be identified, and
which has not been redeemed by its owner or custodian within three (3) days
after impoundment began, may be adopted upon application to the animal control
center and payment of applicable adoption fees and license fees or disposed of
in a humane manner. Euthanasia fees and adoption fees shall be set from time to
time by the city council by resolution. Copies of such resolutions shall be
kept on file and made available in the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
      3.   Licensed Animals: A licensed animal which has not been redeemed by
its owner or custodian within three (3) days after notification of impoundment
may be adopted upon application to the animal control center and payment of
applicable adoption fees and license fees, or disposed of in a humane manner.
Euthanasia fees and adoption fees shall be set from time to time by the city
council by resolution. Copies of such resolutions shall be kept on file and
made available in the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
      4.   Sale To Research Facility: Unless an owner cannot be located,
neither the city, nor the animal control center, nor the animal control officer
shall sell a live animal to a research facility for use in research, tests, or
experiments unless the owner requests, in writing, that his or her animal be
sold for such purposes. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-15: SICK OR INJURED ANIMALS:
   A.   Treatment: Any police officer or animal control officer who finds a
sick or injured animal not upon the property of its owner or custodian, where
the owner is either unknown or cannot be found after reasonable attempts to do
so, may take the animal to the animal control center or veterinary hospital
where treatment by a licensed veterinarian may be arranged.
   B.   Untreatable Animals: Upon determination by an animal control officer,
police officer, or veterinarian that such affliction referred to in subsection
A of this section is untreatable, such animal may be disposed of by such animal
control officer, police officer or veterinarian.
   C.   Costs: The owner or custodian shall pay for any medical expenses
incurred in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-16: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES:
   A.   Disposal Required: When any animal owned by or in the custodial care of
any person dies in the city, such person shall, within twenty four (24) hours,
provide for the burial, incineration, or other disposition of the body of such
dead animal in a safe and sanitary manner.
   B.   Unknown, Unfound Owner: It shall be the duty of the animal control
officer to dispose of any animal found dead in the city, and for whom the owner
or custodian is neither known nor can be found, by removing the animal to the
animal control center for burial or incineration. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-17: TREATMENT OF FOWL OR RABBITS:
   A.   Artificial Treatment: No person shall dye, color, or otherwise
artificially treat in any such manner any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other
fowl.
   B.   Under Three Weeks Of Age: No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter,
or give away baby chicks, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits under three (3)
weeks of age as pets, toys, premiums or novelties.
   C.   Transporting Prohibited: No person shall transport such animals as
specified in this section into the city for the purposes specified in
subsections A and B of this section.
   D.   Exception: Research facilities shall be excluded from compliance with
subsections A and C of this section. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-18: USE OF ANIMALS TO ATTRACT TRADE:
No person shall give away or sell any animal for the purpose of attracting
trade, whereby an animal is offered as a prize or an incentive for entering any
contest, game or other competition; as an incentive for entering a place of
amusement; or as an incentive for entering into any business transaction, the
primary subject of which was not an animal. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-19: SALE OF TURTLES:
No person shall offer for sale, barter, or give away turtles unless accompanied
by a certificate that the turtle or turtles are salmonella free. (Ord. 1993-7,
12-9-1993)
5-2-20: INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to hinder any animal control officer who may be
engaged in seizing, keeping or removing any animal in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-21: KEEPING LIVESTOCK:
   A.   Prohibited: It is hereby deemed unlawful to keep livestock and animals
within the city limits except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Permit Requirements: A permit for the keeping of livestock is required
and shall be issued to residents of the city if they comply with the following
regulations and conditions:
      1.   Consent Required: Permission of seventy five percent (75%) of
neighbors within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the place where the
animals are to be kept is obtained and written confirmation of that permission
is presented to the city council.
      2.   Review By Council: The city council shall review each livestock
application to keep livestock within the city limits of the city, and either
approve or reject on each application's merits.
      3.   Annual Review: The city council will conduct an annual review of the
livestock permits to monitor the number and kinds of livestock that are kept
within the city limits and according to the permit application.
   C.   Prior Existing Uses: Any person which heretofore has kept livestock
within the city limits shall have the right to continue to do so. Provided,
however, that should any such landowner or city resident fail to exercise his
rights to keep such animals for a period of sixty (60) days or more, such
grandfather rights shall be deemed forfeited and future harboring of livestock
shall require the permit as set forth hereinabove.
Provided further, however, that for those types of livestock which
traditionally are seasonally pastured at places other than within the city
limits, such sixty (60) day time limitation shall not run and apply during the
period when said livestock are being pastured seasonally elsewhere.
   D.   Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
animal to allow the same to run at large. Any animal shall be kept on the
owner's premises by means of an adequate fence to hold the animal on said
owner's premises, or in the alternative, shall be maintained on the owner's
premises by means of a cord, chain, or rope of such length to restrict the
animal to the owner's property. The provisions as to fencing contained herein
shall apply to fowl which traditionally are not and cannot be collared and
leashed. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-22: SWINE:
No person may keep swine within the city limits. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
5-2-23: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Separate Offense: Each day violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
under this chapter. (Ord. 1993-7, 12-9-1993)
   C.   Violation Of Specific Sections: For violation of sections
5-2-7,
5-2-10,
5-2-11 and
5-2-12 of this chapter, the penalty shall be as hereinafter set forth:
      1.   The owner or custodian of an animal shall be issued a notice of
violation and assessed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence to be
collected by the Lava Hot Springs city office.
      2.   The fee shall increase to sixty two dollars fifty cents ($62.50) if
it remains unpaid for a period of ten (10) days.
      3.   Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
      4.   The fee shall be independent of any criminal penalties imposed by
any court having jurisdiction due to misdemeanor prosecution.
      5.   If the owner of the animal is a minor, the head of the household in
which the minor resides shall pay any fees, fines or other penalties as may be
imposed by a court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2015-6, 5-14-2015)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW 1
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew Imposed; Hours
5-3-2: Parental Responsibility
5-3-3: Exception
5-3-4: Violation
5-3-5: Posting Bond
5-3-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 20-516, 32-1301.
5-3-1: CURFEW IMPOSED; HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to go or to remain upon any pedestrian or
vehicular thoroughfare, public place or other premises open to the public, or
to operate, or to ride in a vehicle at any such location, between the hours of
ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. in the case of
minors under the age of sixteen (16) years, or between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. in the case of minors
sixteen (16) years of age or older. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
5-3-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having custody of a
minor to permit or allow such minor to be upon any public thoroughfare or any
public place within the city limits as provided in section
5-3-1 of this chapter without acceptable supervision. (Ord. 1958-1, 11-3-1958;
amd. 2007 Code)
5-3-3: EXCEPTION:
Section
5-3-1 of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   A minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having care and custody of said minor;
   B.   A minor upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or
authorized by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of said minor;
   C.   A minor participating in a lawful youth group activity of which the
chief of police has been notified; or
   D.   A minor who is lawfully married or who is a member of the armed forces
of the United States on active duty or on authorized leave from active duty.
(Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
5-3-4: VIOLATION:
Any law enforcement officer finding a minor in apparent violation of this
curfew restriction shall ascertain the name and address of the minor, warn the
minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and direct the minor to proceed
at once to his or her home or usual place of abode. The officer shall also
cause such action to be reported to the minor's parents, guardian, or person
having custody or control. If the minor refuses to heed such direction by the
officer, or refuses to disclose his or her correct name and address, or if the
minor has been advised on any previous occasion that he or she is in violation
of curfew, the minor shall be taken to the office of the police department and
the parent, guardian, or other adult person having care and custody of the
minor shall be requested to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent,
guardian, or other adult person cannot be located or fails to come and take
charge, or if such parent, guardian, or adult person has been requested to come
and take charge on one or more previous occasions, a petition may be filed in a
court of competent jurisdiction under the youth rehabilitation act or the child
protective act of the state, as appropriate to the circumstances. (Ord. 1979-5,
6-20-1979)
5-3-5: POSTING BOND:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer and cited for a misdemeanor
as designated in this code or Idaho Code, the officer may require the person to
post bond in accordance with a bonding schedule maintained by the city clerk-
treasurer when the person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of identity or
when the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the person will
disregard his promise to appear in court. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
5-3-6: PENALTY:
Thereafter, any minor in apparent violation of this chapter shall be taken into
custody and when found guilty of such violation, the parent or guardian or
other person with custody of said minor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1958-1, 11-3-1958; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
EXCESSIVE NOISE AND LIGHT POLLUTION
SECTION:
5-4-1: Excessive Noise Prohibited
5-4-2: Excessive Light Pollution Prohibited
5-4-3: Notice Of Excessive Noise Or Light Pollution Violation
5-4-4: Liability For Excessive Noise Or Light Pollution Violations
5-4-5: Penalty For Violating Excessive Noise And Light Pollution Ordinance
5-4-6: Resolution Establishing Excessive Noise And Light Pollution Violation
Fee
5-4-7: Reservation Of Other Remedies
5-4-1: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
Noise, including sound or vibrations, whether produced by a device, or the
human voice, or vehicles, or equipment, or instrument, which due to its volume,
its duration, its location, or the hour when it is produced, disturbs the
comfort, peace, health or safety of persons who are not voluntary listeners is
hereby declared to be excessive and harmful to the health and welfare of
residents and visitors to the City of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho. Accordingly, the
City adopts these provisions to help protect the public from unwanted noises
and disturbances.
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter of City code, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL   1.   An area with local shopping, entertainment and service establishments
AREA:        located within walking distances of the residents served;
            2.   A tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels, retail, entertainment and
             services are located; or
            3.   A commercially dominated mixed-use area with multiple-unit dwellings.
             Any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, altering,
CONSTRUCTION assembling, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or
ACTIVITIES:  appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading, excavating, filling,
             landscaping, use of power equipment and the delivery, loading or unloading of
             materials and equipment.
DECIBEL      A common logarithmic unit used to measure the intensity or level of sound. When
(dB):        measuring sounds levels for purposes of this chapter, A weighting shall be used,
             which takes into account how the human ear perceives sounds.
DYNAMIC      A device used primarily on heavy trucks for the conversion of energy from an
BRAKING      internal combustion engine to an air compressor to help the truck decelerate.
DEVICE:
NIGHTTIME:   The period of time from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
             An imaginary line, at the ground surface and its vertical extension, which
PROPERTY     separates the real property owned or rented by one person from that owned or
LINE:        rented by another person, or which separates real property from adjoining public
             premises or public right(s) of way, or in multiple dwelling units separates one
             unit from the adjoining unit, such as the wall between two adjacent apartments.
RESIDENTIAL  An area that is zoned primarily for residential use.
AREA:
SOUND LEVEL  An apparatus or instrument, specifically constructed for the measurement of sound
METER:       levels, approved by the City for the collection of sound data.
SOUND        Anything that is capable of making sounds that can be measured by a sound level
PRODUCING    meter. Sound producing source includes, but is not limited to, the following:
SOURCE:
            1.   Air conditioning or heating units, heat pumps, refrigeration units
             (including those mounted on vehicles), and swimming pool or hot tub pumps;
 
            2.   Air horns, bells, or sirens;
            3.   Audio or visual equipment;
            4.   Domestic tools, including chain saws, electric drill, electric saws,
             hammers, lawn mowers, leaf/snow blowers, and similar tools;
            5.   Loudspeakers or public address system;
            6.   Musical instruments or vocals;
            7.   Spoken speech;
             8.   Vehicles, i.e. conveyances by which any person, animal, or property is or
            may be transported or drawn upon the highway or public right of wav, and includes
             vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means;
            9.   Vehicle engines or exhaust systems, other than regular traffic upon a
             highway, road or street;
            10.   Vehicle tires, when caused to squeal by excessive speed acceleration;
            11.   Parties or gatherings of people;
            12.   Dynamic braking device(s) on heavy trucks; or
            13.   Animals such as dogs, livestock, waterfowl, fowl, or other animals or
             birds.
 
   B.   Standards For Measurement Of Sound Levels:
      1.   Standards used in the measurement of sound as provided for in this
Chapter shall be those as specified herein.
      2.   Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using
the “A” weighting scale, set on “slow” response.
      3.   Measurements shall be taken at the property line of the affected
property. The sound level meter shall be operated in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
      4.   Background noise levels shall be taken for comparison with a given
sound producing source for accuracy of a measurement. Enforcement actions shall
be taken if the sound producing source of noise is greater than the stated
permissible levels and the background noise level. Extraneous or momentary
spikes in the background noise readings shall not be used to compare with the
sound producing source noise readings. If the sound producing source is
constant and too loud to determine the background noise level, then the
enforcement office shall find a similar site and distance to test for the
background noise level.
      5.   Measurement of sound shall be performed by the City’s code
enforcement officer, other designee of the Mayor, or by other law authorized
enforcement personnel.
   C.   Maximum Allowable Noise Levels; Nuisance Declared:
      1.   It is a violation of this chapter, a public nuisance, and unlawful
for any person, persons, or business to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, whether on private premises, business premises, or from any public
place or public right of way, any noise which is excessively loud, annoying, or
offensive.
      2.   For purposes of determining and classifying any noise as being
excessively loud, annoying, or offensive, the following criteria are hereby
established.
      3.   Noise levels emanating from any property, as measured by City
personnel using a City-approved sound level meter, which exceed the decibel dB
(A) levels set forth below, shall constitute noise that is excessively loud,
annoying, or offensive, and a public nuisance:
 
TYPE OF AREA     TIME                    MAXIMUM dB(A)
Residential Area 7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M.  (65)
                10:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.  (55)
Commercial Area  11:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M. (70)
                10:00 P.M. - 11:00 A.M. (55)
 
      4.   In addition, other noise from a sound producing source may be
declared by the City code enforcement officer or other designee of the Mayor to
be a public nuisance and in violation of this chapter even if such noise is
below the decibel db(A) levels set forth in the preceding paragraph, if such
noise, because of its frequency , duration, location, hour when it is produced,
or other unique factors, would be considered unreasonably annoying, offensive,
or excessively loud, such that it would disturb the comfort, peace, health, or
safety of persons who are not voluntary listeners.
   D.   Exemptions.
      1.   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise
level regulations set forth herein:
         a.   Emergency construction work that is necessary to restore property
to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster or to
restore public utilities or to protect persons or property from an imminent
danger.
         b.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves.
         c.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. (d) Noise from
snow plowing, street cleaning or trash collection, (e) Lawful fireworks.
         f.   Construction activities, public works construction, or utility
work, or private construction activities, or ordinary yard and building
maintenance/repair. Provided however, that for private construction activities
or ordinary yard and building maintenance/repair to be exempted such activities
must be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
         g.   Activities for which the City has approved a special event permit
or license. (Ord. 2020-1, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-003, 8-14-2025)
5-4-2: EXCESSIVE LIGHT POLLUTION PROHIBITED:
Light from flood lights, spot lights, lasers, work lights, search lights,
strobe lights, security lights, porch lights, beacon lights, outdoor string
lights or other types of outdoor lighting fixtures or devices which due to
brightness, glare, rotation, color, movement or flashing, or its duration, or
its location, or the hour when it is illuminated, disturbs the comfort, peace,
health or safety of persons in nearby homes or businesses is hereby declared to
be excessive and harmful to the health and welfare of residents and visitors to
the City of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho. It is unlawful for any person to make,
continue, or cause to be made, or allow to be made on any private premises or
private business or from any public place or any public right of way or from
any vehicle any light which is excessively bright, annoying or offensive to
persons in nearby homes or businesses. Provided, however, that persons engaged
in events authorized by the City Council in writing, or public works
construction, or utility work, or emergency work, or private construction
pursuant to a building permit issued by the City, or holiday lighting between
Thanksgiving day and January 15 are exempted from the prohibitions of this
section. However, for private construction work or holiday lighting to be
exempted such lighting may not be utilized between eleven o’clock (11:00) PM
and sunrise. This prohibition shall not apply to signs authorized and/or
subject to regulation by the Lava Hot Springs Sign Code contained in Title 9,
Chapter 4 of the City Code of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho because the illumination
from those signs is subject to regulations provided for in the Sign Code. (Ord.
2020-1, 8-13-2020)
5-4-3: NOTICE OF EXCESSIVE NOISE OR LIGHT POLLUTION VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the City Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of
the Mayor to issue violation notices for excessive noise or light pollution
which violates this chapter. The City Code Enforcement Officer or other
designee of the Mayor reserves the ability to offer a warning to the offending
party before issuing citations or fines.
The City Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the Mayor shall deliver
such notices to the person producing the excessive noise or light pollution or
may post the same in a conspicuous place on the business or private residence
or vehicle or equipment from where the excessive noise or light pollution is
emanating. (Ord. 2020-1, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-003, 8-14-2025)
5-4-4: LIABILITY FOR EXCESSIVE NOISE OR LIGHT POLLUTION VIOLATIONS:
The owner of the private residence or the business or the vehicle or the
equipment from which the excessive noise or light pollution emanated shall be
jointly responsible for a violation along with the person who actually caused
the excessive noise or light pollution. (Ord. 2020-1, 8-13-2020)
5-4-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATING EXCESSIVE NOISE AND LIGHT POLLUTION ORDINANCE:
Any person who violates this chapter or any owner who violates this chapter and
receives a notice of violation from the City Code Enforcement Officer may avoid
being prosecuted in the Magistrate Division of the Sixth Judicial District of
the State of Idaho in and for the County of Bannock for the violation alleged
in such notice by electing to pay to the City Clerk of the City of Lava Hot
Springs, as a penalty for such violation, the fee established and set forth for
such violation by resolution adopted by the City Council. If any person who
violates this chapter or any owner who violates this chapter fails to respond
to an excessive noise or excessive light pollution violation notice within
thirty (30) days or refuses to pay the violation fee, a uniform citation for an
infraction may be issued for failure to appear or pay the violation fee, or the
unpaid fee for the violation may be sent to a professional collection bureau
for collection, at the discretion of the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee. (Ord.
2020-1, 8-13-2020)
5-4-6: RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING EXCESSIVE NOISE AND LIGHT POLLUTION VIOLATION
FEE:
The City Council shall, from time to time, set and adopt fees for excessive
noise and light pollution violations by resolution. Copies of such resolutions
shall be kept on file and made available in the office of the City Clerk for
the City of Lava Hot Springs. (Ord. 2020-1, 8-13-2020)
5-4-7: RESERVATION OF OTHER REMEDIES:
The issuance of an excessive noise or light pollution violation notice shall
not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing excessive noise and/or light
pollution violations and all other lawful remedies are preserved and reserved
for use by the City, including issuance of an infraction, assigning unpaid
violation fees to a collection agency for collection, filing a civil complaint
for collection of unpaid violation fees, and filing a civil complaint for
nuisance. (Ord. 2020-1, 8-13-2020)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Law Adopted
6-1-2: Vehicle Defined
6-1-3: Processions Or Assemblages
6-1-4: Limitation On Operation Of Vehicles
6-1-5: Impoundment Of Vehicles
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 49-108, 49-583.
6-1-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
   A.   Intent: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to
aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in
traffic regulations among and between agencies of Idaho having such
jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by the
cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the
state.
   B.   Adoption: There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of the city
that certain code, identified as the 1969 revised edition, Idaho motor vehicle
laws, more particularly Idaho Code title 49 published by the department of law
enforcement, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho legislature,
or amended by the city council, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein.
   C.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the Idaho motor vehicle laws,
together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk-
treasurer, shall be kept on file in the clerk-treasurer's office for use and
examination by the public. (Ord. 1971-2, 2-3-1971; amd. 2007 Code)
6-1-2: VEHICLE DEFINED:
"Vehicle" shall mean any mechanical device which is self-propelled and/or
designed to travel along the ground, on water or through the air, including,
but not limited to, aircraft, watercraft, automobiles, buses, motor bikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, mopeds, bicycles, and other devices propelled by
the effort of the operator, trucks, motor homes, tractors, go-carts, and golf
carts. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
6-1-3: PROCESSIONS OR ASSEMBLAGES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code relating to obstruction of
public thoroughfares, a procession or assemblage upon such thoroughfares,
including streets, highways, vehicular ways, pedestrianways, or other
thoroughfares may be conducted if application has been made to, and a written
permit issued by, the mayor or his/her designee. In considering any such
application, the mayor or his/her designee shall evaluate the problems of
traffic control and police protection of persons and property. The mayor or
his/her designee may prescribe, by the terms of any permit, reasonable
limitations upon the size, route, or nature of the procession or assemblage in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-
1979; amd. 2007 Code)
6-1-4: LIMITATION ON OPERATION OF VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to operate
any type of vehicle upon any public property other than vehicular thoroughfares
or parking lots, or to operate a vehicle upon the private property of a person
other than the person to whom the vehicle belongs without permission. (Ord.
1979-5, 6-20-1979)
6-1-5: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
The mayor or his/her designee may impound a vehicle, by causing it to be towed
to a secure place and stored there until claimed, if: a) it is parked or
located in violation of this title or its operator has for any reason been
rendered incapacitated or unavailable to take charge of it, b) the vehicle
represents a traffic hazard or is endangered by potential theft or vandalism
unless moved. The mayor or his/her designee shall make reasonable inquiry under
the circumstances as to the availability of any person to move the vehicle with
the owner's consent. If such person cannot reasonably be identified or located,
the mayor or his/her designee may order impoundment by a reputable commercial
towing and storage service. Such service shall be summoned on a
nondiscriminatory basis, unless the owner or operator specifies a particular
service. The service shall be entitled to charge and collect from the owner of
the vehicle reasonable fees for towing and/or storage. This section shall not
limit the authority of mayor or his/her designee to impound vehicles incident
to search and seizure, or as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-
1979; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 1
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Responsibility Of City Engineer
6-2-3: Placement Of Signs, Controls And Markings
6-2-4: Violation
6-2-5: Posting Bond
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 49-801 et seq.
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the regular flow of traffic through
the city as deemed appropriate by the city engineer, including, but not limited
to, designation of areas in which certain turns are permitted or prohibited,
regulation of the speeds of motor vehicles, and coherent and safe traffic
patterns established. (Ord. 1987-8, 9-23-1987)
6-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY ENGINEER:
The city engineer having the appropriate qualifications to accomplish the
purposes set forth in section
6-2-1 of this chapter shall be responsible for the requisite installation of
signs and traffic control devices to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 1987-8, 9-23-1987; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-3: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS, CONTROLS AND MARKINGS:
The city engineer shall place all requisite traffic signs, controls and
markings as he deems necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth in section
6-2-1 of this chapter after due consideration of the needs for control of
traffic within the city. Without limitation, such devices shall include stop
signs located at the following intersections: Fife Street and Second Avenue
West at east, west and south corner; Booth Street and Fourth Avenue West at
east and west corners. No person operating a vehicle shall violate the commands
given, or fail to heed the warnings provided by such duly authorized signs and
devices. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979; amd. Ord. 1987-8, 9-23-1987)
6-2-4: VIOLATION:
It shall be an infraction of the law for any person to violate any traffic
control signal, sign or marking of the city. Any person who so violates any
such traffic control signal, sign or marking of the city shall be subject to
the penalties imposed by rule 9 of the Idaho infraction rules, as amended.
(Ord. 1987-8, 9-23-1987)
6-2-5: POSTING BOND:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer and cited for a misdemeanor
as designated in this code or the Idaho Code, the officer may require the
person to post bond in accordance with a bonding schedule maintained by the
city clerk-treasurer when the person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of
identity or when the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the
person will disregard his promise to appear in court. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS 1
SECTION:
6-3-1: Purpose
6-3-2: Limits Imposed
6-3-3: Posting Of Signs
6-3-4: Posting Bond
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 49-654 et seq.
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The mayor and council find and, therefore, declare as a matter of public policy
that the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, as well as
persons visiting the city, require that reasonable limits be imposed upon the
speed at which vehicles may be operated within the city. In recognition of the
need to impose reasonable speed limits, the mayor and council have charged the
traffic control committee to conduct a traffic study and to recommend
reasonable speed limits for the city. The committee having conducted its study
and having presented its findings in a public meeting before the mayor and
council, and the mayor and council having considered such findings, together
with public comments thereon as the basis for establishing particular limits
set forth in this chapter are hereby adopted. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979; amd.
2007 Code)
6-3-2: LIMITS IMPOSED:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to operate
a vehicle upon any public thoroughfare, including any street, highway,
vehicular way, or other thoroughfare, at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or
entering the thoroughfare in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care. Where no special hazard exists that requires lower
speed for the purpose of compliance with this section, the speed of any vehicle
not in excess of the limits specified below shall be lawful, but any speed in
excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
   A.   Forty five (45) miles per hour or such other limit as the Idaho
department of transportation or its successor agency may establish, upon any
thoroughfare within the city which is part of the highway system maintained by
the Idaho department of transportation or its successor agency. (Ord. 1979-5,
6-20-1979; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Fifteen (15) miles per hour on all thoroughfares not otherwise
classified above. (Ord. 2010-2, 6-10-2010)
6-3-3: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The chief of police is authorized to post or cause to be posted the foregoing
speed limits upon thoroughfares within the city, consistent with the standards
for traffic control devices prescribed by the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-
1979; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-4: POSTING BOND:
Whenever any person is halted by a police officer and cited for a misdemeanor
as designated in this code or the Idaho Code, the officer may require the
person to post bond in accordance with a bonding schedule maintained by the
city clerk-treasurer when the person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of
identity or when the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the
person will disregard his promise to appear in court. (Ord. 1979-5, 6-20-1979)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING
SECTION:
6-4-1: Authority, Purpose And Short Title
6-4-2: General Parking Restrictions
6-4-3: Parking In Alleys And On Streets For Deliveries
6-4-4: Parking Of Certain Vehicles In Residential Zones Prohibited
6-4-5: Parking In Violation Of Signs And Curb Markings Prohibited
6-4-6: Angle And Diagonal Parking Prohibited
6-4-7: Long-Term And Overnight Parking Of Motor Vehicles And Trailers Limited
Or Prohibited
6-4-8: Use Of On And Off Street Parking For Purposes Other Than Vehicle Parking
Prohibited
6-4-9: Parking Violation Notices And Penalties For Multiple Parking Violation
Notices
6-4-10: Parking Violation Penalties
6-4-11: Parking Violation Fee Schedule
6-4-12: Booting/Immobilization Of Motor Vehicles And Trailers
6-4-13: Boot/Immobilization Device Fee
6-4-14: Removal Of Boot/Immobilization Device
6-4-15: Penalty For Failure To Remove Boot/Immobilization Device
6-4-16: Tampering With Or Damaging A Boot/Immobilization Device
6-4-17: Penalties For Repeated Violation
6-4-18: Towing And Impoundment For Violations Of This Parking Code
6-4-19: Additional Remedies Preserved
6-4-1: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE:
   A.   Idaho Code sections 50-302, 50-314 and 49-208 authorize municipal
corporations to regulate, limit and control traffic and parking within its
boundaries.
   B.   Lava Hot Springs, Idaho ("City") is unique because of its small
geographical size and the topography of the property within the City limits.
The residents of the City are small in number and shrinking because of the
City's popularity as a tourist destination. Many of the streets and alleys
within the City are steep and/or narrow. Many residential neighborhoods do not
have off-street parking and the residents depend on on-street parking for their
personal vehicles. The purpose of the regulations and standards established
within this chapter is to ensure adequate on-street parking is provided and
maintained throughout the City for residents, tourists and businesses. These
regulations are intended to relieve parking congestion, provide for the safe
and orderly movement of traffic throughout the City, protect the integrity of
neighborhoods, accomodate residents who must compete for on-street parking with
visitors, reduce air and noise pollution, promote business by providing
adequate on-street business parking, and balance the needs of tourism with the
needs of residents and businesses for the use of limited on-street parking
spaces.
   C.   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Lava Hot Springs Parking
Code and may be referenced herein as "Parking Code." (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park a motor
vehicle, except when necessary to allow movement of other vehicular traffic or
pursuant to the direction of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any
of the following designated places:
   A.   On any part of a public sidewalk;
   B.   Within any portion of a public or private driveway;
   C.   Within any portion of an entrance to a public street;
   D.   Within an intersection;
   E.   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
   F.   Within any portion of a crosswalk;
   G.   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk located at any intersection;
   H.   Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any stop sign or traffic
control signal;
   I.   Between a designated safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a traffic regulatory sign indicates a different length is allowed;
   J.   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   K.   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or
within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance when parking on the side of the
street opposite such entrance, when regulatory signs or curb markings indicate
such prohibition;
   L.   Beside or opposite any street excavation or other obstruction in such a
manner which causes traffic congestion or obstructs the regular flow of
traffic;
   M.   Upon any street or portion thereof in a manner which blocks or
interferes with the operation of emergency vehicles, or authorized city
vehicles or which interferes with the regular flow of vehicular traffic;
   N.   Upon that part of a public street located on any bridge or elevated
structure;
   O.   At any place where a regulatory sign or signs or painted curb markings
prohibit such parking;
   P.   In an alley in a manner which blocks or interferes with the regular
flow of vehicular traffic;
   Q.   In any fire apparatus access road as defined in the International Fire
Code; and
   R.   In any parking spaces or loading areas designated exclusively for use
by persons with a disability. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-3: PARKING IN ALLEYS AND ON STREETS FOR DELIVERIES:
Because of limited parking within the City, an exception to the prohibitions in
Section
6-4-2(A)(15) and (16) exists for any person who parks a motor vehicle in any
alley or on any public street within the City for the sole and exclusive
purpose of loading or unloading, provided that the loading and unloading must
be performed in a reasonably expeditious fashion. It shall be a violation of
this Parking Code for the operator of a motor vehicle to leave it unattended
while parked in an alley or on a public street within the City for the purposes
of loading or unloading so that it cannot be immediately moved upon request to
allow operation of emergency vehicles, or authorized city vehicles, or to
eliminate traffic congestion. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-4: PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES PROHIBITED:
Because of limited on-street parking within the residential neighborhoods of
the City, parking on a City street within any residential zone designated as
such in the Lava Hot Springs Zoning Ordinance is limited to cars, pickups and
passenger vans designed to carry ten (10) or fewer persons. It shall be a
violation of this Parking Code for any person operating or in control of semi-
tractors, or heavy duty trucks, or moving vans, or buses, or motorhomes, or box
trailers, or flatbed trailers, or semi-trailers, or RV trailers, or horse
trailers, or similar vehicles or towable trailers to park, or the owners of
such vehicles or trailers to allow the same to be parked, on the City streets
or alleys in any residential zone within the City except for the sole and
exclusive purpose of temporarily loading or unloading, provided that the
loading and unloading is performed in a reasonably expeditious fashion and does
not obstruct the natural flow of traffic. Such vehicles or trailers parked on a
City street or alley within a residential zone of the City for the purposes of
loading or unloading must be attended at all times and immediately moved upon
request to allow operation of emergency vehicles, or authorized city vehicles,
or to eliminate traffic congestion, or to allow parking by residents who own or
lease a residence in the neighborhood. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-5: PARKING IN VIOLATION OF SIGNS AND CURB MARKINGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park any
motor vehicle upon any City street in violation of any sign restricting parking
on such portion of the street designated by the sign;
   B.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park any
motor vehicle upon any City street in violation of any curb markings which
restrict parking on such portion of the street designated by the curb markings;
and
   C.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code to park in an area
designated by signage as a "Tow Away Zone." (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-6: ANGLE AND DIAGONAL PARKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   All motor vehicle parking on any City street shall be by parallel
parking and angle or diagonal parking on all City streets is prohibited and a
violation of this Parking Code; and
   B.   "Parallel marking" shall mean parking of a motor vehicle on the right-
hand side of the street, headed in the direction of traffic with its right-hand
wheels parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the curb. (Ord. 2020-2,
8-13-2020)
6-4-7: LONG-TERM AND OVERNIGHT PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS LIMITED
OR PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person who owns or
has possession or control of a car, pick-up. or passenger van designed to carry
ten (10) or fewer persons to park or leave such vehicle parked on any City
street or alley within any residential zone designated as such in the Lava Hot
Springs Zoning Ordinance for more than thirty (30) days. A vehicle is
considered parked if it remains in the same location and is not driven or moved
more than fifty (50) feet to a different location.
   B.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person who owns or
has possession or control of a motor vehicle or trailer to park or leave the
vehicle and/or trailer parked on any City street or alley in any zone which is
not designated as a residential zone in the Lava Hot Springs Zoning Ordinance
for a period of more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. A vehicle is
considered parked if it remains in the same location and is not driven or moved
more than fifty (50) feet to a different location.
   C.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park any
trailer or motor vehicle other than a car, pickup or passenger van designed to
carry ten (10) or fewer persons on a City street or alley between the hours of
midnight and six o’clock (6:00) AM.
   D.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park a
motor vehicle or trailer in any public parking lot or park in the City for the
purpose of camping, sleeping or living between the hours of midnight and six
o’clock (6:00) AM.
   E.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to park a
motor vehicle or trailer in any private parking lot or vacant lot in the City
for the purpose of camping, sleeping or living between the hours of midnight
and six o’clock (6:00) AM without the express written permission of the person
or business which owns or leases the private parking lot or vacant lot. (Ord.
2020-2, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-005, 8-14-2025)
6-4-8: USE OF ON AND OFF STREET PARKING FOR PURPOSES OTHER THAN VEHICLE PARKING
PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to occupy
or any person or business to permit a person to occupy any City on-street
parking space for a purpose other than motor vehicle parking without express
authorization by the City Council in the form of a business license expressly
authorizing the use of City on-street parking spaces for any purpose other than
motor vehicle parking, including but not limited to storage, operation of a
business, seating for food or beverage service, changing facilities, portable
toilet facilities, or other such uses.
   B.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to occupy
or any person or business to permit a person to occupy any private off-street
parking space which has been designated for use by customers of a business as a
condition for the issuance of a business license or certificate of occupancy
for any purpose other than off-street motor vehicle parking without the express
authorization by the City Council in the form of a business license or
certificate of occupancy expressly authorizing such use.
   C.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to use more
than a single City on-street parking space or single off-street parking space
for the parking of a single motor vehicle alone or in combination with a
vehicle or trailer being towed by the motor vehicle.
   D.   It shall be a violation of this Parking Code for any person to use more
than a single City on-street parking space or single off-street parking space
for the parking of a trailer of any kind.
   E.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter which may be to the
contrary, for residents of the City who operate a business in or from the City,
such as a food truck, which primarily operates out of a trailer of less than
twenty (20) feet in length, and who have a current business license from the
City, those persons may apply for an additional parking permit from the City
which would allow them to park one (1) such trailer associated with their
business, when not in use for business purposes, on the City street immediately
adjacent to their own residence, subject to such conditions or restrictions as
the City may assign in granting any such permit. The City may impose a fee for
issuance of such permit, with the permit fee to be established by resolution.
(Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-005, 8-14-2025)
6-4-9: PARKING VIOLATION NOTICES AND PENALTIES FOR MULTIPLE PARKING VIOLATION
NOTICES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the City Code Enforcement Officer employed by
the City to issue notices of parking violations for violations of this Parking
Code.
   B.   If a motor vehicle and/or a trailer upon which a notice of parking
violation has been attached remains, in the same location, parked in violation
of this Parking Code for a period of two (2) hours after a notice is attached,
an additional such notice may be attached to the motor vehicle and/or trailer
for each two (2) hour period such motor vehicle and/or trailer remains parked
in violation of this Parking Code.
   C.   Each notice shall be a separate violation and the penalties for each
additional, separate violation shall increase in amount in accordance with the
Fee Schedule resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-10: PARKING VIOLATION PENALTIES:
The owner and/or operator of a motor vehicle and the owner and/or person in
control of a trailer in or upon which a parking violation notice has been left
or attached by the City Code Enforcement Officer employed by the City may avoid
being prosecuted in the Magistrate Division of the Sixth Judicial District of
the State of Idaho in and for the County of Bannock for the violation alleged
in such notice by electing to pay to the City Clerk of the City of Lava Hot
Springs, as a penalty for such violation, the fee established and set forth for
such violation by resolution adopted by the City Council. If the owner and/or
operator and/or person in control fails to respond to a parking violation
notice within thirty (30) days or refuses to pay a parking violation fee and/or
a booting fee, a uniform citation for an infraction may be issued for failure
to appear or pay the parking violation fee, or the unpaid fee for the violation
may be sent to a professional collection bureau for collection, at the
discretion of the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-11: PARKING VIOLATION FEE SCHEDULE:
The City Council shall, from time to time, set and adopt a fee schedule for
parking related violations by resolution. Copies of such fee schedule and the
adopting resolution shall be kept on file and made available in the office of
the City Clerk for the City of Lava Hot Springs. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-12: BOOTING/IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
A motor vehicle or trailer shall be subject to booting/immobilization in the
event the City Code Enforcement Officer observes the motor vehicle or trailer
to be illegally parked on a City street or alley. For the purposes of this
chapter, a boot is a device which is placed on a motor vehicle's tire or wheel
to prevent or discourage vehicular movement which may be attached to or removed
from a motor vehicle or trailer only by an authorized employee of the City of
Lava Hot Springs. In addition to placing a boot on a motor vehicle and/or
trailer tire, the City Code Enforcement Officer shall also attach a sticker to
the driver's side window of the motor vehicle or on a conspicuous place on the
trailer to alert the owner or operator or person in control that the motor
vehicle and/or trailer has been immobilized. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-13: BOOT/IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE FEE:
When a boot or immobilization device is attached to a motor vehicle or trailer
by or at the direction of the City Code Enforcement Officer, a fee shall be
assessed against the owner and/or operator and/or person in control of said
motor vehicle and/or trailer. The fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-14: REMOVAL OF BOOT/IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE:
The owner and/or operator of a motor vehicle and/or person in control of a
trailer to which a boot or immobilization device has been attached may have the
boot/device released from the motor vehicle and/or trailer by meeting the
following condition:
   A.   Payment in full of all outstanding parking violation fees and boot/
immobilization device fees attributed to the motor vehicle and/or trailer.
   B.   Payments may be made to the City Clerk or the City Clerk's designee on
Monday through Friday between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
P.M., excluding holidays.
   C.   Payments may also be made to the City Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord.
2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-15: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO REMOVE BOOT/IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE:
If the owner and/or operator of a motor vehicle and/or person in control of a
trailer which has been immobilized by a boot/immobilization device for longer
than forty-eight (48) hours fails to meet the requirements to remove the boot,
pursuant to section
6-4-14, said motor vehicle and/or trailer may be towed and impounded at the
request of the City Code Enforcement Officer with the costs thereof assessed
against the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle and/or person in control
of the trailer. This penalty shall be in addition to any fee(s) for parking
violation notice(s) which may have been issued. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-16: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING A BOOT/IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE:
It is a violation of this Parking Code for any person to remove, damage, or
tamper with a boot/immobilization device which has been placed by or at the
direction of the City Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Lava Hot Springs.
Any person who damages a boot/immobilization device shall be, in addition to
the penalties described in Sections
6-4-13 and
6-4-15, be assessed and charged with the costs to repair and/or replace the
boot/immobilization device. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-17: PENALTIES FOR REPEATED VIOLATIONS:
At the discretion of the City Code Enforcement Officer, any owner or operator
of a motor vehicle and/or owner of a trailer who violates this Parking Code, or
whose vehicle has been issued notices of violations of this Parking Code more
than three (3) times in a twelve (12) month period shall be guilty of an
infraction and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine in an
amount set from time to time by Resolution of the Council. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-
2020)
6-4-18: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS PARKING CODE:
   A.   Any motor vehicle or trailer parked in violation of this Parking Code
for more than forty-eight (48) hours on the City streets or alleys may be towed
and impounded at the request of the City Code Enforcement Officer with the
costs thereof assessed against the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle
and/or owner and/or person in control of the trailer. This penalty shall be in
addition to any fee for a boot/immobilization device and/or parking violation
notice and/or infraction citation which may have been issued.
   B.   Any motor vehicle or trailer parked in a "Tow Away Zone" identified by
signage indicating that parking in such zones will result in towing and
impounded, may be towed and impounded immediately upon observation by and
request of the City Code Enforcement Officer with the costs thereof assessed
against the owner and/or operator of the motor vehicle and/or owner and/or
person in control of the trailer. This penalty shall be in addition to any fee
for a boot/immobilization device and/or parking violation notice and/or
infraction citation which may have been issued. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
6-4-19: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
The issuance of a parking violation notice shall not be the exclusive remedy
for enforcing the Parking Code and all other lawful remedies are preserved and
reserved for use by the City, including issuance of an infraction citation,
assigning unpaid fees and/or damages to a boot/immobilization device to a
collection agency for collection, filing a civil complaint for collection of
unpaid fees and/or damages to a boot/immobilization device, filing a civil
complaint for nuisance, ordering the towing and impoundment of vehicles and
trailers parked in violation of the Parking Code and/or abandoned vehicles and
trailers, and filing a civil complaint to recover towing and impounding charges
assessed to the City. (Ord. 2020-2, 8-13-2020)
CHAPTER 5
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definition
6-5-2: Use Prohibited
6-5-3: Penalty
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
"Dynamic braking device" is defined as a device used primarily on trucks for
the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion to air compressor for
the purpose of braking. Dynamic braking device is also commonly referred to as
a "Jacobs brake", "engine brake" or "compression brake". (Ord. 1998-3, 4-9-
1998)
6-5-2: USE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic
braking device engaged within the city. (Ord. 1998-3, 4-9-1998; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1998-3, 4-9-1998; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 6
JUNKED, ABANDONED VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
6-6-3: Responsibility
6-6-4: Notice; Hearing
6-6-5: Removal, Impoundment By City
6-6-6: Disposition Of Unclaimed Vehicles
6-6-7: Redemption
6-6-8: Special Permit; Fee
6-6-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 49-1801 et seq.
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future, plural
words shall include the singular, and singular words shall include the plural.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC: The chief of police or other city employee designated by
the mayor to serve in this capacity.
SUBJECT VEHICLE: Any "vehicle" as defined herein which does not have lawfully
affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current vehicle
safety inspection certificate, if the same are required by law, or which is
structurally damaged, dismantled, partially dismantled, junked, abandoned or
discarded.
VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and/or designed to travel along
the ground, on water or through the air, including, but not limited to,
aircraft, watercraft, automobiles, buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor
scooters, trucks, motor homes, tractors, go-carts, and golf carts, as well as
parts or appurtenances thereto; and it shall also include campers and trailers
which are neither inhabited nor affixed to a foundation. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-
1977)
6-6-2: PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall park, store, leave, abandon, or permit the
parking, storing, leaving or abandoning of any "subject vehicle" as defined
above, whether attended to or not, upon any public or private property within
the city for a period of time exceeding twenty four (24) hours.
   B.   Declared Nuisance: The presence of an inoperative vehicle, or parts
thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared to be a nuisance in
that it represents a serious hazard to the public health, safety, convenience
and welfare of the residents of the city. Such nuisance may be abated as
provided below. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
   C.   Exceptions: However, this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle
completely enclosed within a building on private property or any vehicle held
in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city and
located in an area where such a business is permitted by the zoning laws of the
city. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977; amd. 2007 Code)
6-6-3: RESPONSIBILITY:
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard as specified below, the owner of
a subject vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which
such vehicle is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its
prompt removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner
of the vehicle and/or the owner or occupant of the private property where the
vehicle is located, shall be liable for the expenses incurred; provided, that
such liability shall not attach to the owner or occupant of the property if it
satisfactorily appears to the director of traffic that the vehicle in question
was placed on said property without the owner's or occupant's prior knowledge,
permission, or subsequent acquiescence. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
6-6-4: NOTICE; HEARING:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever it comes to the attention of the director of
traffic that any "nuisance" as defined in section
6-6-2 of this chapter exists within the city, a notice, in writing, shall be
served upon the owner of the vehicle and the occupant of the property where the
nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of
the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and
requesting its removal within fifteen (15) days following issuance of the
notice. The notice shall further advise that upon failure to comply with its
terms, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the costs
incurred thereby to be levied against the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner
or occupant of the property. If the owner of the vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the property cannot be located personally, it shall constitute
sufficient notice if a copy of the same is posted in a conspicuous place upon
the property and duplicate copies of the notice are sent by certified mail to
the owner of the vehicle and the owner or occupant of the property, if known,
at their last known addresses.
   B.   Request For Hearing: Persons to whom notices are directed or their duly
authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the city
council within the fifteen (15) day period prescribed herein, for the purpose
of showing cause why they should not be required to comply with the terms of
this chapter.
   C.   Hearing:
      1.   Notice: Such hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the city council at least five (5) days after the filing of the
request for hearing, and the persons to whom notices are directed shall be
advised by ordinary mail or personal delivery of the time and place of said
hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof.
      2.   Time For Compliance Tolled: The time remaining for compliance with
the notice shall be tolled upon the filing of a request for hearing and shall
not again commence to run until the hearing has been conducted and the city
council has issued its decision.
      3.   Testimony; Evidence: At any such hearing, the city and the persons
to whom notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as
either party deems necessary.
      4.   Council Decision: The city council shall decide whether or not the
vehicle in question should be impounded (unless impoundment has already
occurred as authorized below) and subject to disposition pursuant to this
chapter.
   D.   Hazard Exists:
      1.   Notice To Remove: Notwithstanding the forgoing provisions of this
section, if the director of traffic reasonably determines that the condition
and location of a subject vehicle represents a clear, present and serious
hazard to life, safety or health, he shall, without delay, attempt to ascertain
the identity of its owner and of the owner or occupant of property on which it
is found, and shall personally serve upon such person a written demand that the
vehicle be removed within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Removal By City: If the identity of such person cannot be readily
ascertained, or if there is a failure to comply with the demand for removal,
the director of traffic may remove and impound the vehicle as provided below,
and shall give notice of such action in the manner prescribed in section
6-6-5 of this chapter. Opportunity for hearing shall be granted as provided
above, except: a) a hearing may be requested after either notice to remove or
notice of impoundment, and that b) the person receiving notice may request, and
shall receive upon request, an accelerated hearing before a quorum of the city
council at a special meeting conducted no later than seven (7) days after
filing the request for such hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be personally
delivered or sent by ordinary mail no less than five (5) days in advance
thereof. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
6-6-5: REMOVAL, IMPOUNDMENT BY CITY:
   A.   Failure To Comply; Removal By City: If the violation described in the
notice has not been remedied within the compliance period, or if a hearing has
been conducted and the compliance period has expired following affirmance of
the violation by the city council, the director of traffic or his designee is
authorized to take possession of the vehicle in question and remove it from the
premises where it is located.
   B.   Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder or deny access to the director of traffic or his
designee attempting to remove a vehicle as authorized by this chapter.
   C.   Notice Of Impoundment: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of
such vehicle, the director of traffic shall give notice to the owner of the
vehicle, to any known lienholder, and also to the owner or occupant of the
property from which the vehicle was removed, if known, that said vehicle has
been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall
specify the location where the vehicle is stored, and state the costs incurred
by the city for its removal and storage. Notice shall be delivered personally
or sent by ordinary mail. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
6-6-6: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Appraisal: If sixty (60) days elapse after removing a vehicle and
giving notice as authorized above, during which the vehicle has not been
claimed and the city's costs paid, the city shall cause the vehicle to be
appraised.
   B.   Value Less Than Costs Incurred By City: If the vehicle is appraised at
less than the costs incurred (including the advertising costs that would be
incurred if the vehicle were sold at public auction), the director of traffic
may then summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute an appropriate
certificate of sale or destruction. One copy of such certificate shall be filed
with the city clerk-treasurer and another shall be forwarded to the appropriate
office of the Idaho transportation department.
   C.   Value In Excess Of Costs:
      1.   Notice Of Sale: If the vehicle is appraised in excess of costs as
described above, the director of traffic shall post prominently in the city
municipal building and publish once in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city, a notice of public sale not less than ten (10) days before the
date of the proposed sale.
      2.   Contents Of Notice: Such notice of sale shall include:
         a.   A statement that the sale is of property impounded by the city;
         b.   A description of the vehicle sufficient to identify it; and
         c.   A recitation of the date, time, and place of sale.
      3.   Sale: The vehicle shall be sold for cash to the highest and best
bidder.
      4.   Certificate Of Sale: At the time of payment of the purchase price,
the director of traffic shall execute an appropriate certificate of sale, the
original to be given to the purchaser, one copy to be filed with the city
clerk-treasurer, and another copy to be forwarded to the appropriate office of
the Idaho transportation department.
      5.   Invalid Sale: Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the
liability of the city or its employees or agents shall be strictly limited to
the amount of the purchase price received.
      6.   Surplus Proceeds: Costs recovered in the course of any sale or
distribution shall be deposited to the appropriate law enforcement budget of
the city by the city clerk-treasurer and any surplus proceeds shall be paid to
the owner of the vehicle, or party holding a valid lien or security interest,
if known. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
6-6-7: REDEMPTION:
The owner of, or person asserting a lien or secured interest in, any vehicle
impounded under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle at any
time after its removal but prior to its sale or destruction upon proof of
ownership, lien or secured interest, and payment to the city clerk-treasurer of
such sum as the director of traffic shall determine and fix for the actual and
reasonable expense of removal and storage, plus any preliminary sale
advertising expenses already incurred. Usual removal, storage and advertising
expenses, reflecting the city's pattern of actual costs shall be posted in the
office of the director of traffic and shall be made available for public
inspection. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
6-6-8: SPECIAL PERMIT; FEE:
Upon application of any person for a special permit, accompanied by payment in
cash, certified check or money order of the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00), the director of traffic shall cause a permit to be issued for salvage
of parts from one vehicle and/or for necessary repair of an existing vehicle.
Such permit shall be valid for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. No more
than two (2) such permits may be obtained by any person or household during any
twelve (12) month period. When a permit has expired, if inspection by the
director of traffic or his designee discloses that the unused salvage has been
removed and/or the vehicle repaired by the permittee, the fee herein specified
shall be refunded; but if such salvage has not been removed and/or the vehicle
repaired within the specified time period, the director of traffic or his
designee shall issue a notice to remove as provided in section
6-6-4 of this chapter and shall proceed as directed by this chapter. The permit
fee shall be retained, crediting it against the city's cost. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-
10-1977)
6-6-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Civil Action: Upon failure of compliance with this chapter by the owner
of a vehicle or by the owner or occupant of property from which such vehicle
has been removed by the city, the city may file a civil action against any or
all of them to recover the unpaid expenses incurred by such removal, including
litigation costs and a reasonable attorney fee. In addition, as part of or
separately from the civil action, the city may cause a lien or special
assessment to be placed directly upon the property where the vehicle was
located for the amount of such expenses.
   B.   Misdemeanor: Any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be
unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. Each day that such violation
continues with respect to each vehicle may be deemed a separate offense.
Prosecution for such offense shall not preclude a civil action for recovery of
costs as provided above. (Ord. 1977-4, 8-10-1977)
CHAPTER 7
SNOWMOBILES 1
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Operation Within City Limits
6-7-3: Restrictions
6-7-4: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-7101 et seq.
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
HIGHWAY: All "highways" as defined by the law except for "public roadways" as
defined in this section.
OPERATOR: Each person who operates or is in physical control of the snowmobile.
OWNER: Any person holding any record title to a snowmobile and entitled to the
use or possession thereof, other than a lien holder or other person having a
security interest only.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any other body
or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, and regardless of the degree
of formal organization.
PUBLIC ROADWAY: Portions of all road or street, improved or designed, or
ordinarily used for travel or parking of motor vehicles, which is controlled by
an authority other than the state highway department.
SNOWMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle under one thousand (1,000) pounds'
unladen gross weight, designed primarily for travel on snow or ice, or over
natural terrain, which may be steered by tracks, skis, or runners, and which is
not otherwise registered or licensed under the laws of the state. (Ord. 1984-1,
1-18-1984)
6-7-2: OPERATION WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
Snowmobiles may not be operated within the city limits of the city from Main
Street from the west city limits to Third Avenue East except where necessary to
cross such streets to get from one side to the other. All other public streets
within the city shall be opened to travel on snowmobiles, subject to the
restrictions contained herein. (Ord. 1984-1, 1-18-1984)
6-7-3: RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   Speed: To drive or operate any snowmobile at any rate of speed greater
than that reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions.
   B.   Under Influence: To operate a snowmobile under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit forming drugs.
   C.   Negligent Manner: To operate a snowmobile in a negligent manner so as
to endanger the person or property of another, or to cause injury or damage to
either, or to harass, chase, or annoy any wild game animals or birds or
domestic animals.
   D.   Lights: To operate a snowmobile without a lighted headlight and
taillight between the hours of dusk and dawn and when upon crossing any public
roadway or highway, or when otherwise required for the safety of others.
   E.   Brakes: To operate a snowmobile without an adequate braking device
which may be operated by either hand or foot.
   F.   Muffler: To operate a snowmobile without an adequate muffler, except
when used in conjunction with public racing events.
   G.   Driver's License: To operate a snowmobile upon a public roadway or
highway without a valid motor vehicle operator's license, unless the public
roadway or highway is closed to other motor vehicle traffic.
   H.   Sidewalks: To operate or park snowmobiles on sidewalks.
   I.   Indiscriminate Operation: To operate a snowmobile indiscriminately
within the city limits of the city without a distinct point of departure and
point of destination. Such point of departure or destination can be either
within the city or outside the city.
   J.   Speed; Traffic Control: To disobey all posted speed limit and traffic
control signs.
   K.   Trailer Or Sled: To operate a snowmobile with a trailer or sled that
does not have a fixed hitch.
   L.   Right Of Way: To fail to yield the right of way to all motor vehicles
and pedestrians.
   M.   Hours Of Operation: To operate the snowmobile between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except when traveling to
residence by way of the designated snowmobile route.
   N.   Unlicensed, Unregistered Vehicle: To operate unlicensed, unregistered
snowmobiles. (Ord. 1984-1, 1-18-1984)
6-7-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1984-1, 1-18-1984; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES OR BLADES, GO-CARTS 1
SECTION:
6-8-1: Purpose
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: Use Restricted
6-8-4: Posted Property
6-8-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-313.
6-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city council to place reasonable limits on the
recreation of skateboarding, roller skates or blades, go-carts or scooters in
congested areas to protect the public and public or private improvements from
damage or liability occasioned as a result of the exercise of that recreational
activity. (Ord. 1992-4, 8-13-1992)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms herein are defined as follows:
GO-CART: A small vehicle distinguished by small wheels capable of carrying one
or two (2) persons propelled by an engine and designed for use as a sport or
toy rather than transportation upon streets.
ROLLER SKATES OR BLADES: Skates with small wheels for use on a smooth surface.
SCOOTER: Small wheel carts or wagons upon or in which one or two (2) persons
may ride, having no engine, but is usually propelled by foot power, pushed by
another or allowed to coast downhill.
SKATEBOARD: Any short board composed of wood, plastic or other material to
which is attached roller skate type wheels upon which a person sits, stands,
kneels or lies while the device is in motion. (Ord. 1992-4, 8-13-1992)
6-8-3: USE RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for any person to ride on or propel any skateboard, roller
skates or blades, go-carts or scooters on any of the following streets or
sidewalks adjacent to:
   A.   Main Street beginning at 4th West and Main to the Main Street river
bridge;
   B.   One block north and south of Main Street beginning at the intersection
of 4th West and Main to the intersection of 3rd East and Main.
   C.   Any other street or sidewalk with signs stating the prohibition. (Ord.
1992-4, 8-13-1992)
6-8-4: POSTED PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall ride or propel any skateboard, roller
skates or blades, go-cart or scooter upon the land of another, public or
private, without the permission of the landowner or the tenant in possession
where such land has been posted by the landowner or tenant in possession in a
conspicuous manner upon or near the boundaries of such land with signs legibly
printed informing persons of said prohibition.
   B.   Right Of Entry: Law enforcement personnel are specifically authorized
to enter upon private property, when necessary, for the sole purpose of
enforcing this prohibition on a complaint signed by the landowner or tenant in
possession. (Ord. 1992-4, 8-13-1992)
6-8-5: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1992-4, 8-13-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION:
7-1-1: District Established
7-1-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
The city is hereby declared to be and is hereby established as a fire district
and said fire district shall be known and designated as fire zones 1, 2, and 3.
Each zone shall include such territory or portions of the city as illustrated,
outlined, and designated on a certain map on file in the office of the city
clerk-treasurer being marked and designated as "Fire Zones Of The City Of Lava
Hot Springs" for the application of the regulations included in the
international building code, published by the International Code Council, and
any subsequent amendments, supplements, or editions of said document. (Ord.
1976-2, 4-23-1976; amd. Ord. 2003-3, 3-13-2003)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Permit Required
7-2-3: Sale Of Nonaerial Common Fireworks
7-2-4: Public Display
7-2-5: Requirements For Sale Of Nonaerial Common Fireworks
7-2-6: Requirements For Public Display Of Fireworks
7-2-7: Location
7-2-8: Prohibitions
7-2-9: Penalty
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The City of Lava Hot Springs, Bannock County, Idaho.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
Fireworks include sky lanterns and similar devices and items classified as
common or special fireworks by the United States Bureau of Explosives or
contained in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation
and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN 0336 1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not
include any automotive safety flares, toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other
items designed for use with toy guns or toy cannons, party poppers, pop-its or
other devices which contain twenty five hundredths (0.25) of a grain or less of
explosive substance.
LANTERNS: Any Chinese lanterns, sky lanterns, wish lanterns, sky candles, fire
balloons or similar devices regardless of name using an open flame or
combustible material, including but not limited to alcohol or a candle, for the
purpose of illuminating, or heating the air in, a bag made of tissue paper,
rice paper, very thin plastic or any combustible material for the purpose of
making the device lighter than air causing it to rise into the sky or for the
purpose of floating the device on water. Because of the combustible nature of
these devices and the fire danger posed by such devices, these devices will be
considered fireworks and regulated as such by the City.
NON-AERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Means any fireworks such as ground spinners,
fountains, sparklers, smoke devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the
ground and not to travel outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit
sparks or other burning material which land outside a twenty foot (20')
diameter circle or above a height of twenty feet (20'). Non-aerial common
fireworks do not include firecrackers, jumping jacks, lanterns, or similar
products.
PERMIT: An authorization given by the City for the sale of nonaerial fireworks
or for public display of fireworks or other events. (Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011;
amd. Ord. 2017-4, 10-5-2017)
7-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or use any fireworks at any time
not permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-3: SALE OF NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS:
Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail with a permit issued by the
City and used beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23, and ending
at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight July 5, and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight December 26 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January
1. (Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-4: PUBLIC DISPLAY:
Fireworks for public display or other event may be used at any time in
compliance with a permit issued by the City. (Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR SALE OF NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS:
Any person or entity desiring to engage in the retail sale of nonaerial common
fireworks shall:
   A.   Make application to the City on a form approved by the City.
   B.   Furnish to the City a certificate of public liability and property-
casualty insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for personal injury and property damage.
   C.   Pay a fee to the City of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the permit.
   D.   Display the permit in public view at the location listed in the permit.
(Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS:
A person or entity desiring to engage in the public display of fireworks shall:
   A.   Make application to the City on a form approved by the City.
   B.   Furnish to the City a certificate of public liability and property-
casualty insurance providing coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for personal injury and property damage.
   C.   Pay a fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the permit.
   D.   Ensure that the public display will be supervised by a qualified person
and will not constitute an unreasonable hazard to persons or property. (Ord.
2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-7: LOCATION:
Retail sales of nonaerial common fireworks shall be allowed only from within a
temporary fireworks stand and shall be operated and comply with all provisions
of section 39-2607, Idaho Code. (Ord. 2011-4, 12-8-2011)
7-2-8: PROHIBITIONS:
The lighting, release and/or discharge of lanterns as defined in this chapter
is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Lava Hot
Springs, Idaho. (Ord. 2017-4, 10-5-2017)
7-2-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Any person or entity violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
County Jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment,
and shall be additionally responsible for restitution of all damages caused and
costs of fighting any fire caused by such violation.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Any person or entity violating any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible for the costs of suppressing any resulting fire,
including the wages paid by any responding agency and the reasonable charges
for equipment, materials and supplies used in the suppression of such resulting
fire. The City of Lava Hot Springs and/or any other agency responding to
suppress a fire caused by anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall
have the right to bring a civil lawsuit to recover such costs. (Ord. 2017-4,
10-5-2017)
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
7-3-1: Applicability
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Prohibited Materials
7-3-4: Incinerators, Burn Cages And Burn Barrels
7-3-5: Permissible Burning
7-3-6: Permit
7-3-7: Burning Moratorium
7-3-8: Responsibility And Duty Of Permit Holder Or Persons Responsible For
Fires
7-3-9: No Responsibility Of City
7-3-10: Recreational Fires
7-3-11: Penalty
7-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to the burning of any materials within the City of
Lava Hot Springs, Bannock County, Idaho an incorporated City. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-
8-2018)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
These definitions shall apply to this chapter.
BONFIRE: Means the open burning of cut trees, vegetation, leaves or lumber for
ceremonial, celebratory or other purposes, and wherein the fire occupies an
area greater than three feet (3') in diameter and two feet (2') in height.
BURN: Means all outdoor burning except a recreational fire or burning contained
in an incinerator burn barrel.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Means those chemicals or substances whether the materials
are in usable or waste condition which are physical hazards or health hazards
as defined and classified in part V of the 2012 edition of the International
Fire Code or the part defining "hazardous materials" of the effective version
of such code as is adopted or approved by the Idaho Building Code Board or
Idaho Department of Insurance/State Fire Marshal, effective on January 1 of the
year following adoption by the Idaho Building Code Board or Idaho Department of
Insurance/State Fire Marshal.
OPEN BURNING: Means the burning of a bonfire, household garbage or rubbish fire
or other fire in an outdoor location where the fuel being burned is not
contained in an incinerator, burn barrel, outdoor fireplace or barbeque pit.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: Means the burning of materials other than household garbage
or rubbish where fuel being burned is not contained in a burn barrel,
incinerator, outdoor fireplace, fire ring, or pit and with a total fuel area of
three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height for
pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-
8-2018)
7-3-3: PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
The burning of the following is prohibited, whether in an open burn or in an
incinerator, burn barrel, stove or fireplace:
   A.   Carcasses and parts of carcasses from dead animals including
domesticated livestock, sheep, goats, poultry, pets, and commercial fish and
animal feces;
   B.   Junked motor vehicles or any materials resulting from a salvage
operation;
   C.   Tires or other rubber materials or products;
   D.   Plastics;
   E.   Asphalt or composition roofing or any other asphaltic material or
products;
   F.   Tar, tar paper, waste or heavy petroleum products, or paints;
   G.   Lumber or timber treated with preservatives, including railroad ties;
   H.   Trade waste materials meaning any solid, liquid or gaseous material
resulting from the construction or demolition of any structure, or the
operation of any business, trade or industry including, but not limited to,
wood product industry waste such as saw dust, bark, peelings, chips, shavings
and cull wood except as specifically allowed under IDAPA 58.01.01 section 600 -
623;
   I.   Insulated wire;
   J.   Pathogenic waste;
   K.   Hazardous waste;
   L.   Any material which, when burned, will produce an offensive smell, smoke
or odor;
   M.   Any material which, when burned, will cause or create dense smoke or
odor; and
   N.   Garbage/household waste. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-4: INCINERATORS, BURN CAGES AND BURN BARRELS:
   A.   Use of incinerators, burn cages or burn barrels are prohibited within
the City of Lava Hot Springs as a routine method of trash disposal, except that
a burn cage, barrel or other forms of containment may be used when burning yard
waste pursuant to an issued burn permit.
   B.   All burning in the burn barrel, burn cage or incinerator shall be done
during daylight hours; any fire still burning at sunset shall be extinguished
by water, fire extinguishment materials or by other appropriate means.
   C.   Incinerators or burn barrels may only be used to burn organic yard
waste (limbs, leaves, etc.) grown on the property where used. In accordance
with the Clean Air Act and associated regulations, burn barrels or incinerators
may not be used to burn household garbage, prohibited items described in
section
7-3-3 of this chapter, or other products prohibited by State or Federal
regulations. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-5: PERMISSIBLE BURNING:
   A.   Except for recreational fires, burning of permissible materials may be
done outside of a burn barrel, burn cage or incinerator upon compliance with
all the following:
      1.   A permit to engage in such burning, except for a recreational fire,
burn barrel, burn cage or incinerator, shall be obtained from the City Clerk or
the City Clerk's designee at the City Clerk's Office.
      2.   All burning shall be constantly attended by a competent person over
the age of eighteen (18) until the fire is extinguished.
      3.   A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-
A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt,
sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
      4.   The location for open burning shall not be less than fifty feet
(50') from any structure or combustible object including trees and shrubbery,
and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading within fifty
feet (50') of any structure or combustible object.
      5.   Such burning shall be done at a distance of more than two hundred
feet (200') from any wild land or sage brush area.
      6.   The person to whom the permit is issued shall have the legal right,
by ownership, lease or written permission, to conduct the burn at the time and
place proposed. It shall not be the responsibility of the City Clerk or any
other City employee or agent to verify the accuracy of their presentations and
information provided by the person seeking the permit and the person seeking
the permit shall be completely and fully responsible for any inaccuracies in
the information provided in support of issuance of the permit.
      7.   The permit holder shall be responsible for following safe practices
for the burn, including not starting or continuing the burn during unsafe
conditions which shall include, but are not limited to, dry conditions, low
humidity, strong winds or other conditions which could reasonably be expected
to make burning hazardous to persons or property. It is recommended that burns
not be conducted when the wind exceeds or is expected to exceed five (5) mph
during the anticipated duration of the fire. This is only a recommendation and
is not intended to alleviate the permit holder's obligation and responsibility
for following safe burn practices.
      8.   No burn shall create dense smoke, toxic emissions or odor. No burn
shall be conducted at a place or under conditions which are likely to or do
result in smoke, toxic emissions, odor or heat entering or damaging neighboring
structures. No burn shall be conducted in a place or under conditions which are
likely to or do result in a traffic hazard.
      9.   If hazardous conditions exist in the vicinity of the target area or
the burn, including but not limited to, dry or drought conditions causing the
vegetation or other fuels outside of the target area to be susceptible to
ignition, which could be reasonably expected to permit the burn to spread
beyond the target area, the permit holder shall be responsible for eliminating
the hazardous conditions by creating borders, perimeters and barriers to
prevent the burn from spreading beyond the target area.
      10.   No burn shall be conducted at night between dusk and dawn.
      11.   The permit holder shall in all instances notify the dispatcher for
the Bannock County Sheriff's Office of the location, expected start time and
expected duration of all burns for which a permit is required. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-
8-2018)
7-3-6: PERMIT:
   A.   A permit is required in all cases except for a recreational fire,
burning inside in a fireplace, wood stove or cook stove. The Lava Hot Springs
City Fire Chief, City Code Enforcement Officer, City Clerk or the City Clerk's
designee is authorized to issue a permit for burning. The purpose of the permit
is to provide a record of the authorized time and target area for the burn and
to identify the person responsible for conducting the burn. Obtaining a permit
shall not alleviate the permit holder from seeking and obtaining permits from
any other agency that has jurisdiction of the target area and/or materials to
be burned. All permits are subject to revocation or suspension after issuance
at the sole discretion of the Lava Hot Springs City Fire Chief and/or City Code
Enforcement Officer if determined that conditions warrant revocation or
suspension of the permit. The Lava Hot Springs City Fire Chief, City Code
Enforcement Officer, City Clerk or City Clerk's designee shall take reasonable
steps to notify the permit holder of such revocation or suspension, but it is
the responsibility of the permit holder to exercise due caution and diligence
for identifying hazardous conditions before starting a burn. The application
and permit shall be in a form authorized and furnished by the Lava Hot Springs
City Fire Chief, City Code Enforcement Officer and/or City Clerk. The
application and permit shall provide at least the following information:
      1.   The target area of the burn;
      2.   The expected start time and duration of the burn;
      3.   The materials to be burned;
      4.   The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the
permit who shall also be the person responsible for conducting the burn;
      5.   The beginning and end date during which the burn is authorized, but
in no case shall the authorized dates exceed two (2) weeks from the date of
issuance; and
      6.   Any special limits on or conditions applicable to the authorized
burn. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-7: BURNING MORATORIUM:
The Lava Hot Springs City Fire Chief and/or the Mayor or City Council may
declare a moratorium on burning, which moratorium shall revoke any permit
issued under this chapter for such period of time as in the sole discretion of
the Lava Hot Springs City Fire Chief and/or the Mayor or City Council is deemed
necessary to avoid increased fire hazards due to hazardous conditions. At the
discretion of the Lava Hot Springs Fire Chief and/or Mayor or City Council,
non-permitted recreational fires may be included in an issued burning
moratorium. Such moratorium when issued will be posted at Lava Hot Springs City
Hall and other sites where official public notices are customarily posted.
(Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-8: RESPONSIBILITY AND DUTY OF PERMIT HOLDER OR PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR
FIRES:
It is the responsibility of the applicant for a burn and the person supervising
any burn in a burn barrel, burn cage, incinerator or recreational fire to keep
the fire under control. If conditions exist immediately prior to beginning a
burn which violate section
7-3-4 or
7-3-5 of this chapter, the burn shall not be started. Even if such conditions
do not exist at the start of the burn the applicant for a burn and the person
supervising any burn in a burn barrel, burn cage, incinerator or recreational
fire shall have the duty to immediately bring the fire under control and/or
extinguish the fire to avoid accidental or unintended damage to property or
injury to persons. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-9: NO RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY:
The City of Lava Hot Springs and the issuing person shall have no liability for
any damage caused by any fire started by a permit holder or any fire which a
permit holder fails to extinguish when necessary to prevent accidental or
unintended damage to property or injury to persons.
The City of Lava Hot Springs and the issuing person shall have no liability for
failing to personally communicate the revocation or suspension of a permit
issued under this chapter to the permit holder. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
7-3-10: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
Small recreational fires as described in section
7-3-2 of this chapter may be conducted without a burn permit provided such
recreational fire is conducted in a safe manner and in keeping with the
provisions of this chapter. Any recreational fire exceeding the size
restrictions described in subsection A1 of this section, will constitute a
"bonfire" and may not be conducted without a permit.
   A.   The following rules and conditions shall apply to all recreational
fires:
      1.   Location: Recreational fires must be contained in an appropriate pit
below grade, or containment ring or structure of non-combustible material such
as metal or stone, and covered with a grate or screen not to exceed one-half
inch (1/2") mesh. Such pit, ring or containment must be located at least twenty
five feet (25') from a structure or combustible material including trees and
shrubbery, and be at least fifteen feet (15') from any portable or mobile
property such as vehicles, recreational vehicles, tents, or movable structures.
Recreational fires shall not exceed three feet (3') in diameter and two feet
(2') in height.
      2.   Precautions: All adult persons present at a recreational fire shall
be responsible to make sure that fire extinguishing equipment, including but
not limited to water buckets, shovels or garden hoses are readily available and
capable of use to extinguish a recreational fire or its spread.
      3.   Attendance: A competent person over the age of eighteen (18) shall
be present at all times at a recreational fire from its start to its
extinguishment.
      4.   Recreational Fire Bans: Although recreational fires are allowed
without a permit, the Mayor and City Council and/or the Lava Hot Springs City
Fire Chief may declare a temporary ban on recreational fires if in their sole
discretion such ban is deemed to be necessary to avoid increased fire hazards
due to adverse conditions, environmental or other factors. It is the
responsibility of the person or persons conducting such a fire to determine if
a moratorium is in place that affects recreational fires.
      5.   Materials: Prohibited materials as identified in section
7-3-3 of this chapter shall not be burned in a recreational fire. (Ord. 2017-5,
2-8-2018)
7-3-11: PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Any person or entity violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
County Jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment,
and shall be additionally responsible for restitution of all damages caused and
costs of fighting any fire caused by such violation.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Any person or entity violating any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible for the costs of suppressing any resulting fire,
including the wages paid by any responding agency and the reasonable charges
for equipment, materials and supplies used in the suppression of such resulting
fire. The City of Lava Hot Springs and/or any other agency responding to
suppress a fire caused by anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall
have the right to bring a civil lawsuit to recover such costs. (Ord. 2017-5, 2-
8-2018)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Snow And Ice
8-1-2: Construction, Repair Or Replacement
8-1-3: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-313.
8-1-1: SNOW AND ICE:
   A.   Removal Required: The owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within
the City abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk shall remove all snow and
ice from any such sidewalk daily.
   B.   Notice: The City Clerk-Treasurer or other duly authorized
representative is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the
owner, tenant or occupant to comply with the terms and conditions of this
chapter to remove or otherwise correct the objectionable matter herein
legislated against, which notice notifying such owner, tenant or occupant that
they have a period of twelve (12) hours from and after receipt of such notice
or posting of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises, within which
to correct or otherwise remove snow and ice. (Ord. 2017-1, 8-10-2017)
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Notice: At any time the City Council finds there is a safety hazard to
normal pedestrian traffic upon any sidewalk or where there is not a sidewalk
for pedestrian traffic, on streets designated for sidewalks by resolution of
the City Council, it shall be the duty of the City, or its authorized
representative, to notify the owners of premises within the City abutting or
adjoining any public street or sidewalk to construct a new sidewalk, or to
replace or repair such sidewalk, as necessary.
   B.   Cost: The owner of the abutting or adjoining property to said sidewalk
shall have the duty to construct, repair, or replace said sidewalk, at his own
cost and expense, upon receiving notification from the City. If the property
owner fails to construct, repair, or replace said sidewalk, within the time
period allotted to said owner, the City may cause the same to be constructed,
repaired or replaced and assess the cost thereof to the property owner in
accordance with section 50-1008, Idaho Code.
   C.   Time Limitations: The owner shall, after notice has been given: 1)
repair such sidewalk, within thirty (30) days; 2) replace such sidewalk, within
sixty (60) days; or 3) construct a new sidewalk, within sixty (60) days in
accordance with specifications set forth by the City Council in such notice, or
as may be set forth in the current edition, as amended, of the Idaho Standards
for Public Works Construction, if adopted by the City Council. Prior to said
construction, the owner shall advise the City of the date and time of said
construction, and shall further coordinate with the City for the construction
of adjoining curb and/or gutter. The City shall be responsible for the cost of
the construction of the curb and gutter. However, the City Council shall have
the discretion to construct curb and gutter, and/or to determine if curb and
gutter are needed, and if determined to not be needed, the City shall have no
responsibility to construct the same. (Ord. 2015-8, 11-12-2015)
8-1-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure To Comply: Upon failure of owner, tenant or occupant of said
premises to comply with the terms and conditions of such notice, then and in
that event such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
action to be taken by the City.
   B.   Abatement By City: Upon the failure to remove snow and ice within the
time limits of section
8-1-1 of this chapter, the City may remove the same, doing whatever is
necessary to accomplish the abatement cleanup, removal and related work. The
costs thereof may be assessed against the property and collected as provided by
law, particularly as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 10, for special
assessments, or the City may collect the costs by civil action. (Ord. 2017-1,
8-10-2017)
CHAPTER 2
TREES, SHRUBS, HEDGES AND OTHER PLANTS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Title
8-2-2: Purpose
8-2-3: Definitions
8-2-4: Establishment Of Tree Committee
8-2-5: Term Of Office
8-2-6: Operation
8-2-7: Duties And Responsibilities
8-2-8: Species Of Trees Permitted
8-2-9: Utilities
8-2-10: Adjacent Property Owner's Responsibilities For Public Trees
8-2-11: Property Owner's Responsibilities For Private Trees
8-2-12: Licensing Of Private Tree Service Companies
8-2-13: Notification And Permits
8-2-14: Regulations For Planting Street Trees
8-2-15: Trees, Hedges And Shrubs Overhanging Public Property
8-2-16: Abuse Of Public Trees And Shrubs
8-2-17: Street Tree Care
8-2-18: Tree Topping
8-2-19: Abatement Of Nuisances
8-2-20: Compensatory Payments
8-2-21: Interference With City Tree Committee
8-2-22: Adoption Of ANSI A300 And ANSI Z133.1
8-2-23: Appeal Process
8-2-24: Review By City Council
8-2-25: Penalty
8-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be cited as the TREE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAVA HOT
SPRINGS, IDAHO. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to establish a Lava Hot Springs tree committee and
provide direction in planting and caring for trees. The major objective is to
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing
for the regulation of the planting, preservation, protection and proper
maintenance of trees within city limits. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ANSI A300: That certain standard tree, shrub and other woody plant maintenance
standard practice as set forth in ANSI A300 (part 1) - 2001, as published by
the American National Standards Institutes, Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001.
ANSI Z133.1: That certain safety standard regarding the planting and
maintenance of trees in proximity to utility lines as published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001 edition.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person(s) owning property adjacent to public
rights of way.
ARBORICULTURE: The management of trees; including planting, pruning, watering,
fertilizing, removal or any other action which affects the healthy growth and
maintenance of trees.
CITY FORESTRY ADVISOR: A professional enlisted by the city to provide support,
training, education and administrative assistance with tree maintenance, insect
and disease control, public tree inventory, master plan management needs and
all other services based on terms and conditions of an agreement.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of all trees and shrubs within the city.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in
all directions to a line ten feet (10') outside of the dripline.
DISEASE: A process that causes anatomical disruptions, physiological
dysfunctions, and energy disruptions that lead to decline and/or death of an
organism or any of its parts.
HAZARDOUS TREES: Public or private trees that create any unsafe situation for
persons using adjacent public property.
HEDGE: A row of shrubs or small trees that are planted close to each other in
order to form a boundary.
LICENSE: An annually issued license issued by the city which allows the city to
determine adequate liability insurance coverage and proper knowledge of ANSI
standards by any contractor doing tree contracting within the city limits.
OBSTRUCTIVE TREES, SHRUBS OR HEDGES: Public or private trees that prevent
appropriate passage or safe vision on any public right of way.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all area owned by the city.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the city and required for any activity above
or below ground that may impact the canopy or the critical root zone of any
public tree.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company,
or other governmental entity or organization of any kind.
PEST: Any insect, disease, animal or other organism that causes harm or damage
to trees.
PRIVATE TREES: Any trees other than public trees.
PROPERTY OWNER: The recorded owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PRUNING: The practice of managing tree health according to the national
standards set forth in the ANSI A300.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: See section
8-2-19, "Abatement Of Nuisances", of this chapter.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Real property owned, managed, or leased to the city and
dedicated to the public for present or future use.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated
to, or deeded to the public for pedestrians, vehicular or other public use. It
includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, access routes for
public utilities and open public spaces.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm or injury and/or
property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using
public property.
PUBLIC TREES: Trees located upon public property owned by the city, including
street trees.
SHRUB: A woody perennial plant, branched at or near the base and which at
maturity is expected to grow less than fifteen feet (15') in height.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation located on
public property adjacent to streets, avenues, alleys or other public ways
within the city.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the tree's crown or the removal of the top part (trunk
and limbs) of a coniferous tree, thereby removing the normal canopy and
disfiguring the tree.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, usually having one main stem or trunk and many
branches and which, at maturity is expected to exceed fifteen feet (15') in
height and two inches (2") in diameter. The failure to achieve such height at
maturity shall not preclude its consideration as a tree. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-
2015)
8-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF TREE COMMITTEE:
   A.   Establishment: The Lava Hot Springs city council shall appoint a
permanent tree committee to serve and assist with issues involving public
trees. This includes issues involving planting, maintenance, preservation and
removal of trees and shrubs within city limits. All decisions and plans of the
tree committee are subject to approval by the Lava Hot Springs city council.
   B.   Membership: Three (3) members will be appointed to the tree committee
by the city council. Membership shall consist of citizens and/or city staff and
one member of the city council or of the city planning and zoning commission
with interest in and knowledge of issues involving trees and urban
horticulture. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-5: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of the three (3) persons appointed by the mayor shall be four (4)
years, except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first
committee shall be only one year and term of the other one member of the first
committee shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy occurs during
the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-6: OPERATION:
The committee shall choose its own officers, draft its own rules and
regulations and have them approved by the city council and keep a journal of
its proceedings. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Committee members will maintain a seventy five percent
(75%) attendance rate at meetings and work sessions, or will be removed from
the committee and his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term. All committee meetings shall be open to the public and
follow all provisions of the open meetings law. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Lava Hot Springs tree committee shall provide advice to the mayor and city
council as to the preservation, protection and management of the community
forest of Lava Hot Springs, in accordance with the intent and purpose of this
chapter. The committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   A.   Information: Assist the city in encouraging landscaping installation
and maintenance on private property by providing information on the value of
landscaping and the proper planting and care of trees and other vegetation.
   B.   Recommendation: Recommend policies and procedures to identify, mark,
publicize and preserve historic and notable trees on both public and private
property.
   C.   Promotion: Assist the city in promoting appreciation of trees and the
community forest through annual Arbor Day observances and other activities.
   D.   Development: Encourage improvement of the community forest through
planning and policy development.
   E.   Assistance: Assist city departments in every way possible to enhance
the community forest in the city.
   F.   Grants And Donations: Enhance opportunities for obtaining monetary
funds for tree purchases, related supplies and community forestry activities
through local and federal assistantship grants and donations.
   G.   Advocate: Serve as an advocate of the city's community forest.
   H.   Meetings: This committee will meet when needed at least twice annually.
   I.   Advisors: Advisors may also be called to serve under a nonvoting
status.
   J.   Compensation: Members and advisors of the committee shall serve without
compensation.
   K.   Quorum: A majority of the members shall be present for the transaction
of business.
   L.   Journal: The committee shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The
city will provide an assistant to record notes and prepare minutes of each
meeting. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-8: SPECIES OF TREES PERMITTED:
The "master list of public trees" shall be the official guideline for the
selection and planting of trees on public property. It shall include tree
species recommended and species prohibited for planting on public property and
tree spacing suggestions.
The tree committee and city forestry advisor shall maintain and periodically
update the "master list of public trees". The master list of public trees is
available at the Lava Hot Springs City Hall and on the city of Lava Hot Springs
website.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree within any public right of way or
planting median or immediately adjacent to a public street except those trees
identified in the master list of public trees unless advance, written
permission is granted by the city of Lava Hot Springs. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-
2015)
8-2-9: UTILITIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any public or private tree
under or within twenty (20) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over
or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
electric transmission or distribution line or other utility except the species
of trees identified in the master list of public trees for utility planting.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to plant any public or private tree at any
location in any manner which does not comply with the safety standards for
planting and maintenance of trees in proximity to public utilities, as set
forth in ANSI Z133.1.
   C.   The city of Lava Hot Springs will not be responsible for damage to any
tree or shrub located within a utility easement as a result of the operation or
maintenance of city utility lines. Damage to any public utility system caused
by trees improperly located within the public right of way or easement will be
repaired at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-10: ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PUBLIC TREES:
   A.   Responsibilities: Adjacent property owners shall:
      1.   Adjacent property owners are not permitted to plant trees on city
property.
      2.   Established trees that are encroaching city property and are being
maintained by adjacent property owners at the time when this chapter was
adopted may continue to be so maintained. If determined hazardous, adjacent
owner must remove the same immediately. Contractors hired to remove the tree
must be licensed and provide the city of Lava Hot Springs with a liability
insurance certificate naming the city as an additional insured prior to removal
of the tree. Once a street tree being maintained by an adjacent property owner
is removed, it cannot be replaced on city property.
      3.   Meet all requirements for work done (including, but not limited to,
pruning and removal) on any public trees that they are responsible for.
      4.   Meet all requirements necessary prior to commencing repair of damage
done to public streets or sidewalk adjacent to any public trees that they are
responsible for.
   B.   Routine Public Tree Maintenance For Trees:
      1.   Adjacent property owners shall:
         a.   Prune and maintain trees planted according to ANSI A300, a copy
of which is available on the city of Lava Hot Springs website.
         b.   Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not acceptable
forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees.
         c.   Except as otherwise determined by the public works department,
branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide
sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to
interfere with public travel.
         d.   Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs that
are considered a public nuisance.
   C.   Protection/Preservation: Adjacent property owners shall:
      1.   Obtain a permit from the city before performing any activity which
may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical root zone).
      2.   Notify the city when any part of a public tree is damaged or
destroyed. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-11: PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PRIVATE TREES:
   A.   Routine Tree Maintenance:
      1.   Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner's private real
property that are considered a public nuisance.
      2.   Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that
are considered a public nuisance. Branches that overhang sidewalks, streets or
alleys shall be pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance over the
sidewalk, street or alley so as not to interfere with public travel in
accordance with section
8-2-15 of this chapter.
      3.   Control of pests on trees located on the owner's private real
property that may pose a threat to public trees upon determination by the tree
committee or city forestry advisor.
      4.   Remove or barricade all debris (wood, branches and leaves) on public
property by the end of the working day on which any tree work is done. (Ord.
2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-12: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICE COMPANIES:
Tree service companies performing work on public trees are required to apply
for a license through the Lava Hot Springs City Hall. Applications are then
reviewed by designated members of the Lava Hot Springs tree committee and the
city council. Upon approval, licenses shall be issued by the Lava Hot Springs
City Hall, valid for the calendar year that the license is issued in, for a fee
of forty five dollars ($45.00), and will include identification stickers for
service trucks that shall be updated annually.
   A.   Licensing Requirements:
      1.   International Society Of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist on
staff.
      2.   An ISA certified arborist to be on site while work is being
performed.
      3.   Liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      4.   Knowledge and compliance of OSHA regulations.
      5.   Knowledge and compliance of ANSI A300 standards, a copy of which
will be on the city of Lava Hot Springs website.
   B.   Revocation Of License: The Lava Hot Springs city council, with the
recommendation of the Lava Hot Springs tree committee, may revoke a license for
violation of any section of this code. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-13: NOTIFICATION AND PERMITS:
   A.   Notification Of Proposed Work: No person may perform any of the
following acts without first notifying the Lava Hot Springs public works
department and shall contact the Lava Hot Springs public works department via
mail, phone, fax, or e-mail at a minimum of two (2) business days prior to
commencement of the proposed work. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits
as required by law:
      1.   Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to
public rights of way from watering or fertilizing such trees;
      2.   Attach any object to public tree(s);
      3.   Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the
critical root zone of any public tree(s).
   B.   Permit Application Procedures And Requirements For Public Tree(s)
Removal:
      1.   This is in no way intended to interfere with the immediate removal
of a tree that presents a hazardous or emergency situation;
      2.   Upon inspection, the Lava Hot Springs tree committee may issue a
permit through the Lava Hot Springs City Hall. Permits are available at the
Lava Hot Springs City Hall between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
through two o'clock (2:00) P.M., Monday through Friday;
      3.   The Lava Hot Springs City Hall may condition the approval of any
permit;
      4.   Prior to the removal of any public, street, or alley tree, the
property owner or private tree service company intending to perform the work,
which is currently licensed by the city of Lava Hot Springs, must make a
request for permit. All work must be completed within thirty (30) days of
issuance of said permit;
      5.   Whenever a public or street tree that is being maintained by the
city is removed, the stump of said tree shall also be removed. The city shall
then replace the removed tree. If the tree had to be removed because of damage
caused by an adjacent property owner or another individual, the cost of removal
and replanting will be assessed to the adjacent property owner or the
individual who damaged the tree. Tree replacement shall be a condition of
issuance of a permit for removal, unless the Lava Hot Springs tree committee
for good cause shown waives such requirement. Tree replacement is the
responsibility of the permit holder. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-14: REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING STREET TREES:
Street trees shall be classified in accordance with the three (3) species size
classes listed in the Lava Hot Springs approved tree list. Street trees shall
not be planted closer together than the following: a) small trees, twenty feet
(20'); b) medium trees, thirty feet (30'); and c) large trees, forty feet
(40'). No trees may be planted closer to the back side of any curb or the
nearest edge of any sidewalk than the following: a) small trees, two feet (2');
b) medium trees, three feet (3'); and c) large trees, four feet (4'). All
distances shall be measured from the center of the tree trunk at ground level.
(Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-15: TREES, HEDGES AND SHRUBS OVERHANGING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All owners or persons in control of private real property upon which a street
tree, hedge or shrub is growing, shall remove or trim, at his or her expense,
all limbs or foliage which overhang or project into any public street,
sidewalk, alley or easement and which interfere with public travel or use of
such public way or easement or which do not satisfy the clear view requirements
of the zoning ordinance of the city. Street trees, hedges and shrubs shall be
trimmed from the ground level to at least twelve feet (12') above any public
street, public easement or alley, except truck thoroughfares which shall
require a clearance of sixteen feet (16'), and to at least ten feet (10') above
the curb and sidewalk. Hedges are permitted in any side or back yard to the
height of six feet (6'); provided, on a corner lot nothing shall be planted or
allowed to grow in any such manner as to materially impede vision between a
height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets bounded by the property lines of the intersecting street
of such corner lots on a line joining points along said property lines for a
distance of thirty feet (30'). No hedge along the front edge of any front yard
shall be over three feet (3') in height. All owners or persons in control of
real property within the city of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho, shall remove or trim,
at his or her expense, all trees, bushes and shrubs or other ornamental foliage
on such property which overhang or project into any public street, sidewalk,
alley or easement and which interfere with public travel or use of such public
way or easement or which do not satisfy the clear view requirements of the
zoning ordinance "clear view of intersecting streets and ways" of the city. Any
such person who falls to comply with the provisions of this section within ten
(10) days after receiving written notice from the Lava Hot Springs City Hall to
do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any trees, hedges and shrubs not
trimmed in accordance with this section may then be trimmed by the city and the
expenses therefor may be charged to the persons or property owners who fail to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. If a person fails to reimburse the
city for the cost incurred within thirty (30) days after notice, the cost
incurred by the city shall become an obligation owing the city against the
property of the owner and assessed against the property in accordance with
sections 50-334 and 50-1008, Idaho Code. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-16: ABUSE OF PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   Unless authorized by an appropriate public officer, it shall be
unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any public tree;
      2.   Permit any animal under his control to injure any public tree or
shrub;
      3.   Permit any fire to injure any portion of any public tree or shrub;
      4.   Cause any toxic chemical to be applied to, seep, drain or be emptied
on or about any public tree or shrub;
      5.   Attach any device or structure to or on public trees, in a manner
which harms or which may potentially harm a public tree;
      6.   Injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or ornamental plant growing,
standing or being on public property;
      7.   Make or cause excavations in the soil near roots of public trees
unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent exposed soil from drying out;
      8.   Damage the roots of a public tree by compacting or filling on or
around the base of the tree;
      9.   Top, prune or trim any public tree, except in accordance with the
provisions of ANSI A300;
      10.   Remove any public or street tree and fail to plant a replacement
tree. The replacement tree shall be an approved variety from the city of Lava
Hot Springs master list of public trees and shall be a minimum of a ten (10)
gallon size specimen. Where utility lines are present, a class I type tree
(mature height not greater than 20 feet), shall be required. A replacement tree
shall be planted within thirty (30) days of removal of said tree, or as soon as
weather conditions allow.
   B.   Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit the pruning, removal,
treatment, care or maintenance of any public tree or shrub, provided such work
complies with the provisions of ANSI A300. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-17: STREET TREE CARE:
The city of Lava Hot Springs shall have the right to remove, trim, destroy and
control all street trees which are planted, grown or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this chapter. The city of Lava Hot Springs shall have the
right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street trees within the lines of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-18: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prune or top any public tree, except in
accordance with ANSI A300. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-19: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   The city hereby declares the following actions, practices or objects to
be a public nuisance:
      1.   Any living or standing private or public elm tree or part thereof
infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Marsham) or
Hylurgopinus rufipes (Eichhoff).
      2.   Any public or private dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs,
branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material not buried, burned, sprayed
with an effective elm bark beetle destroying insecticide, or from which the
bark has not been removed.
      3.   The cultivation, maintenance or allowing to grow of any private or
public tree which harbors any insect, disease or infestation by any living
creature which poses a threat to the health or safety of any other public or
private tree within the city or which poses a health or safety threat to any
person or property.
      4.   Any public or private tree infested by any insect, pest or disease
which is determined by the city forester to pose a threat to the health of any
other public or private tree.
      5.   Any public or private tree, the roots of which are growing beneath a
public sidewalk and which cause a public hazard to the safe and efficient
pedestrian travel upon such sidewalk.
      6.   Any public tree planted, growing or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any person who fails to commence the abatement of any nuisance within
ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the city, or who fails to
diligently prosecute and complete the abatement of such nuisance within a
reasonable time after the delivery of such notice, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Such notice shall be delivered to the owner or person in control
of any property upon which such nuisance shall exist. Notice shall be deemed
complete upon its deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified
mail, return receipt request, addressed to the last known address of such owner
or person.
   C.   In the event any owner or person in control of private real property
fails to abate such nuisance in accordance with the time frame set forth above,
then the city may prevent, remove or abate such nuisance at the expense of such
owner or person and may levy a special assessment against the property upon
which such nuisance is located, in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code
section 50-334. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-20: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as
otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace such tree
with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless otherwise
determined by the tree committee. The value of a tree shall be determined by
the city forestry advisor in accordance with accepted plant appraisal methods
set forth in the ninth edition of the "Guide For Plant Appraisal" published by
the International Society Of Arboriculture or the same as amended from time to
time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if
the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be
removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city of Lava Hot Springs equal
to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree
(s). Any public tree that is determined by the city forestry advisor to be
damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be
devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city by the person
causing the damage. Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established
for that purpose and restricted to use for community forestry programs. Nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the city of Lava Hot Springs from negotiating
agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and
compensatory payment for removal, damage or destruction of public trees. (Ord.
2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-21: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE COMMITTEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city forester, or his or her agents while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park
trees, or trees on public property, as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-
10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-22: ADOPTION OF ANSI A300 AND ANSI Z133.1:
There is hereby adopted as an official code for the maintenance of trees,
shrubs and other woody plants that certain standard maintenance practice as
published in ANSI standard A300 (part 1) - 2001, as published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001, as amended.
There is also hereby adopted as an official code, that certain safety standard
for planting and maintenance of trees in proximity to utility lines, known as
ANSI Z133.1 as published by the American National Standards Institute, Inc.,
May 22, 2001 edition, as amended. One copy of such codes shall be filed with
and maintained in the office of the city clerk, for use and examination by the
public. Amendments to said codes shall be automatically adopted by the city and
shall be in effect on January 1 of the year following adoption. (Ord. 2015-10,
12-10-2015)
8-2-23: APPEAL PROCESS:
All actions taken by the city to which a person affected by the action
disagrees are appealable to the mayor and city council, provided the applicant,
or their representative, exercises that right with a written appeal filed with
the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the action is taken by the city.
Failure to file an appeal within the prescribed time limit shall terminate the
right to appeal any action taken by the city. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-24: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall consider input from the citizens as well as the tree
committee and make the final decision. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
8-2-25: PENALTY:
Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by confinement in the county jail for a period not to exceed six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Said penalty or penalties
shall be in addition to any special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-10, 12-10-2015)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Consistency
9-1-4: Applicability
9-1-5: Permits Required
9-1-6: Conflicting Provisions
9-1-7: Severability Of Provisions
9-1-8: Definitions
9-1-9: Codes Adopted
9-1-10: Amendments To Building Code
9-1-11: Amendments To Residential Code
9-1-12: Amendments To Energy Conservation Code
9-1-13: Manufactured Homes
9-1-14: Fees
9-1-15: Moved Buildings And Structures
9-1-16: Electrical Connections
9-1-17: Driveway And Private Road Requirements
9-1-18: Appeals
9-1-19: Enforcement And Penalties
9-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE OF CITY OF
LAVA HOT SPRINGS, IDAHO. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be as follows:
   A.   To promote and protect the health, safety, comfort and general welfare
of the public.
   B.   To provide protection against fire, earthquake damage, hazardous
structures, and other manmade hazards.
   C.   To preserve and enhance the value of land and buildings throughout the
city. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-3: CONSISTENCY:
It is the intent of city of Lava Hot Springs that this chapter shall be
consistent with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance and other ordinances and policies
of city of Lava Hot Springs, and with any supplemental building, land use, and
community development policies which may be adopted by the city council of city
of Lava Hot Springs. Additionally, it is the intent of the city council that
all amendments to this chapter shall maintain and enhance the consistency with
the above named ordinances. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the corporate limits of the
city of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho. The erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings upon the land
shall conform to all regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-
2016)
9-1-5: PERMITS REQUIRED:
The building official or his or her designee may grant building permits, in
accordance with this chapter. No work, including site preparation, excavation
or development of driveway approach may be commenced and no buildings may be
demolished, constructed, moved or placed prior to obtaining a permit. No permit
shall be granted unless the work applied for is in conformance with the codes
set forth herein. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-6: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not
the intent of these regulations to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. When such regulations
impose a greater restriction or standard upon buildings or land than are
imposed or required by this or other ordinances, rules, regulations or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of the more restrictive
regulations shall control. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-7: SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the
remaining portions of these regulations, it being hereby expressly declared
that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase
hereof would have been prepared, proposed, adopted, approved and ratified
irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord.
2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-8: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: An individual appointed by the building official to inspect
buildings under construction, approve construction, and authorize occupancy as
long as zoning regulations are in compliance.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: An individual appointed by the city council to administer
this chapter, among other duties.
CITY COUNCIL: City council of city of Lava Hot Springs.
DRIVEWAY: A vehicular ingress and egress route that serves no more than two (2)
buildings or structures, not including accessory structures or more than five
(5) dwelling units. Driveways over one hundred fifty feet (150') are fire
apparatus access roads.
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD: A road, including a public road, private road, and
a driveway, that provides fire apparatus access from a fire station to a
facility, building, or portion of building.
PRIVATE ROAD: A vehicular travelway that is privately owned and privately
maintained and serves three (3) or more buildings or structures.
PUBLIC ROAD: A vehicular travelway that is publicly owned and publicly
maintained such as a highway. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-9: CODES ADOPTED:
Those certain documents, one copy of which are on file and are open for
inspection to the public in the office of the clerk of city of Lava Hot
Springs, being marked and designated as the following:
   A. The 2018 edition of the international building code (IBC),
   B.   The 2018 edition of the international residential code (IRC) for one-
and two-family dwellings, parts I through IV and IX,
   C.   The 2018 edition of the international energy conservation code (IECC),
   D.   The 2018 edition of the international fire code,
   E.   The 2018 edition of the international existing building code,
   F.   1997 uniform abatement of dangerous building code,
   G.   May 2015 Portneuf Valley Stormwater Design Manual Including the Errata
Sheet Dated June 23, 2015 (Note: the 2015 PVSDM downloaded after 6/23/15
incorporates the changes contained in the Errata Sheet Dated June 23, 2015),
shall be and the same are hereby adopted providing for issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter by city of Lava Hot Springs for the
regulation of the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair,
moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area and
maintenance of all buildings or structures in the city of Lava Hot Springs,
including the installation of manufactured homes in accordance with the
provisions of title 44, chapter 22, Idaho Code and site preparation. The
adopted versions of the 2018 edition of the international building code (IBC),
2018 edition of the international residential code (IRC) for one- and two-
family dwellings, parts I through IV and IX, 2018 edition of the international
energy conservation code (IECC), 2018 edition of the international fire code
and the 2018 edition of the international existing building code shall be
deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or
approved by the Idaho building code board or Idaho department of insurance/
state fire marshal, effective on January 1 of the year following adoption by
the Idaho building code board or Idaho department of insurance/state fire
marshal. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 2-10-2022)
9-1-10: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
Additional provisions, modifications, and exceptions to the international
building code 2012 edition:
   A.   All references to the name of the jurisdiction shall be construed to
mean city of Lava Hot Springs.
   B.   All references to flood elevation requirements shall be deleted and
replaced with the flood elevation requirements established in the city of Lava
Hot Springs flood damage prevention ordinance 2009-4.
   C.   Any reference to sections 101.4 concerning electrical and 101.4.1 gas
and 101.4.2 mechanical and 101.4.3 plumbing shall be deleted, thus solely
regulated under Idaho Code 54-1001 and 54-2601.
   D.   Amend section 1612.3, Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas, inserting
July 7, 2009 in place of [Date Of Issuance].
   E.   Delete footnote F, Table 2902.1, Minimum Number Of Required Plumbing
Fixtures, and replace with the following:
      1.   Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of thirty
(30) or fewer.
   F.   Add the following footnote G, Table 2902.1, Minimum Number Of Required
Plumbing Fixtures:
      1.   For business occupancies, excluding restaurants, and mercantile
occupancies with an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer, service sinks shall
not be required.
   G.   Amend section 3412.2, Compliance Alternatives, Applicability, inserting
May 12, 2016 in place of [Date To Be Inserted By The Jurisdiction].
   H.   All appendices of the international building code, 2012 edition, are
hereby deleted except appendix D pertaining to fire district and appendix E
pertaining to building accessibility.
   I.   Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted
herein but shall remain subject to placement requirements established by zoning
regulations. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-11: AMENDMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL CODE:
Additional provisions, modifications, and exceptions to the international
residential code, 2012 edition:
   A.   All references to the name of the jurisdiction shall be construed to
mean city of Lava Hot Springs.
   B.   Delete exception no. 1 contained under IRC section R101.2 - Scope.
   C.   Delete exception no. 2 contained under IRC section R101.2 - Scope, and
replace with the following:
Owner-occupied lodging houses with five (5) or fewer guestrooms shall be
permitted to be constructed in accordance with the international residential
code for one- and two-family dwellings.
   D.   Delete item no. 2 contained under the "building" subsection of IRC
section R105.2 - Work Exempt From Permit, and replace with the following:
Fences not over six (6) feet (one thousand, eight hundred twenty-nine (1,829)
mm) high may be exempted from the requirement for a building permit in the
absence of any other applicable land use regulations governing the
installation, height, type or other aspect.
   E.   Delete item no. 7 contained under the "building" subsection of IRC
section R105.2 - Work Exempt From Permit, and replace with the following:
Prefabricated swimming pools that are not greater than four (4) feet (one
thousand, two hundred nineteen (1219) mm) deep.
   F.   Add the following item no. 11 at the end of the "building" subsection
of IRC section R105.2 - Work Exempt From Permit:
Flag poles.
   G.   Delete IRC section R109.1.3, Floodplain Inspections, and replace with
the following:
Floodplain Inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as
established by table R301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor, including
basement, the building official is authorized to require submission of
documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement,
required in section R322.
   H.   For purposes of table R301.2(1), the following climatic and geographic
design criteria shall be used:
 
Ground                      Wind  Seismic  Subject To Damage From
Snow Load                   Speed Design              Frost
(lbs.)                      (mph) Category Weathering Line      Termite  Decay
                                                      Depth
Converted to roof live load
as determined by elevation  90    D1       Severe     36 inches Slight/  None/
(feet) at site. See section                                     moderate slight
I below.
 
 
Winter      Ice Shield                                    Air      Mean
Design Temp Underlayment Flood Hazards                    Freezing Annual Temp
            Required                                      Index
                         a) 8/1/1979, as amended 7/7/2009
7131 HDD    Yes          b) Lava Hot Springs FIRM panel   2000     45 degrees F
                         number 16005C-0657D
 
   I.   Roof Live Loads (Snow Loads): All newly built or placed structures
shall have roofs which can sustain live loads according to the elevation of its
site. The roof live snow load requirement in the city of Lava Hot Springs is 50
pounds.
   J.   Wind Loads: Structures in Bannock County are to be designed and
constructed to 90 mph 3 second gust standard.
   K.   Table R302.1 Exterior Walls: Delete the figures contained in the last
column of the table under the heading Minimum Fire Separation Distance for the
"Walls" and "Projections" elements, and replace with the following:
Minimum Fire Separation Distance: Walls (fire-resistance rated) < three (3)
feet; Walls (not fire-resistance rated) three (3) feet; Projections (fire-
resistance rated) < three (3) feet; Projections (not fire-resistance rated)
three (3) feet.
   L.   The exception to IRC section R302.2 Townhouses is deleted and replaced
with the following:
Exception: A common one-hour or two-hour fire resistance rated wall assembly
tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if
such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in
the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from
both sides and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior walls and the
underside of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall
be in accordance with section R302.4.
   M.   Delete IRC section R303.4, Mechanical Ventilation.
   N.   The exception to IRC section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler
Systems is deleted and replaced with the following:
Exception: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required
in townhouses where a two-hour fire- resistance rated wall is installed between
dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses
that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
   O.   Delete IRC section R313.2, One- And Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire
Systems.
   P.   Add the following to IRC section R315.3 - Where Required In Existing
Dwellings:
Exceptions: 1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as, but
not limited to, replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or
replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck or
electrical permits, are exempt from the requirements of this section; and 2.
Installation, alteration or repairs of non-combustion plumbing or mechanical
systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
   Q.   Delete IRC section R322.1.10, As-Built Elevation Documentation.
   R.   Delete IRC section R322.2.2 paragraph 2.2, and replace with the
following:
2.2 The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch
(645 mm2) for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area, or the opening
shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that
the design and installation of the openings will provide for equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
   S.   Delete IRC section R403.1.3.1, Foundations With Stem Walls, and replace
with the following:
Footings with stem walls shall have installed a minimum of one no. 4 bar within
12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the wall and two no. 4 bars located 3 inches
(76 mm) to 4 inches (102 mm) from the bottom of the footing.
   T.   Replace all references to concrete foundation walls with a requirement
for rebar consisting of 1/2 inch (#4 bar) to be installed a maximum of 24
inches on center, in both horizontal and vertical positions for concrete walls
greater than four (4) feet and less than ten (10) feet tall and eight (8)
inches in width. Exception: When in the opinion of the building official
conditions exist that make the use of the material required under this
subsection impractical, engineered foundation components may be required.
   U.   Delete IRC section R501.3, Fire Protection Of Floors, and its
exceptions.
   V.   Delete IRC section R602.10, Wall Bracing, and replace with the
following:
Wall Bracing. Buildings shall be braced in accordance with this section or,
when applicable section R602.12, or the most current edition of APA system
report SR-102 as an alternate method. Where a building, or portion thereof,
does not comply with one (1) or more of the bracing requirements in this
section, those portions shall be designated and constructed in accordance with
section R301.1.
   W.   Delete IRC section N1102.4.3, Fireplaces and replace with the
following:
New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight-fitting flue dampers and outdoor
combustion air.
   X.   Chapter 11 [RE] Energy Efficiency - The following sections and tables
of chapter 11 shall be amended in accordance with the requirements contained
below in subsection 004.04 of these rules which correspond to the appropriate
section:
         i.   Table N1102.1.1 (table R402.1.1) - Insulation And Fenestration
Requirements By Component;
         ii.   Table N1102.1.3 (table R402.1.3) - Equivalent U-Factors;
         iii.   Table N1102.2.6 (table R402.2.6) - Steel-Frame Ceiling, Wall
And Floor Insulation (R-Value);
         iv.   Section N1102.4.1 (R402.4.1) - Building Thermal Envelope;
         v.   Section N1102.4.1.1 (R402.4.1.1) - Insulation;
         vi.   Table N1102.4.1.1 (table R402.4.1.1) - Air Barrier And
Insulation Installation;
         vii.   Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) - Testing Option;
         viii.   Add section N1102.4.1.3 (R402.4.1.3) - Visual Inspection
Option;
         ix.   Add section N1102.6 (R402.6) - Residential Log Home Thermal
Envelope;
         x.   Add table N1102.6 (table R402.6) - Log Home Prescriptive Thermal
Envelope Requirements By Component; and
         xi.   Section N1104.1 (R404.1) - Lighting Equipment.
   Y.   All electrical and plumbing requirements of chapters 25 through 42
shall be deleted, thus solely regulated under Idaho Code 54-1001 and 54-2601.
   Z.   All appendices of the international residential code, 2012 edition, are
hereby deleted except appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs and
appendix M, Home Day Care - R3 Occupancy.
(Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-12: AMENDMENTS TO ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
Additional provisions, modifications, and exceptions to the international
energy conservation code, 2012 edition:
   A.   All references to the name of the jurisdiction shall be construed to
mean Bannock County.
   B.   Delete section 108.4 Failure To Comply and replace with the following:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, may be liable to a fine as set forth in section
1200 of the energy conservation code.
   C.   Delete the values contained in table R402.1.1 (table N1102.1.1) for
climate zone "5 and marine 4" and climate zone "6" and replace with the
following:
   TABLE R402.1.1
   INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
 
                                                   Wood  Mass
Climate Fenestration Skylight Glazed       Ceiling Frame Wall  Floor Basement Slab  Crawlspace
Zone    U-Factor     U-Factor Fenestration R-Value Wall  R-    R-    Wall     R-    Wall
                              SHGC                 R-    Value Value R-Value  Value R-Value
                                                   Value
5 and                                              20 or                      10.2
marine  0.35         0.60     NR           38      13+5h 13/17 30g   10/13    ft    10/13
4
6       0.35         0.60     NR           49      20 or 15/19 30g   15/19    10.4  10/13
                                                   13+5h                      ft
 
   D.   Add the following footnote to the title of Table 402.1.1 - Insulation
And Fenestration Requirements By Component:
         k.   For residential log home building thermal envelope construction
requirements see section 402.6.
   E.   Delete the values contained in table R402.1.3 (table N1102.1.3) for
climate zone "5 and marine 4" and climate zone "6" and replace with the
following:
   TABLE R402.1.3
   EQUIVALENT U-FACTORS
 
                                      Wood
Climate Fenestration Skylight Ceiling Frame Mass    Floor   Basement Crawlspace
Zone    U-factor     U-factor R-Value Wall  Wall    R-Value Wall     Wall
                                      R-    R-Value         R-Value  R-Value
                                      Value
5 and
marine  0.35         0.60     0.030   0.057 0.082   0.033   0.059    0.065
4
6       0.35         0.60     0.026   0.057 0.060   0.033   0.050    0.065
 
   F.   Delete table R402.2.6 (table N1102.2.6) and replace with the following:
      TABLE R402.2.6
      STEEL-FRAME CEILING, WALL AND FLOOR INSULATION (R-VALUE)
Wood Frame          Cold-Formed Steel
R-Value Requirement Equivalent R-Value (a)
Wood Frame          Cold-Formed Steel
R-Value Requirement Equivalent R-Value (a)
                   Steel Truss Ceiling
   R-30          R-38 or R-30 + 3 or R-26 + 5
   R-38          R-49 or R-38 + 3
   R-49          R-38 + 5
                   Steel Joist Ceilings
   R-30          R-38 in 2x4 or 2x6 or 2x8 R-49 in any framing
   R-38          R-49 in 2x4 or 2x6 or 2x8 or 2x10
                   Steel Framed Wall
   R-13          R-13 + 5 or R-15 +4 or R-21 + 3 or R-0 +10
   R-19          R-13 + 9 or R-19 + 8 or R-25 +7
   R-21          R-13 + 10 or R-19 + 9 or R-25 +8
                   Steel Joist Floor
                   R-19 in 2x6
R-13                R-19 +6in 2x8 or 2x10
   R-19          R-19 +6in 2x6
                    R-19 + 12in 2x8 or 2x10
(a) Cavity insulation R-value is listed first, followed by continuous
insulation R-value.
(b) Insulation exceeding the height of the framing shall cover the framing.
 
   G.   Delete section 402.4.1 (N1102.4.1) and replace with the following:
Building Thermal Envelope. The building thermal envelope shall comply with
sections R402.1.1 and either section R402.4.1.2 or R402.4.1.3. The sealing
methods between dissimilar materials shall allow for differential expansion and
contraction.
   H.   Delete section 402.4.1.1 (N1102.4.1.1) and replace with the following:
Installation. The components of the building thermal envelope as listed in
table R402.4.1.1 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and the criteria listed in table R402.4.1.1, as applicable to the
method of construction.
   I.   Delete the criteria requirement for the "fireplace" component of Table
R402.4.1.1 (table N1102.4.1.1) - Air Barrier And Insulation Installation, and
replace with the following:
An air barrier shall be installed on fireplace walls.
   J.   Delete section 402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) and replace with the following:
Testing Option. Building envelope tightness and insulation installation shall
be considered acceptable when tested air leakage is less than seven (7) air
changes per hour (ACH) when tested with a blower door at a pressure of 33.5 psf
(50 Pa). Testing shall occur after rough in and after installation of
penetrations of the building envelope, including penetrations for utilities,
plumbing, electrical, ventilation and combustion appliances. During testing:
         i.   Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be
closed, but not sealed;
         ii.   Dampers shall be closed, but not sealed, including exhaust,
intake, makeup air, backdraft and flue dampers;
         iii.   Interior doors shall be open;
         iv.   Exterior openings for continuous ventilation systems and heat
recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed;
         v.   Heating and cooling system(s) shall be turned off;
         vi.   HVAC ducts shall not be sealed; and
         vii.   Supply and return registers shall not be sealed.
   K.   Add the following as section 402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3):
Visual Inspection Option. Building envelope tightness and insulation
installation shall be considered acceptable when the items listed in table
402.4.1.1, applicable to the method of construction, are field verified. Where
required by code official an approved party independent from the installer of
the insulation shall inspect the air barrier and insulation.
   L.   Delete section 402.4.3 and replace with the following:
Fireplaces. New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight- fitting flue dampers
and outdoor combustion air.
   M.   Add the following section:
R402.6 (N1102.6) Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope.
Residential log home construction shall comply with sections 401 (General),
402.4 (Air Leakage), 402.5 (Maximum Fenestration U-Factor And SHGC), 403.1
(Controls), 403.2.2 (Sealing), 403.2.3 (Building Cavities), sections 403.3
through 403.9 (referred to as the mandatory provisions), section 404
(Electrical Power And Lighting Systems), and either subparagraph 004.04.b.i.,
ii., or iii. as follows:
         i.   Sections 402.2 through 402.3, 403.2.1, 404.1 and table 402.6;
         ii.   Section 405 Simulated Performance Alternative (Performance); or
         iii.   REScheck (U.S. department of energy building codes program).
   N.   Add Table R402.6 (table N1102.6) Log Home Prescriptive Thermal Envelope
Requirements By Component to be used only in accordance with subparagraph
004.04.b.i. above to appear as follows:
   TABLE R402.6
   LOG HOME PRESCRIPTIVE THERMAL ENVELOPE REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
 
                                                   Min.                   Slab
                              Glazed               Average Floor Basement R-    Crawlspace
Climate Fenestration Skylight Fenestration Ceiling Log     R-    Wall     Value Wall R-
Zone    U-Factor (a) U-Factor SHGC         R-Value Size In Value R-Value  &     Value(d)
                                                   Inches                 Depth
                                                                          (b)
5, 6-   0.32         0.60     NR           49      5       30    15/19    10, 4 10/13
high                                                                      ft
5       0.32         0.60     NR           49      8       30    10/13    10, 2 10/13
                                                                          ft
6       0.30         0.60     NR           49      8       30    15/19    10, 4 10/13
                                                                          ft
a. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all
glazed fenestration.
b. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
c. 90% AFUE natural gas or propane, 84% AFUE oil, or 15 SEER heat pump heating equipment
(zonal electric resistance heating equipment such as electric base board electric
resistance heating equipment as the sole source for heating is considered compliant with
the high efficiency equipment path).
d. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the
home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall. "15/19" shall be
permitted to be met with R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus
R-5 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home. "10/13" means
R-10 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity
insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
 
   O.   Delete section R404.1 (N1104.1) and replace with the following:
Lighting Equipment (Mandatory). A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the lamps
in permanently installed lighting fixtures shall be high-efficacy lamps or a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the permanently installed lighting fixtures
shall contain only high efficacy lamps.
(Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-13: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes as defined by Idaho state law and inspected by the
department of housing and urban development (HUD), shall not be subject to the
enforcement provisions of the aforesaid building codes, but shall be regulated
and inspected as prescribed in title 44, chapter 22 of the Idaho Code. The
owner, or an agent of the owner, must apply for and receive an installation
permit prior to placing any manufactured home on their property. All additions
or alterations to any manufactured home must comply with all building code
requirements. The building official or appointed representative is hereby
authorized to permit, inspect and collect fees, as established by the governing
body, for manufactured homes placed in Bannock County. Mobile or manufactured
homes not bearing a HUD certification label shall not be allowed except as
provided for by title 44, chapter 25 of Idaho Code. Permitted manufactured
homes shall be installed on permanent foundations as specified in the Idaho
manufactured home installation standard, current edition and as specified in
the city of Lava Hot Springs flood damage prevention ordinance. (Ord. 2016-2,
5-12-2016)
9-1-14: FEES:
The city council of the city of Lava Hot Springs may establish fees for the
issuance of building permits, plan reviews, inspections, and other such fees as
may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-
12-2016)
9-1-15: MOVED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A permit must be secured prior to moving or placing any building or structure
in the city of Lava Hot Springs. All moved buildings or structures shall be
brought to current code requirements when placed in the city. An approved
agreement with the city to ensure that the building or structure to be
relocated will be properly transported, anchored and finished in compliance
with this and all relevant city ordinances and codes is required and may, at
the discretion of the building official, include the posting of a bond.
   A.   Bonding Requirements: Bond, approved by the city council, must be
posted prior to moving any building or structure in the city of Lava Hot
Springs. The bond must be sufficient to ensure that the building or structure
to be relocated will comply with this and all relevant city ordinances and
codes. The bonding amount shall be sufficient to include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      1.   Footing and foundation work.
      2.   Site preparation.
      3.   Stairs and porches.
      4.   Emergency ingress, egress (e.g., window sizes).
      5.   Smoke detectors.
      6.   Structural repairs and changes to comply with codes.
      7.   Safety requirements.
      8.   Rehabilitation of the site from which the building is removed.
      9.   Other requirements as specified in the building code.
   B.   Completion Time: The work as noted above shall be completed within nine
(9) months from the date the bond is accepted. If the work is not completed
within the time established, the city shall give written notice of violation by
certified mail. The applicant shall then have thirty (30) days from receipt of
said notice to complete the work. If the work is not completed at the end of
the thirty (30) days, then the city will be authorized to have the work
completed and the expenses incurred are to be paid from the bond. Any
additional costs for improvements as noted on the building permit plans may be
assessed against the property. Any unused fees shall be returned with
statements of billings to the applicant. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-16: ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No owner of property located in, or resident of the city of Lava Hot
Springs, or person acting on behalf of said property owner or resident may
apply for or use electrical service in any structure situated in the city of
Lava Hot Springs without first securing a building permit for the construction
or placement of the structure.
   B.   No person, firm or corporation shall furnish electrical service, power
or energy to any structure in the city of Lava Hot Springs without securing
verification of the building permit for the structure to which electrical
service is to be furnished.
   C.   The word "structure" as used in this section shall mean:
      1.   Any building to which electrical service has not been previously
furnished.
      2.   Any mobile home to which electrical service has not been previously
furnished at the present site of such mobile home.
   D.   In the instance that the building official determines that a structure
is exempt from the requirements of the international building code and
therefore, no building permit is required, a zoning certificate from the city
of Lava Hot Springs shall be issued. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-17: DRIVEWAY AND PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS:
An occupancy certificate will not be issued for any new building or structure
until the travelway to the building or structure including the driveway and
private road connecting the building or structure to the public road meets the
2012 edition of the international fire code, chapter 5 provisions. (Ord. 2016-
2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-18: APPEALS:
The decision of the building official may be appealed to the city council, as
set forth in the building code by writing a letter to the building official.
The letter must state the cause for appeal and be received by the office of
planning and development services within fourteen (14) days of the decision to
be appealed. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
9-1-19: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
The building official or his or her designee shall be the enforcement officer
of this chapter.
   A.   Enforcement As A Misdemeanor: Any person, firm, or corporation who
fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day on which the
violation occurs may be deemed a separate offense.
   B.   Civil Enforcement: Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at
law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a
violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises;
and these remedies may be in place of the other penalties described in this
section. (Ord. 2016-2, 5-12-2016)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Permit Required
9-2-2: Submittal Of Plans Required
9-2-3: Plan Specifications
9-2-4: Fees
9-2-5: Indemnification
9-2-6: Penalty
9-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair or remodel, wire or
rewire any building or structure or install any heating plant in any building
without first obtaining a permit therefor, signed by the City Building Official
or the designee of the Mayor, and upon its completion approved by the City
Building Official or the designee of the Mayor.
(Ord. 1948-1, 6-7-1948; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2024-003, 7-11-2024)
9-2-2: SUBMITTAL OF PLANS REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to construct any new building or to repair or to remodel
any existing building within the corporate limits of the city must submit
written plans and specifications relating to such construction, or repair work,
or remodeling, to the city council showing in detail the manner of construction
or the repair work planned, together with the plans for wiring such structures
or the repair thereof, and the plans for heating such building. (Ord. 1948-1,
6-7-1948; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-3: PLAN SPECIFICATIONS:
All plans for the construction or the repair or the remodeling, wiring, or for
heating of any structure, within the city limits, shall show plans for such
building, remodeling, wiring or heating, or repair work, and be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted good practices for such purposes including a
description of the quality of the material to be used, and that the provisions
of the building code as adopted in section
9-1-1 of this title shall be deemed to be the generally accepted good practices
for such building construction, repair work, remodeling, wiring, or heating.
(Ord. 1948-1, 6-7-1948; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-4: FEES:
   Permit and inspection fees shall be paid by all applicants, which fees shall
be established and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council.
Such resolution is on file with, and may be reviewed at, the city hall located
at 115 West Elm, Lava Hot Springs, Idaho.
(Ord. 2003-1, 1-9-2003)
9-2-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
   Any person authorized to construct, repair or remodel, wire, or heat any
building or structure shall enter into an agreement with the city council
agreeing to hold the city harmless from any damages that may result to any
person whomsoever from such construction, repair or remodeling. At the
completion of such work, it shall be approved by the city council by resolution
entered in the minutes of the board.
(Ord. 1948-1, 6-7-1948; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-6: PENALTY:
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 1948-1, 6-7-1948; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ADDRESSING SYSTEM 1
SECTION:
9-3-1: Addressing Map
9-3-2: Numbering System
9-3-3: Posting Of Designated Street Address
9-3-4: Numbers For Future Buildings
9-3-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-138.
9-3-1: ADDRESSING MAP:
The addressing map entitled "Address Map" is hereby adopted as the official
addressing map of the city and all addresses shall be assigned in accordance
with this addressing map. No other numbers shall be used or displayed in the
city except numbers assigned in accordance with the official address map. The
address map shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
(Ord. 1990-5, 7-12-1990)
9-3-2: NUMBERING SYSTEM:
   A.   Axis Designated: On the addressing map, Center Street is hereby
designated as the north-south axis and Main Street is hereby designated as the
east-west axis.
   B.   North-South Streets: Odd numbers shall be assigned to the west side of
the street on all north-south streets and even numbers to the east side.
   C.   East-West Streets: On east-west streets, odd numbers shall be assigned
to the south side of the street and even numbers to the north side. (Ord. 1990-
5, 7-12-1990)
9-3-3: POSTING OF DESIGNATED STREET ADDRESS:
   A.   Notice Of Designation: The owner, occupant or person in charge of any
house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified, in
writing, by the city of the number assigned to the same at any time after the
adoption of this chapter.
   B.   Duty To Affix Numbers: Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of
such written notification from the city, the owner, occupant or person in
charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix
the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place near the main
entrance of the building in such a manner that it can be seen from the street.
   C.   Removal Of Different Numbers: It shall be the duty of such owner,
occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing the new number to remove any
different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number
assigned to said structure by the city.
   D.   Principal Building; Multiple Uses: Each principal building shall
display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is
located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or
family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance shall display a separate
number.
   E.   Numerals: Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal
building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as
to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is
located.
   F.   Specifications: The numbers must be easily legible figures not less
than four inches (4") high and should contrast with the building background.
(Ord. 1990-5, 7-12-1990)
9-3-4: NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS:
All residence and business buildings erected after the adoption hereof shall be
assigned a number in accordance with the addressing map and shall purchase and
display such number as provided in section
9-3-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1990-5, 7-12-1990)
9-3-5: PENALTY:
In the event that the owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or
building refuses to comply with the terms of this chapter by failing to affix
the number assigned within thirty (30) days after notification, or by failing
within said period of (30) days to remove any old numbers affixed to such
house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number
assigned thereto, they shall be found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter and shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1990-5, 7-12-1990; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Short Title
9-4-2: Purpose
9-4-3: Scope
9-4-4: Definitions
9-4-5: Permit Required
9-4-6: Impairment Of Traffic And Rights Of Way
9-4-7: Construction And Design
9-4-8: Abandoned Signs
9-4-9: Temporary Signs
9-4-10: Penalty
9-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the LAVA HOT SPRINGS SIGN CODE.
(Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994)
9-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by regulating existing and proposed signage. It is intended to
protect and enhance the physical appearance of the community, reserve the
scenic and natural beauty, provide an enjoyable and pleasing community, protect
property values, and create an attractive economic and business climate. It is
further intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions
that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may contribute to
traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or
projecting over the public right of way, provide more open space, and curb the
deterioration of natural beauty and the community environment. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-
14-1994)
9-4-3: SCOPE:
The regulations of this chapter shall govern and control the erection,
enlargement, expansion, alteration and relocation of any sign, symbol, marking
and advertising device within the city which is visible from any street,
sidewalk, or public or private open space. These regulations shall also govern
the removal of signs determined to be physically unsafe or which create a
safety hazard to the public. The regulations of this chapter shall be in
addition to any applicable provisions of the international building and sign
codes regarding the construction and maintenance of signs. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-
1994; amd. Ord. 2003-3, 3-13-2003)
9-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are adopted in addition to the definitions in the
international building code, as amended herein:
ABANDONED SIGN ON PREMISES: A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide
business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted or product available on
the premises where such sign is displayed.
ALTER: Any repair or change to a sign other than routine maintenance, i.e.,
touchup painting or changing bulbs.
APPLICANT: An individual or licensed sign contractor in the city.
AWNING: A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is
permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position
against the building when not in use.
AWNING SIGN: A sign that is painted on or attached to an awning or otherwise
incorporated into the fabric of an awning.
BANNER: A strip of cloth, canvas, or other flexible material on which a sign is
painted and may be suspended between two (2) structures or hung on the face of
a single structure.
BILLBOARD OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: See definition of Off Premises Sign.
BUILDING CODE: The international building code in effect for the city.
BUSINESS SIGN: An advertising or business identification sign that directs
attention to a business, profession, corporation, service or entertainment sold
or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located or to which it is
attached.
CANOPY: A permanent roof like shelter extending from part or all of a building
face over a public right of way and constructed of some durable material such
as wood, metal, glass or plastic.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN: Any such sign attached to or constructed in or on a
canopy or marquee.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL): A sign on which copy or sign panels may be
changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters or
changeable pictorial panels.
CHANGING SIGN: An electronically or electrically controlled time, temperature
and date sign, message center or reader board, where different copy changes are
shown on the same location.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor,
subcontractor and/or material supplier participating in construction on the
property on which the sign is located.
COPY: The wording of a sign surface.
ERECT: To construct or allow to be constructed, but not including any activity
when performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or normal
maintenance of a sign or sign structure.
EXTERNALLY LIT SIGN: A sign structure that is illuminated with outside
fixtures, i.e., floodlights.
FACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of
displaying an advertising message.
FACE CHANGE: Reuse of an existing cabinet which does not involve changes in
structure.
FESTOON: A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels, or like material.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns,
or symbols used as a symbol of a government, restaurant, franchise, or other
entity.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole and not
attached to any building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade
or upper surface of the street curb to the highest point of said sign or
supporting frame. Elevated roadways shall not be used to measure height.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign unlawfully erected either before or after the effective
date hereof.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition includes internally and externally
lighted signs.
NEON SIGN: Any sign illuminated or outlined by tubes using electrically
stimulated neon or other gas.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign lawfully erected before the effective date hereof
which does not fully comply with the provisions of this chapter.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign that relates to or advertises products, services or
uses at, or directs persons to, a different premises from where the sign is
installed.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign calling attention to any business, product or activity
conducted or produced on the property where such sign is located, or
identifying the premises upon which such sign is located.
PAINTED WALL SIGN: A sign painted directly on the exterior wall of a building
or structure.
PENNANT: A piece of cloth, plastic, paper or other such material varying in
size, shape or design, erected as an advertising device to draw attention to
the site upon which it is located.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign other than a temporary sign.
PORTABLE SIGN: A freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to
either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to, an A-frame, T-
shape or inverted T-shape sign structures. Also includes signs on wheels or
sign capable of being moved from place to place.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and
projects from a structure or building face.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of land or
buildings located on the parcel of land or building which is being offered.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on top of
a structure or building face.
SIGN: Any material, structure, or device or part thereof, composed of lettered
or pictorial matter upon which lettered or pictorial matter is placed in such a
manner as to be viewed by persons out of doors, including sign frames,
billboards, sign boards, painted wall signs, hanging signs, illuminated signs,
pennants, festoons, banners or projecting signs including any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to
advertise or promote the interests of any person or business when the same is
placed in view of the general public.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A small scale sign which typically hangs below a canopy awning
primarily to identify a business for pedestrian traffic.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed. All devices such as
banners, pennants, flags (not intended to include flags of a nation),
searchlights, twirling or sandwich type signs and sidewalk or curb signs.
WALL SIGN: A sign painted on, attached to or erected against a wall of a
building with the face parallel to the building wall and extending not more
than one foot (1') therefrom. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994; amd. Ord. 2003-3, 3-13-
2003)
9-4-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit shall be required from the city to erect, construct, alter or move any
sign, symbol, marking and advertising device. All applications for sign permits
shall be accompanied by plans, designs, specifications or drawing stating
specifically all dimensions, animations, if any, lighting, colors and plan of
installations stating clearances and setbacks. The city council shall have the
authority to refuse or revoke a sign permit for any sign which does not comply
with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
9-4-6: IMPAIRMENT OF TRAFFIC AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as
to obstruct the free and clear vision of pedestrians and vehicular traffic or
at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, color, words, phrases
or symbols, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994)
9-4-7: CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN:
All signs shall meet the following standards:
   A.   Horizontal Clearance: The horizontal clearance between a sign and the
curb line shall not be less than two feet (2').
   B.   Projections:
      1.   A sign projecting more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from
the property line to the curb line shall not be less than fifteen feet (15')
above the ground or pavement below.
      2.   A sign projecting over the curb line shall be not less than fifteen
feet (15') above the ground or pavement below.
      3.   A sign projecting less than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from
the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet (8') above
the ground or pavement below.
   C.   Illumination: Signs with a constant source of illumination shall be
permitted for commercial uses. No flashing, blinking, or moving signs are
permitted. Spotlights or other fixtures used for the illumination of a sign
shall be placed prohibiting light or glare that constitutes a nuisance and
shall not constitute a traffic hazard. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994)
9-4-8: ABANDONED SIGNS:
Any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a
period of two (2) months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event
or purpose which no longer applies shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a
change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed
abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or
more. Any sign which, for a period of three (3) consecutive months, no longer
advertises goods, products, services or facilities available to the public
shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Abandoned signs shall be removed by the
owner of the premises on which the sign is located within seven (7) days from
the date of notice, or by the city at the owner's expense, if not removed
within the time provided. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994)
9-4-9: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
All "temporary signs" as defined in this chapter must meet the following
standards:
   A.   Projecting Over Pedestrian Or Vehicular Thoroughfare: Temporary signs
projecting into or over any pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare must obtain a
permit for the erection of such sign in accordance with the application
provision of this chapter.
   B.   Conventions Or Business Special Events: Temporary signs located on
private property to announce conventions or business special events shall be
immediately removed at the conclusion of the event unless otherwise extended,
in writing, by the city council.
   C.   Political Signs: Political signs can be placed on private property no
more than sixty (60) days before the election to which they relate and must be
removed within ten (10) days after the election. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994)
9-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1994-1, 7-14-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 10
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Scope
10-1-3: Definitions
10-1-4: Service Area And Connection Requirement
10-1-5: Description Of Service
10-1-6: Application For Service
10-1-7: Main Extensions
10-1-8: Services
10-1-9: Meters
10-1-10: Water Charges; Review And Revision Of Rates
10-1-11: Notices
10-1-12: Billing And Payments
10-1-13: Meter Error
10-1-14: Discontinuance Of Service
10-1-15: Restoration Of Service
10-1-16: Unusual Demands
10-1-17: Access To Property
10-1-18: Responsibility For Equipment
10-1-19: Fire Hydrants
10-1-20: Watering Hours
10-1-21: Suspension Of Rules
10-1-22: Easement
10-1-23: Penalties
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as RATES, RULES, AND REGULATIONS FOR THE OPERATION
OF THE WATER SYSTEM OF THE CITY OF LAVA HOT SPRINGS, BANNOCK COUNTY, IDAHO, and
may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-2: SCOPE:
The city and all customers receiving services from the city are bound by these
rules and regulations. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT: The person or persons, firm or corporation, making application for
water service from the city under the terms of these regulations.
AUTO COURT, MOTOR COURT, TRAVEL TRAILER COURT, MOTEL, HOTEL: The combination or
group of two (2) or more dwelling units occupying a building site or area under
one ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient living
accommodations.
CITY: The legally constituted municipal government of the city of Lava Hot
Springs, Bannock County, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The legally elected group of members composing the city council,
including the mayor, of the city of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho.
CUSTOMER OR USER: The owner of a residence, building, structure, or tenant of a
single-family dwelling, or tenant of a commercial business with single service
connection, who has made application and who has been accepted under the terms
of these regulations and who receives water service from the city. The term
customer or user shall not include tenants of duplexes, multi-family dwellings,
apartment houses, or commercial business buildings with two (2) or more
connections, and it shall be the owner's responsibility to apply for service
and to pay for service in such cases.
DUPLEX: A building designed, built, rented, or leased for occupancy by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING OR APARTMENT HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof which
is designed, built, rented, leased, loaned, or hired out to be occupied or
which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or
persons living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within
the premises, which shall also include townhouses or condominiums.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for or occupied by one family for
living or sleeping purposes, and having kitchen or cooking facilities.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person appointed by the city council to supervise the water
system of the city.
TRAILER HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit used or so
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets
or highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof
as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-
2004)
10-1-4: SERVICE AREA AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Service Area: The area serviced by the city shall be all that area
included within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Connection To Water System Required: Every parcel of land or premises
within the boundaries of the city improved by new construction for occupancy,
or occupied or used by any person or persons as a dwelling, or for a commercial
business, or which uses or consumes water in any manner and is located within
one thousand feet (1,000') of a city water main line, shall be connected to the
city water system. The owner or person in charge of such property shall make or
cause to be made such connection within sixty (60) days after adoption hereof.
All laying of pipe from the home or facilities to be served by the city mains
shall be properly designed and constructed in conformity with requirements
specified by the city, and shall be paid for by the applicant. The customer
shall be responsible for payment of all costs for material and labor in
installing his service line from the service connection at the water main to
his premises and thereon, except for the first thirty feet (30') of said
service line which shall be paid for by the city if the service line is located
within a city right of way. Any owner of property required to connect to the
city water system under this section shall cause the city water main to be
extended to his property line at his own cost and expense. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-
2004)
10-1-5: DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Supply:
      1.   The city will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a
continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at a reasonable
pressure and to avoid so far as reasonably possible any shortage or
interruption in delivery.
      2.   The city shall not be liable for damages resulting from the
interruption in service, reduction of service, shortage of water supply or the
lack of service. Temporary suspension of service by the city for improvements
and repairs will be necessary occasionally.
   B.   Quality: The city will exercise reasonable diligence to supply safe and
potable water at all times.
   C.   Ownership Of System: All water mains, valves, fittings, hydrants and
other appurtenances, except customer service lines, as defined in section
10-1-8A of this chapter, shall be the property of the city.
   D.   Classes Of Service: The classes of service shall be residential,
commercial, standby fire, and contract as follows:
      1.   Residential: Residential services shall consist of all services for
domestic purposes, single-family dwellings, homes, and municipal purposes.
      2.   Commercial: Commercial services shall consist of those services
where water is used for commercial services, such as businesses and multi-
family dwellings.
      3.   Standby Fire: Standby fire service shall consist of those services
where water is available or used for fire protection only.
      4.   Contract: Contract services shall consist of those services for bulk
acquisition, industrial, or independent water district purposes under contracts
authorized by the city council.
   E.   Special Contracts: When the applicant's requirements for water are
unusual or large, such as an independent water district, or necessitate
considerable special or reserve equipment or capacity, the city, by
authorization of the city council, reserves the right to make special contract,
the provisions of which are different from and have exceptions to the regularly
published water rates, rules, and regulations. This special contract shall be
in writing, signed by the applicant and approved by the city council and city
attorney and signed by the mayor and city clerk-treasurer.
   F.   Resale Of Water: Resale of water shall be permitted only under special
contract, in writing, between the city council and the persons, parties, or
corporation selling the water.
   G.   Service Preference: In case of shortage of supply, the city reserves
the right to give preferences in the manner of furnishing service to customers
and interest of the city from the standing of public convenience or necessity.
(Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-6: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Application Form: Each applicant for water service shall sign an
application form provided by the city giving the date of application, location
of premises to be served, the date applicant desires services to begin, purpose
for which services are to be used, the address for mailing of the billings, the
class and the size of the meter service and such other information as the city
may reasonably require. In signing the application, the customer agrees to
abide by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. The application is
merely a written request for service and does not bind the city to serve.
   B.   Deposits And Establishment Of Credit: At the time application for
service is made, the applicant shall establish his credit with the city.
      1.   Deposit Requirements And Establishment Of Credit: All users served
by the city water system shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a sum in
cash, the amount to be determined by resolution of the city council upon the
passage hereof and be reviewed from time to time and updated by resolution of
the council.
      2.   Deposits: At the time the deposit is given to the city, the
applicant will be given a receipt for the same. The deposit is not to be
considered as a payment on account. In the event the service is discontinued,
the deposit will be applied to the closing bill, and any amount in excess of
the closing bill will be refunded. The city will not pay interest on any
deposits.
      3.   Forfeiture Of Deposit: If an account becomes delinquent and it is
necessary to turn off the service, the deposit shall be applied to the unpaid
balance due. Water service will not be restored to that premises until all
outstanding bills due the city have been paid and the cash deposit replaced,
together with a service charge as provided in subsection 10-1-12F of this
chapter.
   C.   Application Amendments: Customers desiring a material change in the
size, character, or extent of equipment or operation which would result in a
material change in the amount of water used shall give the city written notice
of such change prior to the change, and the application for service shall be
amended. Customers desiring a change in the size, location, or number of
services shall fill out an amended application. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-7: MAIN EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Within City Limits: Water main extensions to areas within the city
limits not presently served with water shall be installed under procedures to
be established by the city council. Subdividers for newly partitioned
properties will assume all costs of main extensions with the approval of the
city council.
   B.   Locations Of Extensions: The city will make water main extensions only
on rights of way, easements, or publicly owned property. Easements or permits
secured for main extensions shall be obtained in the name of the city, along
with all rights and title to the main, at the time the service is provided to
the customers paying for the extension. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-8: SERVICES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE: That part of the piping on the customer's property
that connects the service to the customer's distribution system.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: That part of the water distribution system which
connects the meter to the main and shall normally consist of corporation stop,
service pipe, curb stop and box, meter, meter yoke, and meter box.
   B.   Ownership, Installation, And Maintenance:
      1.   The customer shall own, install, and maintain the customer service
line. All trenching and laying of the service pipe to be installed as part of
the service connection shall be performed exclusively by the applicant, at the
applicant's expense, and under such supervision of the city that the city deems
appropriate. The applicant shall use materials approved by the city. The city
shall connect the service connection to the main lines and install the meter
box, meter curb stop, and related appurtenances.
      2.   After installation of the service connection, the city shall own and
maintain the entire service connection. Maintenance shall only be performed by
authorized employees of the city.
   C.   Service Connection Charge:
      1.   Payment Required: At the time the applicant files for service where
no service previously existed, he shall submit with his application the service
connection charge for water service and sewer service. This charge is to
include a service connection fee plus the actual cost to the city to connect
the service to the main and the meter and meter housing and related
appurtenances.
      2.   Fee Established: The service connection fee (or charge) shall be
established by the city council by resolution upon passage of this ordinance
and be reviewed from time to time and updated by resolution of the city
council.
   D.   Size Of Service: The city will furnish and connect a service of five-
eighths inch (5/8") in diameter. The applicant may request another size
service, provided such requests are reasonable for the applicant's needs. In
such event, the applicant shall pay to the city the actual costs to the city
for labor, materials, and equipment, plus ten percent (10%).
   E.   Changes In Service Size: Changes in the size of a service line or
service connection requested by the customer shall be paid by the customer on
the basis of actual cost to the city for making the change, including labor,
materials, and equipment plus ten percent (10%).
   F.   Length Of Service:
      1.   Public Right Of Way: Where the main is in a public right of way, the
meter, if required, will be placed at the right of way line nearest the
property to be serviced for the standard connection fee, provided the length of
service line does not exceed the width of the right of way.
      2.   Easement Or Publicly Owned Property: Where the main is on an
easement or publicly owned property other than designated rights of way, the
services shall be installed to the boundary of the easement or public property
by the city, provided the length of service does not exceed thirty feet (30').
      3.   Length Exceeds Maximum Stated: If, in either case cited in this
subsection, the length of service line to the meter location exceeds the
maximum stated, the applicant shall pay the extra cost of the line on the basis
of actual cost to the city for labor, materials and equipment, plus ten percent
(10%).
   G.   Joint Service Connections:
      1.   The city may, at its option, serve two (2) or more premises with one
connection. On new service connections, the inside diameter of such joint lines
shall be sufficient to provide a carrying capacity of not less than the
combined capacity of individual service lines of the same size as the meters
installed.
      2.   Service extensions from an existing service to occupancies or
ownerships other than that for which the existing service was intended shall
not be permitted, nor shall separate residences be permitted to receive service
through one meter except under special considerations approved by the city
council.
   H.   Number Of Service Connections On Premises: The owner of a single parcel
of property may apply for and receive as many service connections as he and his
tenants may require, provided his application or applications meet the
requirements of the policies, rules, and regulations. However, the owner shall
be required to pay for all service connections.
   I.   Standby Fire Protection Service Connections:
      1.   Purpose: Standby fire protection connections of two inch (2") size
and larger will be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent
the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing.
Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water operated alarms shall be considered as
having such provisions. The city may require that a suitable detector check
meter be installed in the standby fire protection service connections, to which
hose lines or hydrants are connected. All piping on the customer's premises
shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the state of Idaho.
      2.   Charges For Service: Charges for standby fire protection service
shall be determined by resolution by city council upon written request for a
standby fire protection connection. No charge will be made for water used in
the standby fire protection services to extinguish accidental fires or for
routine testing of the fire protection system. The customers shall pay the full
cost of the standby protection service connection, any required detector check
meters, and any required special water meter installed for the service to the
standby connection.
      3.   Violations Of Regulations: If water is used from a standby pipe
connection service in violation of these regulations, an estimate of the amount
used will be computed by the city. The customer shall pay for the water used at
the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on the size of the
service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis of the regular
water rates.
   J.   Fire Service Connections Other Than Standby: A service having fire
protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing
through the same service connection shall be considered as an ordinary service
and metered as such. All water used through that service, regardless of its
use, will be charged at the regular rates.
   K.   Temporary Service Connections: For water service of a temporary nature,
applicants shall be required to pay in advance the estimated cost of
installation and removal of metering equipment and materials, plus a reasonable
depreciation charge for the use of equipment and material furnished by the city
the applicant shall also pay his water bill in advance and based on an estimate
of the quantity to be used, or he shall otherwise establish satisfactory
credit.
      1.   Time Limit: Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and
terminated within six (6) months after installation unless an extension of time
is granted, in writing, by the city.
      2.   Charge For Water Served: Charges for water furnished through a
temporary service connection shall be at the established rates set forth in the
current water rate schedule.
      3.   Installation Charge And Deposits: The applicant for temporary
service will be required:
         a.   To pay the city, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and
removing all facilities necessary to furnish each service.
         b.   To deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during
the entire period such temporary service may be used, or to otherwise establish
credit approved by the city.
         c.   To deposit with the utility an amount equal to the value of any
equipment loaned by the city to such applicant under the terms of subsection K4
of this section.
      4.   Responsibility For Meters And Installation: The customer shall use
all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned
facilities of the city. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost
of making repairs shall be paid by the customer and reimbursed to the city. The
city may also deduct the cost of repairs and replacement from the deposit fund
and require the customer to restore the deposit fund to its previous amount. If
the loaned materials are returned in satisfactory condition and all bills paid,
the full amount of the equipment deposit will be returned to the temporary
customer at the termination of service.
   L.   Customer's Plumbing:
      1.   Plumbing Code: The customer's plumbing, which shall include the
customer's service line and all plumbing, piping, fixtures, and other
appurtenances carrying or intended to carry water, sewer or drainage, shall
comply with the plumbing code of the state of Idaho.
      2.   Control Valves:
         a.   Customers shall install a control valve in the customer service
line, the operation of which will control the entire water supply to the
premises served. In the event a customer's service is discontinued for any
reason, a control valve must be installed, if none exists, as provided by this
section.
         b.   It shall be a violation of these rules and regulations for the
customer to operate, cause, or permit unauthorized operation of the meter stop
or any appurtenances on the service connection. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-9: METERS:
   A.   Ownership: The city will own and maintain all water meters. The city
will not pay rent or any other charge for a meter or other water facilities,
including housing and connections on a customer's premises.
   B.   Installation: Installation of water meters shall be performed only by
authorized employees of the city. All meters shall be sealed by the city at the
time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of
its authorized employees.
   C.   Size And Type Of Meter: Applicant may request and receive any size
meter regularly stocked or furnished by the city, provided the request is
reasonable and further provided that the meter is not greatly oversized or
undersized, as determined by the water superintendent. The city reserves the
right to determine the type of meter to be installed.
   D.   Location Of Meters: Meters shall normally be placed at the curb or
property lines; the meter will be installed wherever the applicant desires
within reason, but the location must be approved by the city. The meters will
not be located in driveways or other locations where damage to the meter or its
related parts may occur.
   E.   Joint Use Of Meters: The joining of several customers to take advantage
of the single minimum charges and large quantity rates shall be prohibited,
except under special contract, in writing, with the city council.
   F.   Changes In Size Or Location: If for any reason a change in the size of
a meter and service is required, the installation will be accomplished on the
basis of a new connection, and the customer's application shall be amended.
Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated
only at the customer's expense. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-10: WATER CHARGES; REVIEW AND REVISION OF RATES:
The water user charges shall be established by resolution by the council upon
the passage of this chapter. These charges shall be reviewed from time to time
and updated, by resolution of the council, to reflect actual costs of
operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing of the water system and
their facilities. Any revisions of the user charges shall be based on actual
operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing expenses and the total water
usage. Revisions due only to changes in expenses and user class shall be made
by the city. All changes in user charges applicable to this chapter shall be
computed by the methods outlined herein. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-11: NOTICES:
   A.   Notices To Customers: Notices from the city to the customer will
normally be given in writing and either mailed or delivered to him at his last
known address. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the city may notify
either by telephone or messenger.
   B.   Notices From Customer: Notices from the customer to the city shall be
given by the customer or his authorized representative, in writing, to the city
or to an agent of the city authorized to receive notices or complaints. (Ord.
2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-12: BILLING AND PAYMENTS:
   A.   Meter Readings:
      1.   Meters will be read and customers billed on the basis of the meter
reading to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      2.   The city will keep an accurate account on its books of all readings
of meters, and such account so kept shall be offered at all times, places, and
courts as prima facie evidence of the use of water service by the customer.
   B.   Rendering Of Bills:
      1.   Billing Period: All meters shall be read and bills rendered monthly.
      2.   Bills For Other Than Normal Billing Period: Opening or closing
bills, or bills that for any other reason cover a period containing ten percent
(10%) more days or ten percent (10%) fewer days than in the normal billing
period shall be prorated.
      3.   Bills For More Than One Meter: All meters supplying a customer's
premises shall be billed separately, except that where the city has for
operating purposes installed two (2) or more meters in place of one, the
reading may be combined for billing.
   C.   Disputed Bills: When a customer disputes the correctness of a bill, he
shall deposit the amount of the disputed bill at the time the complaint is
lodged, to preclude discontinuance of service pending final settlement of the
bill or bills. Subsequent bills shall be paid or placed on deposit in a similar
manner. Failure of the customer to make such a deposit shall warrant
discontinuance of service as provided under subsection F of this section.
   D.   Failure To Read Meters: In the event that it shall be impossible or
impractical to read a meter on the regular reading date, the water consumption
shall be prorated on the basis of thirty (30) days per month and the total
water consumption for billing purposes for that period shall be estimated.
   E.   Payment Of Bills: Each bill rendered shall contain the final date on
which payment is due. If the bill is not paid by that date, the account shall
be considered delinquent, unless other arrangements have been made with the
city, in writing, that specify another due date.
   F.   Delinquent Accounts:
      1.   Delinquent Notice: A reminder of account delinquency may be sent, at
the discretion of the city clerk-treasurer, to each delinquent account on or
about ten (10) days after the account becomes delinquent.
      2.   Late Charges: Ten (10) days after an account becomes delinquent,
late charges shall be assessed. Delinquent account late charge shall be
established by the council by resolution upon the passage of this chapter and
be reviewed from time to time and updated by resolution of the council.
      3.   Turnoff Notice: On or about fifteen (15) days after an account
becomes delinquent, a turnoff notice may be sent to the customer. Said notice
shall state a date on which water will be turned off if delinquent account is
not paid in full prior thereto.
      4.   Service Turnoff: On the turnoff date, the meter reader or other
agent of the city shall deliver a written notice to the customer stating that
the water service is being turned off until all delinquent amounts have been
paid. The meter reader or other agent of the city shall immediately thereafter
turn off the service. A delivery of the notice to the premises served by the
meter shall be considered a delivery to the customer.
      5.   Service Charge: In all instances where water has been turned off
because of delinquent accounts, a service charge shall be made for the
restoration of services, and replacement of cash deposit as stated in
subsection
10-1-6B of this chapter, will be required. The service charge for restoration
of delinquent accounts shall be established by the council by resolution upon
the passage of this chapter and be reviewed from time to time and updated by
resolution of the council.
   G.   Installment Payment Of Delinquent Accounts: In cases of extreme
hardship, the city shall have the discretion of renewing service to a
delinquent account upon receipt of a satisfactory installment plan for the
payment of the overdue amount. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-13: METER ERROR:
   A.   Meter Accuracy: All meters will be tested prior to installation. No
meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service which is known
to have an error in registration in excess of two percent (2%) under conditions
of normal operation.
   B.   Meter Test:
      1.   Standard Test: Meter tests will be conducted in accordance with
standards of practice established by the American Water Works Association.
      2.   On Customer Request: A customer may, giving not less than seven (7)
days' notice, request the city to test the meter servicing his premises. The
city will require the customer to deposit the testing fee. This fee shall be an
estimate of the cost of testing the meter as determined by the superintendent.
The deposit will be returned to the customer if the test reveals the meter to
over register more than two percent (2%) under the standard test conditions.
However, if the meter tests within two percent (2%) accuracy, the deposit shall
be retained by the city. Customers may, at their option, witness any meter
tests which they request, but the customer shall not interfere with the testing
procedure or the person conducting the test. All tests shall be made during
normal business hours of the city.
      3.   On City Request: If, upon comparison of past water usage, it appears
that a meter is not registering properly, the city may at its option test the
meter and adjust the charges accordingly if the meter either over registers or
under registers. No charge for meter testing will be made to the customer for
the meter test under these conditions.
   C.   Adjustments Of Bill For Meter Error:
      1.   Meter Variance: No credits or debits will be borne by the city or
the customer should the tested meter show variance high or low, from the
accuracy defined in section A of this section.
      2.   Nonregistering Meters: The city will bill the customer for water
consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be computed upon an
estimate of consumption based either upon the customer's prior use during the
same season of the year, or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other
customers receiving the same class of service during the same season and under
similar circumstances and conditions. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-14: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   On Customer Request:
      1.   Each customer about to vacate any premises supplied with water
service by the city shall give the city written notice of his intentions at
least two (2) days prior thereto, specifying the date service is to be
discontinued; otherwise, he will be responsible for all water supplied to such
premises until the city shall receive notice of such removal.
      2.   At the time specified by the customer that he expects to vacate the
premises where service is supplied or that he desires to be discontinued, the
meter will be read and a bill rendered which is payable immediately.
   B.   Nonpayment Of Bills: A customer's water service may be discontinued if
the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures listed in
subsection
10-1-12F of this chapter.
   C.   Nonpayment Of Sewer Service Or Municipal Refuse Charges: If sewer
service charges or municipal refuse collection charges of the city are not paid
when due by any person, firm, or corporation whose premises are served or who
are subject to the charges herein provided, water service provided to that
customer by the city may be discontinued because of the default in the payment
of the sewer or municipal refuse collection charges in accordance with the
provisions set forth in section
10-1-12 of this chapter.
   D.   Assessment For Delinquent Charges: As an additional alternative method
for collection of water, sewer, and garbage bills, if such rates and charges
are not paid when due by any such person, firm, or corporation, except a tenant
of a single-family dwelling or tenant of a commercial business with a single
service connection, who is the customer, the amounts so unpaid may be certified
by the city clerk-treasurer to the county assessor, and shall be by him
assessed against the premises served as provided by law and shall be collected
and paid over to the city in the same manner as other taxes are assessed,
collected, and paid over, with interest. Interest on unpaid bills shall run
from the due date thereof at a rate to be determined by the city. Such unpaid
charges may also be recovered in an action at law in the name of the city, with
interest as aforesaid.
   E.   Improper Customer Facilities:
      1.   Unsafe Facilities: The city may refuse to furnish water and may
discontinue services to any premises without prior notice where plumbing
facilities, appliances, or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe, or not
in conformity with the plumbing code of the state of Idaho.
      2.   Cross Connections: A "cross connection" is defined as any physical
connection between the city's system and another water supply. The Idaho state
health division and the U.S. environmental protection agency prohibit cross
connections. No cross connections are allowed.
      3.   Cross Connection Prohibited 1 : The city will not permit any cross
connection and will discontinue service to any persons or premises where a
cross connection exists. Service will not be restored until the cross
connection is eliminated. Customers using water from one or more sources in
addition to receiving water from the city on the same premises shall maintain
separate systems for each; and the city's water supply facilities shall be
separated from any and all other systems by an air gap of not less than one
foot (1'), or if in the ground, by not less than five feet (5').
   F.   Water Waste: Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a
customer's premises, seriously affecting the general service, the city may
discontinue service if such conditions are not corrected after due notice by
the city.
   G.   Service Detrimental To Others: The city may refuse to furnish water and
may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demands by one customer
will result in inadequate service to others.
   H.   Fraud Or Abuse: The city will refuse or discontinue service to any
premises where it is deemed necessary to protect the city from fraud or abuse.
Discontinuance of service from one or both of these causes will be made
immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the city that the condition or
conditions exist.
   I.   Unauthorized Turnon: Where water service has been discontinued for any
reason and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person,
the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. The charges
for shutting off the water at the main or removing the meter shall be computed
at actual cost to the city, plus ten percent (10%). These charges shall be
billed to the offending customer, and water shall not be furnished to the
premises or customer until such charges are paid and the city has reasonable
assurance that the violation will not reoccur.
   J.   Noncompliance With Regulations: The city may, upon five (5) days'
notice, discontinue service to a customer's premises for failure to comply with
any of the provisions of these regulations. If an emergency exists as a result
of the customer's action or failure to comply with these rules and regulations,
the city may immediately discontinue service without notice to the customer.
Notice shall be made to the customer as quickly as the emergency permits. (Ord.
2004-3, 9-23-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10-5 of this title.
10-1-15: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Nonpayment Of Bills: Restoration of service after discontinuance for
nonpayment of bills shall be made after payment of current and past due
charges, plus a service charge, and posting a deposit as hereinbefore provided.
   B.   Unsafe Facilities, Water Waste, Fraud, Abuse Or Noncompliance:
Restoration of service after discontinuance of service for unsafe facilities,
water waste, fraud, abuse, or for noncompliance with any of the policies,
rules, and regulations will only be made after the irregularity has been
corrected and the city has been assured that the irregularity will not reoccur.
The service charge as herein provided shall be in addition to any other charges
due or past due that the city may have incurred to correct the irregularity.
(Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-16: UNUSUAL DEMANDS:
   A.   Prior Arrangement Required; Cost: When an abnormally large quantity of
water is desired for filling a swimming pool, pond, or for other purposes,
arrangements must be made with the city prior to taking such water. The cost of
the water shall be at the regular user rates set by resolution of the city
council, and payment in full shall be made at the time the water is provided.
   B.   Criteria For Approval: Permission to take water in unusual quantities
will be given only if the city facilities and other consumers are not
inconvenienced. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-17: ACCESS TO PROPERTY:
All duly appointed employees of the city, under the direction of the water
superintendent, shall have free access, at all reasonable hours of the day, to
any and all parts of structures and premises in which water is or may be
delivered for the purposes of inspecting connections, the conditions of
conduits and fixtures, and the manner and extent in which the water is being
used or being delivered. The city does not, however, assume the duty of
inspecting the customer's service line, plumbing, and equipment, and shall not
be responsible therefor. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-18: RESPONSIBILITY FOR EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Responsibility For Customer Equipment: The city shall not be liable for
any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the
customer's line, plumbing, or equipment; nor shall the city be liable for loss
or damage due to interruption of service or temporary changes in pressure. The
customer shall be responsible for valves on his premises being turned off when
the water service is turned on.
   B.   Responsibility For City Equipment: City equipment on the customer's
premises remains the property of the city and may be repaired, replaced, or
removed by the city employees at any time without consent of the customer. No
payment will be made to the property owner for the right to install, maintain,
replace, or remove city equipment on his premises. The property owner must keep
vicious dogs or other animals secured or confined to avoid interference with
the utility operations and maintenance.
   C.   Damage To City Equipment: The customer shall be liable for any damage
to equipment owned by the city which is caused by an act of the customer, his
tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permittees. Damage to
equipment shall include, but not be limited to, breaking of seals and locks,
tampering with meters, injury to meters, including, but not limited to, damages
by hot water, steam, and damaged meter boxes, curb stops, meter stops, and
other appurtenances. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-19: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Operation: No person or persons other than those designated and
authorized by the city shall open any fire hydrant belonging to the city,
attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or tamper with it. Any
violation of this regulation will be prosecuted according to law. No tool other
than special hydrant wrenches shall be used to operate a hydrant valve. In
cases where a temporary service has been granted and water received through a
fire hydrant, an auxiliary external valve will be provided to control the flow
of water.
   B.   Moving Fire Hydrant: When a fire hydrant has been installed in the
locations specified by the proper authority, the city has fulfilled its
obligation. If a property owner or other party desires to change the size,
type, or location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes. Any
changes in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the city and the
fire department. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-20: WATERING HOURS:
   A.   Findings: The city council hereby finds: 1) that the city has an
economic interest in the use and application of water within the city limits
and of any user of the city water system; 2) that in the past, residents of the
city have misused and abused the water privileges, causing an undue burden on
the city and other residents, and depletion of water storage to dangerous
levels.
   B.   Imposition Of Watering Hours: The city hereby imposes watering hours on
residents and commercial properties. The watering hours shall be set by
resolution of the city council or by order of the mayor as determined by the
water flow and level of water storage facilities. (Ord. 1981-6, 8-12-1981)
   C.   Penalty:
      1.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates any portion of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1981-6, 8-12-1981; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Separate Offense: Each separate occurrence of failure to comply with
this section shall be considered a separate offense.
      3.   Termination Of Service: In addition, any person who violates this
section shall have his water shut off. In order to have the water reinstated,
the person in violation shall be required to make a deposit not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00) with the city clerk-treasurer.
   D.   Enforcement: The city council authorizes the following departments to
enforce this section:
      1.   City police department;
      2.   City water department.
The citations for the violations of this section shall be issued on the
standard city forms used for the state. (Ord. 1981-6, 8-12-1981)
10-1-21: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
No employee of the city is authorized to suspend or alter any of the policies,
rules, and regulations cited herein without specific approval or direction of
the city council, except in cases of emergency involving loss of life or
property or which would place the water system operation in jeopardy. (Ord.
2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-22: EASEMENT:
Each applicant and user gives and grants to the city an easement and right of
way on and across his property for the installation and maintenance of water
mains and the necessary valves, equipment, and meters in connection therewith.
(Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-1-23: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER
SECTION:
10-2-1: Short Title
10-2-2: Connection Required
10-2-3: User Charge System
10-2-4: Domestic And Commercial User Charges Within City
10-2-5: Sewer Connection Fee
10-2-6: Rules Governing Connection Fees
10-2-7: Domestic And Commercial User Charges Outside City Limits
10-2-8: Equivalent User Fee
10-2-9: Metered Service
10-2-10: Penalty
10-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982)
10-2-2: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
Every parcel of land or premises within the boundaries of the city improved for
occupancy and occupied or used by any person shall be connected to the public
sanitary sewer system; provided, that connection to the sanitary sewer system
from inflow (storm drain) sources, outflow hot tub (natural baths) source or
ground water infiltration into the sanitary sewer system shall neither be
required nor permitted. The owner or person in charge of such land shall make
or cause to be made such connection within sixty (60) days after receiving
official notice from the city to so connect. All charges associated with the
laying of pipe from the homes or facilities to be serviced to said mains shall
be borne by the property owner. All such connections to the city's mains shall
be properly designed and constructed in conformity with requirements specified
by the city. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982)
10-2-3: USER CHARGE SYSTEM:
   A.   Revision: The sewer user charges have been reviewed by AVI Engineering
and an updated table of users is attached to the ordinance codified herein on
file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and incorporated herein by
reference. The revised user charge system will be placed on file at the city
hall. (Ord. 1994-4, 10-13-1994)
   B.   Annual Notice: In conjunction with the user charge system, each user
shall be notified by mail annually of all costs incurred during the previous
year and the basis for the charge to be assessed for the upcoming year. (Ord.
1983-1, 1-19-1983)
10-2-4: DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL USER CHARGES WITHIN CITY:
   A.   General:
      1.   This is a user charge for a small community which follows model
number one in appendix B of the federal register dated September 27, 1978. This
treatment works is primarily flow dependent and will utilize the equivalent
user concept. The equivalent user system has been set up based on flow.
      2.   A sewer user charge shall be levied on all users of the sewage
collection and treatment facilities for the purpose of allocating among such
users the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of this
facility in approximate proportion to each such user's contribution to the
total wastewater load of such facilities.
   B.   Basis For User Charge:
      1.   The sewer user charge for each user or user class shall be based on
the user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment
facilities in comparison to a standard equivalent user as defined.
      2.   The sewer user charge for each user shall be in accordance with the
equivalent user schedule established below. The sewer user charge for a single
user having more than one classification shall be determined by adding together
the equivalent user for each classification. The user charge for special users
contributing sewage of excessive flow and/or strength, for which the tabulated
equivalent users below do not apply, shall be individually calculated as
provided below. The monthly fee to be paid by each user shall be computed by
multiplying the sewer user charge for each user by a constant monthly cost
factor which shall be as set by the city council. The minimum sewer user charge
shall be one equivalent user.
   C.   Equivalent User: "One equivalent user" shall be defined as contributing
three hundred fifty (350) gallons per day of wastewater containing not more
than seven-tenths (0.7) pounds of five (5) day BOD and seven-tenths (0.7)
pounds of suspended solids. The equivalent user flow has been developed from
population and sewer usage records which indicate an average dwelling unit has
three and one-half (31/2) people contributing one hundred (100) gallons per
day. Standard engineering data indicates two-tenths (0.2) pounds of five (5)
day BOD and two- tenths (0.2) pounds of suspended solids respectively per
person per day. The basic equivalent user shall be subject to revision if
population, water usage, sewage volume, and/or other information indicates flow
and/or strength significantly different from that defined herein. Revision of
the basic equivalent user criteria shall normally only be made upon the
recommendation of a registered, professional engineer. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982)
   D.   Equivalent User Schedule: The number of equivalent users which shall
comprise the sewer user charge for each user and/or user class shall be in
accordance with the following equivalent user schedule. Assignment of
equivalent users shall apply for one year until the next annual user charge
review. Users so indicated or not included in this schedule shall be considered
special users and shall be evaluated separately as provided below. If and when
the information indicates that the strength of sewage contributed by any of the
following users is in excess in comparison with the allowable limits listed
above, then a surcharge shall be levied against such users as provided below.
Any of the users in the following schedule may be classified as special users
if information on their contribution flow and/or strength indicates a need to
do so:
   EQUIVALENT USER SCHEDULE
   1.0 Minimum
Classification  Equivalent
                Users
Classification                                                Equivalent
                                                              Users
Assembly hall or lodge (no cafe)                             1.00
Bar or tavern (for each seat)                                0.06
Barber and beauty shops (per chair)                          0.20
Bowling alley (per lane)                                     0.50
Cafe, drive-in, less than 20 inside seats                    2.00
 For each additional 20 seats                               1.00
Cafe, up to 50 seats                                         2.00
 For each additional 25 seats                               1.00
Car washes, per stall                                        2.00
Churches                                                      
 Single congregation (per chapel seat)                      0.01
 Multiple congregations (per chapel seat times              0.01
  number of congregations)
 With kitchens additional                                   1.00
Condominiums (per unit)                                      0.75
Garage or maintenance shop                                   1.00
Hospitals or medical clinics (with no beds)                  3.00
 For each additional bed                                    0.50
Hot baths, per average person per day                        0.06
Hotels, motels (per unit)                                    0.38
 Or rooming house (additional per unit with kitchen)        0.20
Institutions with permanent or temporary residents           1.00
 Rest homes, etc. (plus per resident)                       0.30
Laundromat, up to 10 washers                                 4.00
 For each additional washer                                 0.30
Office, up to 20 employees                                   1.00
 For each additional employee                               0.03
Public pay toilets, per urinal or toilet                     0.10
Roof drains                                                   
 Eq. user/mo. = Ar x 1.35 ft. x 7.48 gal/cf divided 12 divided 350:       
  Ar   = Roof area in square feet.                          
  1.35 = Annual precipitation from weather data.            
  7.48 = Conversion factor from cubic feet to gallons.      
  12   = Conversion from yearly to monthly.                 
  350  = Amount of flow in gallons for 1 equivalent user.   
Schools, no cafeteria, per student                           0.03
 With cafeteria, per student                                0.05
Service stations                                             2.00
Single dwelling unit (residence, apartment or trailer)       1.00
Store or business, up to 20 employees                        1.00
 Each additional employee                                   0.03
Supermarkets, grocery                                        2.00
 With butcher shop                                          1.00
Swimming pools, per average person per day                   0.06
Trailer parks                                                 
 Permanent resident trailers                                1.00
 Overnight trailers                                         0.38
 Sanitary waste dump station                                5.00
Warehouses, potato, etc., per 10,000 gallons/month           1.00
Open class per 10,000 gallons/month                          1.00
 
(Ord. 1982-3, 3-17-1982; amd. Ord. 1983-1, 1-19-1983; Ord. 1994-4, 10-13-1994;
Res. 2008-2, 9-9-2008)
   E.   Surcharge For Excessive Strength: When any user contributes wastewater
having an average BOD and/or suspended solids loading in excess of the
designated allowable limits hereinafter designated, a surcharge shall be levied
against such user. Said surcharge shall apply to sewage strength in excess of
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) of BOD and two hundred milligrams
per liter (200 mg/l) of TSS. Said surcharge is based only on operation and
maintenance costs for the current year's city budget as determined in the user
charge system. Said surcharge shall be levied against the user in excess of the
charge provided in the user charge system schedule. The proportion of the
operating and maintenance costs (O&M costs) shall be distributed as follows:
Flow = 60 percent
BOD = 20 percent x cost of operation and maintenance
TSS = 20 percent x cost of operations and maintenance
The BOD and TSS loading shall be determined from the tests averaged over the
period made by city officials or the city engineer. The monthly user
surcharge shall be computed by use of the following equations:
BOD/$MO = Total Flow/MO x BOD-200 x 20% x EU O&M
     Tested                    
      200                10,500
WHERE : Flow is in gallons
     : BOD tested is in ppm or mg/l
     : 200 is the allowable limit in ppm or mg/l
     : EU O&M in ppm or mg/l
TSS/$MO = Total Flow/MO x TSS-200 x 20% x EU O&M
     Tested                   
      200                10,500
     : Flow is in gallons
     : TSS tested is in ppm or mg/l
     : 200 is in ppm or mg/l
     : EU O&M in ppm or mg/l
 
A copy of the list of user surcharge, the characteristics of their sewage, and
the surcharge for each shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the
city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 1983-1, 1-19-1983)
   F.   Special Users:
      1.   Determination: If, in addition to excessive strength, a user is
determined to add flow to the lagoon in excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons
per month, the above formula shall be multiplied by a factor of total flow
divided by ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month. In order to determine the
flow of this special user, the city may monitor sewage and water flow in order
to determine total flow. The value of user's monthly charge used in the formula
above will be the same value as assigned single dwelling units.
      2.   Copy On File: A copy of the list of special users, the
characteristics of their sewage, and the special user's monthly charge shall be
kept on file at all times in the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
   G.   User Request For Change In User Charge: Any sewer user who feels his
user charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his premises within the
spirit and intent of the foregoing provisions may make written application to
the city council requesting a review of his user charge. Said written request
shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and strength
of his wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based,
including how the measurements or estimates were made. Any flow measurements
and/or testing of wastewater shall be approved in detail by the city and/or its
engineer. Review of the request by the city council shall determine if it is
substantial or not, including recommended further study of the matter for the
city and/or user by a registered, professional engineer. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-
1982)
10-2-5: SEWER CONNECTION FEE:
   A.   Fee Established: Effective October 1, 2008, the sewer connection fee
for a user inside the city shall be as follows:
 
Size Of          Connection Fee
Sewer Connection
4 inch           $1,000.00
8 inch           2,000.00
 
(Ord. 2008-5, 9-24-2008)
   B.   Special Connections: Any special connections not covered by the above
schedules, including users outside the city, shall have connection fees set by
the mayor and city council in each individual situation. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-
1982)
   C.   Person Desiring Connection Responsible For Costs; Work Must Meet City
Standards: The foregoing fees are for the privilege of connecting with the city
sewer, and all work necessary for making proper connection shall be done to the
satisfaction of and under the supervision of the city inspector and shall be
paid for by the person desiring such connection. (Ord. 2008-5, 9-24-2008)
10-2-6: RULES GOVERNING CONNECTION FEES:
   A.   Any applicant for a sewer connection to any lot abutting on a street,
alley, or other right of way containing a main sewer line shall pay the full
connection fee therefor.
   B.   In case wherein two (2) or more dwellings exist on any lot under the
same ownership, and if any such dwellings are located to the rear of the other
or if at least seventy five feet (75') from the property line abutting on any
street, alley, or right of way containing a main sewer line, the rear dwelling
shall be charged one-half (1/2) the applicable full connection fee where the
owner thereof requested only one stub for dwellings on such lot and the same
service lateral is used for all such dwellings.
   C.   In any business block or shopping center containing more than one
adjoining business or commercial establishment under one ownership, where more
than one such establishment is connected with the same lateral but separate
applications for service are made and separate billings are requested, one of
such establishments shall pay the applicable full connection fee, and each
additional establishment shall pay one-half (1/2) the applicable connection fee
required for connection of similar size.
   D.   Any person owning unimproved real property which does not abut a
street, alley or right of way containing a main sewer line and who subdivides
the same for construction of dwellings shall install at his own cost all
connection lines acceptable to the city and connect the same to an existing
city main sewer line at a place to be determined by the city council and all at
the cost and expense of said subdivider. Each lot shall pay a hookup cost.
(Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982)
10-2-7: DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL USER CHARGES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The sewer user charge for the use of the sewer system outside of the city
limits shall be computed by multiplying the number of equivalent users
determined from the schedules set out above. (Ord. 1995-2, 4-13-1995)
10-2-8: EQUIVALENT USER FEE:
Effective October 1, 2008, the fee for "one equivalent user" for any connection
to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be the constant sum of fifteen
dollars seventy five cents ($15.75) per month. Said fee may be amended from
time to time as required by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2007-6, 10-
11-2007; amd. Res. 2008-2, 9-9-2008)
10-2-9: METERED SERVICE:
Whenever the council shall deem it appropriate and in the best interests of the
city and its citizens to require a user to have a sewer and/or water service to
his facilities metered to more appropriately determine the amount of service
provided such user by the system, the council may, by resolution, require the
user to install a meter and/or meters which will accurately measure the
services provided; and the council may further establish, by resolution, the
rates to be charged for such service as will properly pay the fair share of the
services provided such user. The cost of the meter and its installation shall
be borne by the user. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982; amd. Ord. 2007-6, 10-11-2007)
10-2-10: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1982-1, 2-17-1982; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2007-6, 10-
11-2007)
   B.   Separate Offense: Any violation of any or all provisions of this
chapter for any one day shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Liability For Expenses: In addition to such fine and imprisonment, such
person shall be liable for any expense incurred by the city in enforcing this
chapter.
   D.   Additional Remedies: The proper local authorities of the city, county
or state, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to correct or abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1982-1,
2-17-1982; amd. Ord. 2007-6, 10-11-2007)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
10-3-1: Short Title
10-3-2: Definitions
10-3-3: Garbage Collection
10-3-4: Separation Of Refuse
10-3-5: Collection
10-3-6: Use Of Service Compulsory; Exception
10-3-7: Rules And Regulations
10-3-8: Regulation Of Garbage And Refuse Hauling
10-3-9: Garbage, Trash And Other Refuse From Private Property
10-3-10: Requirements For Contractor
10-3-11: Hotels And Restaurants
10-3-12: Street Litter Cans
10-3-13: Burning Prohibited 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
10-3-14: Dumping Prohibited
10-3-15: Suppression Of Nuisances
10-3-16: Interference
10-3-17: Emergency Complaints
10-3-18: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 3 of this Code.
10-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION
SERVICE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAVA HOT SPRINGS, IDAHO. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-
1972)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context words in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ASHES: The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
material.
CITY: The City of Lava Hot Springs.
COLLECTOR: The City of Lava Hot Springs or the person holding a contract issued
or granted by the City authorizing such person to operate, conduct and maintain
a Municipal garbage and refuse collection and disposal system upon, on and over
streets, alleys and public ways of City.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT: Every "person" as herein defined in possession, charge,
custody or control of any premises where garbage, refuse and rubbish is created
or accumulated.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PREMISES: Land and all dwellings and structures thereon including, but not
excluding, by enumeration, single- or multi-family dwellings, rooming houses,
apartment houses, hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, hotels, and
motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments or place of conducting business,
trade or occupation.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste)
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, small dead animals and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
SANITARY CONTAINERS: Approved sanitary containers or receptacles of not less
than twenty (20) gallon capacity, not more than thirty two (32) gallon capacity
or as provided in subsection
10-3-9A of this chapter and may be any of the following:
   A.   Disposable (nonreturnable) paper sacks, which shall be fifty (50) pound
wet strength extensible kraft paper.
   B.   Disposable (nonreturnable) plastic bags, which shall be manufactured
from polyethylene copolymer resin, with the gauge of not less than 1.5 mils.
   C.   Metal or plastic cans which must not have any inside structures to
prevent the free discharge of the contents.
   D.   The aforesaid paper sacks or plastic bags may be used as liners in
cans, but such sacks or bags used as liners shall be watertight, of a solid and
durable material and shall be equipped with a suitable close fitting cover.
   E.   Approved mechanical dumping containers of one yard or more capacity.
TRASH: Nonputrescible solid waste such as excelsior, rags, wooden boxes or
cardboard or paper boxes, bottles, broken ware, small metal scraps, small
mechanical parts, shavings, floor sweepings excluding dirt floors, and all
other things of similar nature. The term "trash" as used in this chapter shall
not include debris resulting from construction, reconstruction or repairs of
premises, automobile frames, fallen trees, large tree limbs, nor other waste
matter that is not properly contained as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1972-
1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-3: GARBAGE COLLECTION:
The city refuse collection and disposal service shall, by such means as the
city council deems appropriate, collect and dispose of all garbage, rubbish,
refuse, paper, glass, tin cans, crockery, ashes and other debris and shall
operate this service, and the regulations provided by this chapter shall be and
remain applicable thereto until duly amended as provided by law. The right and
power to amend this chapter from time to time and to repeal the same is
reserved to the city. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-4: SEPARATION OF REFUSE:
All kitchen garbage shall be drained of excess water and shall be wrapped in
paper. Any animal defecation shall be separately wrapped in paper before being
placed in said garbage can. Tin cans and glass containers shall be placed in
cans with kitchen garbage. Other rubbish, refuse, ashes, or other debris shall
be placed in containers separate from kitchen garbage. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-5: COLLECTION:
   A.   Collection Required: All garbage, refuse, rubbish, and ashes from the
entire residential sections properly placed for collection as provided for in
this chapter, shall be collected by the city or its duly authorized agent or
contractor necessary to maintain and preserve sanitation of the community.
   B.   Failure To Collect: Temporary failure to make such collection due to
circumstances beyond the control of the city shall not relieve the occupant or
the owner of the premises from the payment of sanitary service fees hereinafter
provided for.
   C.   Permit Required: No person, whether having entered into a contract with
the city for collections of garbage, refuse, rubbish and ashes or not, shall be
permitted to transport same over the public thoroughfares in anything other
than watertight containers and not until they shall have first secured a
written permit authorizing such hauling from the sanitary inspector.
   D.   Vehicles: The city or city's contractor shall furnish vehicles
especially designed for the collection and hauling of garbage and waste
products. All garbage vehicles shall be closed and watertight with side, rear
or both side and rear openings, commonly known as packers, for collecting
material. Rear loading openings shall have a minimum size of forty eight inches
by sixty inches (48" x 60"). (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-6: USE OF SERVICE COMPULSORY; EXCEPTION:
No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the refuse collection and
disposal service herein provided for, and the failure of any person to receive
such service shall not exempt such person from the payment of charges herein
provided, save and except any of those persons residing in areas where no
service is rendered by the city, no charge will be made. The boundaries within
the city exempted from such charges shall be established by the city council.
(Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972; amd. 2007 Code)
10-3-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council is hereby empowered to prepare and publish rules and
regulations in connection with the preparation, handling and disposal of
garbage and refuse, subject to the approval of the city council, and may direct
that the city garbage and waste disposal crew or authorized contractor shall
not collect garbage and other waste from any premises where such rules and
regulations are not complied with. The failure to collect the same by such
direction shall not relieve the owner or occupant of such premises from the
payment of fees or penalties provided for herein. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972; amd.
2007 Code)
10-3-8: REGULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULING:
   A.   Watertight Containers Required: No person shall be permitted to collect
or haul garbage, refuse, ashes, or rubbish over the streets excepting that such
shall be conveyed in watertight containers.
   B.   Canvass Or Other Top Required: No person shall be permitted to collect
or haul garbage, refuse, rubbish, debris, papers or any other such items over
and across the streets and alleys thereof unless such vehicle so conveying such
rubbish or debris is equipped with a canvas top or some other device effective
to prevent the said rubbish, debris and trash from being strewn and littered
about the streets and alleys.
   C.   Hauling For Hire:
      1.   License Required: No person shall convey rubbish or garbage over and
across the streets and alleys for hire or for any person other than himself
unless he shall have first filed with the clerk-treasurer an application for
permission to haul garbage or rubbish over and across the streets and alleys
and until said application has been accepted and a license duly issued.
      2.   Form Of Application: That the application so made to the clerk-
treasurer for the person from whom such application is required shall be in
essentially the following form:
Licenses truck has license number                
Capacity of applicant's truck is                 tons volume of body of truck.
Persons with whom applicant has contract to haul garbage or rubbish at date of
making this application are:
   1.
                                                                           
   2.
                                                                           
   3.
                                                                          
                                                 
            Applicant's signature
   (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
      3.   Insurance: Before any license herein provided for can be issued by
the clerk-treasurer for the performance of hauling such garbage or rubbish,
such applicant shall file with the clerk-treasurer proof of workers'
compensation insurance and liability insurance. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972; amd.
2007 Code)
      4.   Hauling For Others Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person
to haul garbage or rubbish for hire, or for any person other than himself, or
to permit hauling of any garbage or rubbish over the streets whatsoever, unless
he shall have made application for and received a license herein provided.
      5.   Use Of Approved Landfill Site Required: Any person who shall haul
garbage or rubbish in and about the city and haul the same over the streets
shall be required to haul all such rubbish and garbage to an approved landfill
site. This requirement, however, may be waived by special application and
permission granted by the city council.
      6.   Strewing Or Scattering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person herein to permit general construction material, debris, tree limbs and
such refuse and garbage to be strewn or scattered about the streets. It shall
be unlawful for any person to carry garbage or rubbish about the streets unless
said refuse or garbage shall be properly covered so as to prevent the same from
being strewn about the streets or alleys. The violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall not only constitute a violation of this
chapter, but in those cases in which a license has been issued shall subject
such licensee to the cancellation of his license during the period for which it
was issued.
      7.   Power Of City Council: The city council is empowered to accept or
reject any application that may be made to haul garbage or refuse as provided
in this chapter.
      8.   Term Of License: Licenses herein required will be issued with
expiration date of December 30 of each year, unless said license shall be
cancelled by the council as provided for herein. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-9: GARBAGE, TRASH AND OTHER REFUSE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Containers: Oil drums, waste tubs, and similar containers shall not be
used for garbage and ashes. Worn out or unsightly garbage cans are to be
discarded.
   B.   Preparation Of Refuse:
      1.   Ashes: All ashes when placed for collection shall be cold and free
from any fire, live coals, or other substances which might ignite. Metal
containers with suitable handles or bails may be used for ashes only, if not
more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter or twenty four inches (24") high and
weigh, when full, less than seventy five (75) pounds.
      2.   Tree Limbs: Small tree limbs when tied in one man bundles not over
four feet (4') long will be hauled.
      3.   Magazines And Papers: Magazines and papers shall be tied in bundles
and must not be put out in wet weather earlier than twelve (12) hours before
pick up time.
      4.   Grass Cuttings, Weeds: Baskets or small cartons may be used for
grass cuttings, weeds, leaves, hedge trimmings and lawn raking. All items in
this subsection will be hauled away on schedule by the garbage contractor.
   C.   Containers, Placement For Collection: All garbage, refuse and rubbish,
except ashes, in or about any private residence, dwelling house or other
building shall be placed in sanitary containers and shall be placed at or near
the alley line if there is a public alley, right of way, or if there is no
access to the alley from the dwelling or other building, then such receptacle
shall be placed at or near the street line so as to be easily seen. The city
council will designate the pick up point for each residence, dwelling house or
other building. Refuse generating property not abutting public streets or
alleys shall permit access to the city or its refuse collection agency for the
collection and disposal of refuse placed thereon in approved sanitary
containers.
   D.   Missed Pick Up: If the collector should miss a refuse pick up and the
city or the collector is so notified prior to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on such
day, such refuse will be removed the same day.
   E.   Removal Of Containers After Pick Up; Shelter Required: Removal of
garbage cans from the streets and alleys shall be made within twelve (12) hours
after pick up; provided, that such cans shall not be placed under the eaves of
any garage or any other building except in cases of absolute necessity; and in
case of such necessity, a roof or shelter shall be placed over such garbage
can.
   F.   Materials Not Picked Up: Books, broken concrete, rocks, plaster,
discarded building materials, or trees and large tree limbs are not included as
garbage. Oil drums and incinerators will not be emptied, nor will they be
allowed in alleys.
   G.   Owner Responsibility: Each property owner or tenant in the city shall
be held responsible for the cleanliness of one-half (1/2) of the alley adjacent
to his property. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-10: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTOR:
   A.   Districts; Collection Routes: The entire area within the city limits
shall be divided into districts for collection routes, and each district or
collection route shall be served the same day in each week or as needed for
industrial and commercial refuse removal except when a recognized holiday is
observed by the City or contractor or when a severe storm makes it impossible
to cover the route in the usual time. When the schedule has been disrupted for
any reason, the public will be so notified and service will be restored as soon
as possible and the public advised, if practical.
   B.   Equipment; Employees/Workers: The contractors shall furnish approved
equipment and men to cover the entire City each week.
   C.   Emptying Of Containers: After dumping the cans, employees shall return
them to the location from which they were taken and shall replace the covers.
Space about the cans and truck shall be left free from any refuse spilled
during the collection. This shall not be interpreted to mean that the collector
is responsible for cleaning up conditions about refuse cans caused by
carelessness of the tenant. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-11: HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS:
   A.   Receptacles Required: Every owner or lessee or person in charge of any
store, restaurant, cafe, hotel or other similar place where garbage is made or
accumulated shall provide or cause to be provided for such store, restaurant,
cafe or hotel or other similar building a watertight metal receptacle into
which all garbage shall be placed, and said receptacle shall have a
tightfitting cover and shall be kept covered. The dimensions of receptacle
shall be similar in size and weight as designated for residences.
   B.   Wastepaper: Loose papers, wastebasket material, wastepaper excelsior,
etc., must be placed in a container with a watertight lid. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-
1972)
10-3-12: STREET LITTER CANS:
Litter and waste disposal containers are not to be used by the merchants and
store employees for store and sidewalk sweeping, trash, paper or cartons. They
are for pedestrians to use to deposit gum wrappers, empty sacks or other
wrappers, preventing the littering upon the City sidewalks and street gutters.
Debris resulting from the construction or repairs of premises shall not be
placed with other refuse for collection but shall be disposed of directly by
the person owning, occupying or leasing the premises. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-13: BURNING PROHIBITED 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-5, 2-8-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 3 of this Code.
10-3-14: DUMPING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Vacant Lots: It shall be unlawful for any person to incinerate garbage,
refuse, rubbish or ashes or dump same on vacant lots.
   B.   Dropping Or Spilling: No person including the contract agent authorized
to collect garbage, refuse, rubbish, and ashes shall drop, spill or permit same
to fall upon any private grounds or public street, alley or way. (Ord. 1972-1,
8-10-1972)
10-3-15: SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES:
The Department of Sanitation shall take cognizance of all nuisances within the
limits of their sanitary jurisdiction and take such measures as may be
effectual to suppress and abate the same. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-16: INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the City
Council during the performance of their duties under this chapter. (Ord. 1972-
1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-17: EMERGENCY COMPLAINTS:
Provisions shall be made by the contractor or City Council to take care of
emergency complaints when refuse has not been collected upon the regular
scheduled trip and to take care of all other special or emergency calls. (Ord.
1972-1, 8-10-1972)
10-3-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1972-1, 8-10-1972; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
WATER, SEWER AND GARBAGE RATES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Water Charges
10-4-3: Refuse Collection And Sanitation Rates
10-4-4: Domestic And Commercial Sewer Rates
10-4-5: Billing; Payment
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish domestic and commercial rates for
the use of the public sewer system for users inside and outside the corporate
limits of the city, and to revise and consolidate in this chapter the rates to
be assessed for metered water and for city refuse collection and sanitation
services, inside and outside the city. (Ord. 1993-1, 4-8-1993, eff. 4-15-1993)
10-4-2: WATER CHARGES:
Water charges shall be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 2004-3, 9-23-2004)
10-4-3: REFUSE COLLECTION AND SANITATION RATES:
There shall be a monthly fee to all commercial and/or residential users of
municipal refuse collection and other sanitation services assessed according to
contractor rates, plus an additional forty cent ($0.40) city administrative fee
per container. Each residential household user will be assessed an additional
three dollars sixty cents ($3.60) per month for landfill construction and
maintenance fees. The fees, rates, and charges for all commercial and/or
residential users of the city refuse collection system, and for landfill
construction and maintenance, may be changed from time to time hereafter by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2006-4, 11-16-2006)
10-4-4: DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL SEWER RATES:
   A.   Within City Limits: There shall be a monthly fee assessed to users of
the public sewer system which shall be calculated as follows: (Ord. 1993-1, 4-
8-1993, eff. 4-15-1993)
      1.   The monthly fee for each user shall be the user's sewer charge
multiplied by the constant monthly cost factor as established in section
10-2-8 of this title. (Ord. 1993-1, 4-8-1993, eff. 4-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2007-6,
10-11-2007)
      2.   Each user's service charge shall be determined in accordance with
chapter 2 of this title.
      3.   The constant monthly cost factor established herein shall be at the
discretion of the mayor and city council and updated from time to time to
reflect the actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing
of the sewage collection facility. (Ord. 1993-1, 4-8-1993, eff. 4-15-1993)
   B.   Outside City Limits: The sewer user charge for the use of the sewer
system outside of the city limits shall be computed by multiplying the number
of equivalent users determined from the schedules set out in chapter 2 of this
title. (Ord. 1995-2, 4-13-1995)
10-4-5: BILLING; PAYMENT:
   A.   Monthly Billing: Fees assessed for metered water, refuse collection and
sanitation services and sewage collection and treatment shall be billed to
users on a monthly basis unless otherwise determined and approved by the mayor
and city council. Domestic and/or commercial premises occupied for a period of
less than one month shall be assessed and billed for the entire month.
   B.   Combined Billing: Fees assessed for metered water, refuse collection
and sanitation services and sewage collection and treatment shall be combined
in one monthly bill and mailed or otherwise delivered to users monthly in the
month following that month for which services were rendered.
   C.   Due Date: The fee assessed for services shall become due and payable
fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing, or other delivery of each monthly
billing. When the fifteenth day falls upon a legal holiday or on a day when the
city offices are not open for business, the next regular business day shall be
considered the final due date. Where remittances are made by mail, assessed
fees shall be deemed paid on the date of mailing as shown by the postmark.
   D.   Delinquent Charge; Interest: A delinquent charge of ten percent (10%)
shall be added to each delinquent bill for each period of thirty (30) days'
delinquency or fraction thereof. Interest at the rate of one and one-half
percent (11/2%) per month or eighteen percent (18%) per annum shall be charged
on the accrued balance of any delinquent account.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Service: When assessed fees are not paid within
thirty (30) days after the due date, the city may collect such billing in any
lawful manner and may issue an order to discontinue any or all such services to
a delinquent customer.
   F.   Notice To Owner: In the event that the user is not the owner in
possession, should the account become delinquent for sixty (60) days, the owner
of said premises shall be notified, in writing, by the city of the account and
its delinquency.
   G.   Responsibility For Payment: The owner of such premises is primarily
liable for any charges delineated in this chapter. Partial payment of any
tenant shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any amounts due hereunder
by the landowner.
   H.   Lien: In the event that the charges for services are not paid when due
and payable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk-
treasurer or city attorney may make and file a lien against the property within
the time and manner provided for filing liens of mechanics and materialmen
under the provisions of the laws of the state, and such lien shall bind the
premises in the same manner and to the same extent as such mechanics' and
materialmen's liens are binding under the state law, and foreclosed in the same
general manner. Upon foreclosure thereof, attorney fees and costs shall in a
like manner be allowed; or the city may sue to recover the amount due, and for
services provided without such lien or assessment.
   I.   Reconnection Fee: In addition to the foregoing, a mandatory fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged to the landowner, his heirs,
successors and assigns for restoring services that have been disconnected for
any delinquency regardless of whoever received the benefit of said services, if
anyone. (Ord. 1993-1, 4-8-1993, eff. 4-15-1993)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purpose
10-5-2: Definitions
10-5-3: Cross Connections Prohibited
10-5-4: Inspection
10-5-5: Inspection Of Customer's System
10-5-6: Backflow Prevention Device
10-5-7: Liability
10-5-8: Penalty
10-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health of water consumers
by the control of actual and/or potential cross connections. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-
14-1996)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BACKFLOW: The flow other than the intended direction of flow of any foreign
liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution of a public water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent
back siphonage.
CITY: The city of Lava Hot Springs, Idaho, or its authorized agent.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any
substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer,
drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing, fixture, or other device
which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or
liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow.
CUSTOMER: Any person or persons or other entity using or seeking use of the
municipal water or sewer system of the city.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic uses.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: The city water supply and any main lines, equipment or
appurtenances thereto.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of public works department, city of Lava Hot
Springs. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-1996)
10-5-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Installation Or Maintenance Prohibited: The installation or maintenance
of a cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable
water supply of the city is prohibited.
   B.   Declared Nuisance: Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter
installed is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated.
   C.   Compliance Required: The control or elimination of cross connections
shall be in accordance with this chapter and in compliance with Idaho
regulation for public drinking water system 1-8306, or subsequent revision, as
promulgated by the Idaho department of health and welfare. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-
1996)
10-5-4: INSPECTION:
   A.   Required Prior To Delivery Of Water: No water shall be delivered to any
structure hereafter built within the city or within areas served by city water
until the same shall have been inspected by the city for possible cross
connections and has been approved as being free of same.
   B.   Backflow Prevention Device Required: Any construction for industrial or
other purposes which is classified as hazardous facilities where it is
reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross connections, or as determined by
the city superintendent, shall be protected by the installation of one or more
backflow prevention device at the point of service from the public water supply
or any other location designated by the city.
   C.   Periodic Inspection: Inspection shall be made periodically by the city
of all buildings, structures or improvements of any kind now receiving water
from the city's system to ascertain whether cross connections exist. (Ord.
1996-2, 3-14-1996)
10-5-5: INSPECTION OF CUSTOMER'S SYSTEM:
The customer's system shall be open for inspection and tests at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross
connection or other hazards, including violations of these regulations exist.
When such a condition becomes known, the city may deny or immediately
discontinue water service to the premises after providing notice to the
customer until corrections have been rectified in accordance with the state
statute and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-1996)
10-5-6: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:
   A.   Required: No water service connected to any premises shall be installed
or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by
state law and regulation and this chapter. Service of water to any premises may
be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention device required by this
chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or it is found that a backflow
prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross
connection exists on the premises. Water service shall not be restored until
such conditions are corrected.
   B.   Circumstances Requiring Installation: Backflow prevention devices shall
be installed under circumstances including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply;
      2.   Premises having cross connections that are not correctable or
intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether
or not cross connections exist;
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist;
      4.   Premises having a history of cross connections being established or
reestablished;
      5.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters;
      6.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard
might result;
      7.   The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public
water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these
facilities unless the city determines that no hazard exists:
         a.   Agricultural, chemical, storage, formulation and distribution
facilities;
         b.   Animal game farm or zoo;
         c.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics;
         d.   Laboratories;
         e.   Metal plating industries;
         f.   Piers and docks;
         g.   Sewage treatment plants;
         h.   Food or beverage processing plants;
         i.   Chemical plants using a water process;
         j.   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
         k.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
         l.   Tank trucks;
         m.   Fill stations;
         n.   Car washes;
         o.   Wild or exotic animal facility or habitat in which wild animals
are located which are not naturally occurring in the state or are normally
found in the wild;
         p.   Others specified by the city.
   C.   Types Of Devices: The type of protective device required shall depend
on the degree of hazard which exists:
      1.   Health Or System Hazard: An air gap separation or a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or
other contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
      2.   Objectionable But Not Hazardous: In the case of a substance which
may be objectionable but not hazardous to health, a double check valve
assembly, air gap separation, or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed.
   D.   Cost: The customer shall bear all expense in furnishing and installing
the backflow prevention device.
   E.   Approval Of Device: Any backflow prevention device required by this
chapter shall be approved by the city superintendent prior to installation.
   F.   Location: Where required, an approved backflow prevention device shall
be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served, but, in all
cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
   G.   Supervision Of Installation: Backflow prevention devices required by
this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of the city.
   H.   Annual Inspection: It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises
where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections
and operational tests made annually. Tests shall be at the expense of the
customer and shall be performed by a state certified tester. These devices
shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer
whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs
and overhauls shall be kept and copies sent to the city. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-
1996)
10-5-7: LIABILITY:
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage
to persons or property by reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the
failure to inspect or test, or by reason of approval of any cross connections.
(Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-1996)
10-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules
and regulations as adopted by the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1996-2, 3-14-1996; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
(Reserved)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization
12-1-2: Findings Of Fact
12-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
12-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-1-5: Definitions
12-1-6: Application And Interpretation Of Provisions
12-1-7: Administration Of Provisions
12-1-8: Development Permit
12-1-9: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-10: Variance Procedure
12-1-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-12: Violation And Penalties
12-1-13: Amendments
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, the legislature of the
state of Idaho has authorized local government units to adopt a floodplain map
and floodplain management ordinance and has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009,
eff. 7-7-2009)
12-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Lava Hot Springs are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health, and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to enact measures which require structures to
be built at a flood protection elevation and/or with floodproofing in order to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed:
   A.   To protect human life and health;
   B.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
   C.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard;
   H.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions; and
   I.   To reduce the annual cost of flood insurance. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009,
eff. 7-7-2009)
12-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application: (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: Low cost buildings that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet, such as detached two (2) car garages, boathouses, small pole barns
and storage sheds, not to be used for human habitation, shall be constructed
and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters; shall be anchored to prevent flotation which may result in
damage to other structures; service utilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the city clerk and/or code enforcement
officer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: Designated as AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). AO zones have base flood depths that range from one to three
feet (3') above the natural ground, a clearly defined channel does not exist,
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may
be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow; AH indicates ponding, and is
shown with standard flood protection elevations.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the "100-year flood").
Designated on flood insurance rate maps by the letters A or V.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might
be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools,
nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations,
and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building that has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form (FEMA form 81-31) used to track
development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with
community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance
premium rate with section B completed by community officials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by the federal
insurance administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-
floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that shall correspond to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance flood (100-year flood) plus any
increased flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required
freeboard.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater
or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE: A flood insurance claim payment up to thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) directly to a property owner for the cost to
comply with floodplain management regulations after a direct physical loss
caused by a flood. Eligibility for an ICC claim can be through a single
instance of "substantial damage" or as a result of "cumulative substantial
damage".
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at subsection
12-1-9B1b (i.e., provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date hereof.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of adopted floodplain management regulations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known
to have occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular
stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based
upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed
or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In
inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one
hundred (100) years; this means that in any given year there is a one percent
(1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before damage occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory building,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any
other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature
of its operations. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-12,
12-10-2015)
12-1-6: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of city. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-
1987)
   B.   Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study", Bannock
County, Idaho, and incorporated areas, dated July 7, 2009, with the
accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the
FIRM are on file at city hall, 115 West Elm, Lava Hot Springs, ID 83246. (Ord.
2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   D.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally
construed in favor of the city council, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal
any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-7: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Administrative Authority: The city clerk-treasurer and code enforcement
officer are hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions. Any conflict between decisions of the city clerk-treasurer and the
code enforcement officer shall be resolved by the city council, whose decision
shall be final.
   B.   Duties Of City Clerk-Treasurer And Code Enforcement Officer: Duties of
the city clerk-treasurer and code enforcement officer shall include, but not be
limited to: (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2015-12, 12-10-2015)
      1.   Permit Review:
         a.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
         b.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
         c.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of subsection 12-1-9C1 of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
      2.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data (In A Zones): When flood protection
elevation data has not been provided (in A zones) in accordance with subsection
12-1-6B, "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this
chapter, the city clerk and/or code enforcement officer shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any flood protection elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer
subsections
12-1-9B, "Specific Standards", and C, "Floodways", of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-
4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-12, 12-10-2015)
      3.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
         a.   Where flood protection elevation data is provided through the
flood insurance study, FIRM or required as in subsection B2 of this section,
verify and record the actual (as built) elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement. Record of the same shall be made on a current elevation certificate
(FF 81-31) with section B completed by the local official.
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed nonresidential
structures where flood protection elevation data is provided through the FIS,
FIRM, or as required in subsection B2 of this section:
            (1) Verify and record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level,
to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed,
and
            (2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection
12-1-8B3 of this chapter. When floodproofing is utilized, certification of
design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect is
required.
            (3) Require engineering certification (as built information) as to
the constructed flood protection elevation.
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter in the city hall located in Lava Hot Springs, Idaho.
      4.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
         a.   Notify the Idaho department of water resources, adjacent
communities and the Bannock County land use board prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal insurance administration.
         b.   Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
waterway is maintained.
      5.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where
needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in section
12-1-10 of this chapter. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the
standards of section 60.6 of the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program (44 CFR 59-76). (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
12-1-8: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in subsection
12-1-6B of this chapter. The permit shall be for all structures including
manufactured homes, as set forth in section
12-1-5 of this chapter, and for all development including fill and other
activities, also as set forth in section
12-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
   B.   Application For Development Permit: Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city clerk-treasurer and/or code
enforcement officer and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required: (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2015-12,
12-10-2015)
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures recorded on a current elevation
certificate (FF 81-31) with section B completed by the city clerk and/or code
enforcement officer; (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-12,
12-10-2015)
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
12-1-9B2 of this chapter; and
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-9: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
      1.   Anchoring:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
         b.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. For
more detailed information, refer to guidebook FEMA-85, "Manufactured Home
Installation In Flood Hazard Areas". (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      2.   Construction Materials And Methods:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (Ord. 1987-
3, 4-8-1987)
         c.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding. Locating such equipment below the
flood protection elevation may cause annual flood insurance premiums to be
increased. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      3.   Utilities:
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
         b.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
         c.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-
8-1987)
         d.   Water wells, if permitted by the city, shall be located on high
ground that is not in the floodway. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      4.   Subdivision Proposals:
         a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage; (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
         b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff.
7-7-2009)
         c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage; and (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
         d.   Where flood protection elevation data has not been provided or is
not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987;
amd. Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      5.   Review Of Building Permits: Where flood protection elevations or
other current engineering data are not available either through the flood
insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (subsection
12-1-7B2 of this chapter), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize scientific methods to assure that proposed construction
will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local
judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of
past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2')
above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance
rates. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where flood
protection elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection
12-1-6B or
12-1-7B2 of this chapter, the following provisions are required: (Ord. 1987-3,
4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      1.   Residential Construction:
         a.   Where flood protection data is available, any structure or
manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above the flood protection elevation.
         b.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. Standard foundation vents as required by the international
building code do not meet this standard.
            (4) Below grade, crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second.
            (5) All building utility systems within the crawl space shall be
elevated above flood protection elevation or be designed so that floodwaters
cannot enter or accumulate within the system component during a flood.
            (6) The interior of a crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade (LAG) and the height of the below grade crawl space, measured
from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space
foundation must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
            (7) Below grade, crawl spaces constructed in accordance with the
requirements listed in this subsection shall not be considered basements.
However, applicants who construct buildings that have below grade crawl spaces
are hereby advised that such buildings will have higher flood insurance
premiums than buildings that have crawl spaces with interior elevations at or
above the lowest adjacent grade.
            (8) Below grade unfinished or flood resistant enclosures shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment, or
building access.
            (9) Otherwise follow the guidelines of the latest version of FEMA
TB 11-01 construction for buildings located in special flood hazard areas:
national flood insurance program interim guidance for crawl space construction.
(Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, shall: (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009,
eff. 7-7-2009)
         a.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy;
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
12-1-7B3b of this chapter.
         d.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection
12-1-9B1b of this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
         e.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
(1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base
flood level will be rated as 1 foot below that level). Floodproofing the
building an additional foot will reduce insurance premiums significantly.
         f.   Otherwise follow the guidelines of the latest version of FEMA TB
11-01 crawl space construction for buildings located in special flood hazard
areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance for crawl space
construction.
      3.   Manufactured Homes: All or varied placement of manufactured homes in
the floodplain shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is at or above the flood protection elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
12-1-9A1b of this chapter to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      4.   Recreational Vehicles: All recreational vehicles placed on sites
within the city shall either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; or
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking
system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of this chapter, and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" as defined in this chapter.
      5.   AE And A1-30 Zones With Flood Protection Elevations But No
Floodways: In areas with flood protection elevations (but a regulatory floodway
has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE
on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      6.   Building Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Areas
of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These
areas have base flood depths of one to three feet (3') aboveground, with no
clearly defined channel. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow.
In these areas the following provisions apply:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as depth number
specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or at
least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with standards of subsection B1 of this section;
         b.   New construction or the substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be
designed to be watertight to the specified flood protection elevation, with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice; and
         c.   Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and
away from a proposed structure.
      7.   Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard
area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above FPE or to the height of the 500-
year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility
should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the level of the flood protection elevation shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
   C.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection
12-1-6B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection C1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-10: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Appeal Board:
      1.   The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
      2.   The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
city clerk-treasurer and/or code enforcement officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2015-12, 12-
10-2015)
      3.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the city council, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the district court as provided under the
statutes of the state.
      4.   In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      5.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A4 of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
      6.   The city clerk-treasurer and/or code enforcement officer shall
maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the
federal insurance administration upon request. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd.
Ord. 2015-12, 12-10-2015)
   B.   Conditions For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot, contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood
protection elevation. As the lot size increases the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases. (Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-
2009)
      2.   (Rep. by Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in subsection A4 of this section, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
      6.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      7.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry
floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage
potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection B1 of
this section, and otherwise complies with subsections
12-1-9A1 and A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
      8.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. Ord. 2009-4, 7-2-
2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
12-1-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the federal insurance administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987)
12-1-12: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 1987-3, 4-8-1987; amd. 2007 Code)
12-1-13: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this chapter or to the flood profiles or flood hazard boundary-
floodway map and water surface elevation of the base flood may be initiated by
the city council. Copies of such amendments shall be furnished to the federal
insurance administration within ten (10) days following adoption. (Ord. 1987-3,
4-8-1987)
TITLE 13 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 1
DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA
SECTION:
13-1-1: Applicability; Purpose
13-1-2: Authority Of The Administrator And The Committee
13-1-3: Application
13-1-4: Clearance Approval
13-1-5: Fees And Costs
13-1-1: APPLICABILITY; PURPOSE:
   Design Review is required for building, developing, or substantially
altering the exterior of buildings or sites in all zones in the City of Lava
Hot Springs for any commercial or industrial building/use, and for any multi-
family residential buildings, including but not limited to, apartments
buildings, fourplexes, triplexes, townhomes, etc. The primary purpose of the
process is to help the applicant identify the technical requirements of city
code that will apply to each unique project and how to apply them to each
project.
   A.   Exemptions:
      1.   Accessory structures not visible from a public street, private
street, or abutting residence;
      2.   Maintenance and repair of existing exterior facades;
      3.   Modifications to exterior finishes that do not change the materials,
including but not limited to paint, stain, or other exterior finishes; and
      4.   Installing a new roof or applying different roofing materials to an
existing structure.
   B.   Design Review is required for site alterations, including, but not
limited to the addition, removal, or modification of site improvements and/or
features such as access, parking, landscaping, or any other alteration which
modifies the site, or could alter any site-specific conditions previously
approved by the City, or could require a rezone, variance, or special use
permit under the requirements of Lava Hot Springs city code. The City Planner
or other designee of the mayor shall have the discretion to determine if Design
Review is required for a particular project.
   C.   Design Review approval must be obtained prior to making application for
any conditional use permit, project permit, site development permit, or
building permit when required by this section.
   D.   The City may withhold permits, certificates of occupancy/completion on
the lots or land being developed or subdivided, or the structures constructed
thereon, if the improvements required under this title have not been
constructed or installed, or if such improvements are not functioning properly,
or if the required Design Review clearance has not been received.
(Ord. 2024-002, 7-11-2024)
13-1-2: AUTHORITY OF THE ADMINISTRATOR AND THE COMMITTEE:
   The City Planner or other designee of the mayor is the Administrator of the
Committee and is responsible for coordinating reviews of applications and for
communicating the decision of the Committee to the applicants. The committee is
authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or deny all projects submitted
for Design Review.
   A.   The Committee shall consist of the Mayor, the City Attorney, the Public
Works Staff, City Engineer, City Planner, City Clerk, City Fire Chief, and/or
their designees.
(Ord. 2024-002, 7-11-2024)
13-1-3: APPLICATION:
   A completed design review application with all fees paid and all application
materials submitted shall constitute a complete application for design review
and is required prior to review of any design review proposal. The following is
required to be submitted for an application for Design Review:
   A.   A Design Review application form which shall include project name,
proposed use, location, applicant, owner, project representatives, and contact
information.
   B.   Vicinity map (to scale) showing the project location in relationship to
neighboring buildings and the surrounding area. The vicinity map shall show the
location of adjacent buildings and structures.
   C.   Site plan, as required by the application form and the Committee
showing locations and dimensions of any of the following on the site:
buildings, fences, sidewalks, ADA ramps, parking areas and stalls, dumpster
enclosures, stormwater retention areas, existing trees and fences, easements,
rights-of-way, above ground utility lines, canals/ditches, etc.
   D.   Preliminary landscape plan (existing landscaping on the site show as
retained, relocated, or removed; proposed landscaping including species types,
quantity, etc).
   E.   Floor plan showing gross square footage for each floor and listing
occupancy classification and type of construction and showing locations of any
floor drains.
   F.   Detailed elevations of all sides of all proposed buildings in the
development and other exterior elements (colors, materials).
   G.   Sign plans showing locations, sizes, dimensions, and illustrations.
   H.   Lighting plan showing locations of lighting structures and fixtures,
the lighting distribution on the site, and demonstrating how light will be
aimed and shielded to prevent light trespass off the property and downward from
the night sky.
   I.   A list of chemicals, including cooking oils, to be stored and/or used
on the site and whether any are proposed to be disposed of in the sanitary
sewer system. If proposed for disposal in the sanitary sewer system, submit
proposed pretreatment method, if any.
   J.   The Administrator may waive some submittal requirements if they
determine the information is not relevant to the Committee after consulting
with the Committee.
(Ord. 2024-002, 7-11-2024)
13-1-4: CLEARANCE APPROVAL:
   A.   Upon receipt of a complete application and fees, the Administrator
shall provide the applicant’s submittal to the Committee along with a request
for review and comments. The Committee shall have fourteen (14) calendar days
to review the submittal and to issue a decision in writing.
   B.   The Committee shall determine whether the proposed project will conform
to, or exceed, applicable standards and criteria of Lava Hot Springs city code,
either as proposed or with conditions that must be satisfied to assure
conformance, to receive Design Review approval. In making its review the Design
Review Committee shall consider, among other things, the City standards and
criteria for the following items:
      1.   Curb, Gutter, and Sidewalk standards;
      2.   Approach and Access Management Standards;
      3.   Street, Right-of-Way, Traffic Circulation, and Traffic Study
Standards;
      4.   Stormwater Retention Standards;
      5.   Lighting Standards;
      6.   Landscaping Standards;
      7.   Parking Standards;
      8.   Land Use and Zoning Standards;
      9.   Sanitary Sewer Pretreatment standards;
      10.   Water, sanitary sewer, and sanitation standards;
      11.   Fire Code standards;
      12.   Building Code Standards;
      13.   Platting and Development Agreement Standards;
      14.   Other items specific to the use, the site, the zone, etc.
   C.   Where allowed by Lava Hot Springs city code or not expressly prohibited
by the same, the Committee may grant deviations from certain standards based on
cause and upon specific request by an applicant.
   D.   If an application is denied, the Committee shall state in writing what
actions, if any, the Applicant could take to obtain future approval.
   E.   The Committee may approve any condition necessary to ensure the health,
safety, and welfare of the public is not jeopardized, and to ensure that the
technical requirements of the city code will be met.
   F.   A decision by the Committee is specific only to the technical details
of City Code and does not constitute an approval for any other separate
authorization required by City Code such as a conditional use permit, variance,
preliminary plat, or final plat, nor is it a complete list of detailed
technical requirements for approval of a project.
   G.   If an applicant disagrees with the written decision of the Committee,
then the applicant must, prior to making an appeal to the City Council, submit
a written request to reconsider the decision, stating the specific requirements
with which the applicant takes issue. The Committee shall review and respond to
the request for reconsideration within ten (10) calendar days.
   H.   Decisions of the Committee may be appealed to the City Council,
provided the applicant has properly made a request to reconsider as set forth
above. Any appeal must be in writing and submitted to the City Clerk within ten
(10) calendar days of the date of the Committee’s final decision. At the
Council meeting to review the appeal, both the applicant and members of the
Committee may provide testimony to the Council, and the Council may reverse,
affirm, or modify any decision of the Committee.
(Ord. 2024-002, 7-11-2024)
13-1-5: FEES AND COSTS:
   The design review application fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2024-002, 7-11-2024)
 
