MONTPELIER, IDAHO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-6 Supplement current through
Ordinance 687, passed 10-15-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 678
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF MONTEPLIER, STATE OF
IDAHO, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MONTPELIER DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SUCH CODE ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY; REPEALING AND REPLACING ALL
ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HERETO; SETTING AN EFFECTIVE DATE; WAIVING THE THREE
READING RULE.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MONTEPLIER, IDAHO, AS
FOLLOWS:
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Montpelier are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Idaho empower and
authorize the City of Montpelier to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Montpelier has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and of the immediate preservation of the public peace, health.
Safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
MONTPELIER, IDAHO;
Section 1:   The general ordinances of the City of Montpelier as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and complied in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Montpelier, Idaho."
Section 2:   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles: [Title I: General Provisions; Title III: Administration;
Title V: Public Works; Title VII: Traffic Code; Title IX: General Regulations;
Title XI: Business Regulations; Title XIII: General Offenses; Title XV: Land
Usage; Table of Special Ordinances; Parallel References; Index]
Section 3:   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed and replaced from and after the
effective date of this ordinance expect as they are included and reordained in
whole or in part of such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4:   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Montpelier is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
Section 5:   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary to
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality, and shall take effect immediately at the
passing of this Ordinance.
Section 7:   Any ordinances or resolutions found to be in confliction to
codification of all the ordinances is hereby repealed and replaced with the
codified ordinances.
Section 8:   The City hereby waives the three-reading rule.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council and Mayor of the City of Montpelier
on this 6th day of March 2024.
   CITY OF MONTPELIER, IDAHO
   By: Signed Ted Slivinski, Mayor
   ATTEST:
   Signed Michelle Singleton, City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Maintenance of city code
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Public utility ordinances
   
10.07   Saving clause
   
10.08   General constructional rule
   
10.09   Plural and singular words
   
10.10   Masculine and feminine gender
   
10.11   Priority of ordinance
   
10.12   Definitions
   
10.13   Captions
   
10.14   Severability
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   This codification of the general ordinances of the City of Montpelier is
declared to be the official city code of the City of Montpelier.
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   Any official copy of the code shall be received without further proof in all
courts and in all administrative tribunals of the state.
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending the code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended. All such ordinances
shall comply with the provisions of the code and Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter
9, regarding passage, execution and publication of ordinances. All such
amendments shall be promptly forwarded to the codifiers by the City Clerk, and
such ordinance shall be promptly published and inserted in its proper place in
each copy of the city code.
§ 10.04 MAINTENANCE OF CITY CODE.
   Upon receipt of each published ordinance from the codifiers, the City Clerk
shall promptly forward a copy of each page thereof to each person having an
official copy of the city code. The City Clerk may collect a fee for each copy
of the city code and an annual fee for maintenance thereof; provided, that such
fees shall be established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the City
Council.
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city are hereby repealed, except as herein
specifically preserved or are, by implication, reserved from repeal, subject to
the saving clauses herein contained, excluding without limitation the special
ordinances relating to the following subjects: Tax levies; appropriation of
public moneys; boundaries and annexations; franchises; ordinances granting
special rights to persons or correspondence; contracts; issuance of warrants;
public salaries; ordinances establishing names or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement districts; bonds; local elections; the sale or
exchange of real estate; sign ordinances; economic development; urban renewal;
public utilities; zoning; and all special ordinances of any kind, except for
those provisions in such special ordinances which the code expressly amends.
§ 10.06 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance or section thereof relating to railroads or railroad crossings
of streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service
or rates of public utilities, shall be repealed by the adoption of the code or
by §
10.05, except as this code specifically provides for such repeal.
§ 10.07 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Any ordinance amending or repealing any section of the code shall not be
deemed or construed to abate any pending action based upon such amended or
repealed section, nor shall the passage of such ordinance prevent the arrest,
prosecution and punishment of any violation of such section committed prior to
the effective date of such ordinance.
§ 10.08 GENERAL CONSTRUCTIONAL RULE.
   Except as expressly stated in the code, all words shall have their ordinary,
generally accepted meaning.
§ 10.09 PLURAL AND SINGULAR WORDS.
   Whenever any word in the code is used in either the singular or in the
plural form, then such word shall be deemed to include both the plural and
singular forms of such word, unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.10 MASCULINE AND FEMININE GENDER.
   When any person is referred to in any section of the code by use of the
masculine gender, then such reference shall be deemed to include the feminine
gender unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.11 PRIORITY OF ORDINANCE.
   In the event of any discrepancy or conflict between the code and any
ordinance passing or amending the same section of the code, then the provisions
of the ordinance shall prevail.
§ 10.12 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY. The City of Montpelier, Bear Lake County, State of Idaho.
   CITY ATTORNEY. An attorney appointed by the Mayor to provide general counsel
and legal assistance to the city and to prosecute or defend all civil actions
in which the city is a party.
   COUNCIL or BOARD. The lawfully elected governing body of Montpelier, Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Bear Lake, Idaho.
   CRIME. An act in violation of this code.
   FELONY. A crime as defined under Idaho Code § 18-111.
   IDAHO ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS (IDAPA). A numbering designation for all
administrative rules in the state which denotes rules promulgated in accordance
with the State Administrative Procedures Act, Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 52.
   INFRACTION. A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding $100 and for which no incarceration
may be imposed.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, trade,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Every crime, except a felony.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. A crime or other violation of this code.
   OPERATOR. The person who is generally in charge of or responsible for
conducting any business, profession or enterprise.
   OWNER. Any person owning real or personal property, including any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, remainderperson or person
holding a life estate or reversionary interest of any kind.
   PERSON. A human being and any public or private corporation, firm,
partnership, trust, estate, sole proprietorship, association, organization,
government or any other entity recognized under state law.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, effects, rights in action and all
written instruments evidencing any pecuniary obligation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STATE. The State of Idaho.
   STREET. All public roads, ways, alleys and rights-of-way used for the
movement of vehicular traffic, including any public sidewalks adjacent thereto.
   TENANT. Any person who occupies any building or real property for a
consideration to the owner.
   UNIFORM BUILDING CODE. The codes adopted by the city under §
150.01.
§ 10.13 CAPTIONS.
   The captions and titles used at the commencement of each section or division
of the code are used only to indicate the content of the section and shall not
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions thereafter.
§ 10.14 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and if
any provision of this chapter or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   In all ordinances of the city, where any act or thing is prohibited or
declared unlawful, or made an offense, and no penalty for punishment is
prescribed therefor, the same shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.010)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FINANCES AND FEES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Salary
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and
third Wednesday of each month, commencing at the hour of 7:30 p.m. at the City
Hall in said city.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.010) (Ord. 492, passed 3-16-1982; Ord. 589, passed 1-17-
2006)
§ 30.02 SALARY.
   As of the effective date of January 1, 1990, the salary of the Mayor shall
be $450 per month, and the salary of the Council members shall be $185 per
month.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010) (Ord. 516, passed 9-7-1989; Ord. 563, passed 8-17-
1999)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Police Department
   
31.02   Golf Course Commission
   
31.03   Industrial Development Corporation; Board of Directors
§ 31.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall have the management and control of all matters and
things relating to the Police Department, its officers and members. He or she
shall have charge of all equipment, books, records and other property belonging
to such Department and superintend the performance of all police duties within
the city. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to preserving the
peace, maintaining order and assuring the safety of the city and its
inhabitants, and to this end, he or she shall execute and enforce all
ordinances of the city and all orders of the City Council and the Mayor. He or
she shall have authority subject to the approval of the Mayor to adopt such
rules and regulations not in conflict with city ordinances as he or she may
deem necessary and advisable for the Police Department, and he or she shall
furnish the Mayor and Council with such rules and regulations. He or she shall
take notice of all nuisances and impediments, obstructions and defects in the
streets and public places in the city and shall remove the same or cause
immediate notice thereof to be given to the proper officer, whose duty it may
be to take action in relation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.010) (Ord. 359, passed - -1952)
§ 31.02 GOLF COURSE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission appointed and terms of office.
      (1)   (a)   There is created a Commission to be known and designated as
the City Golf Course Commission, which Commission shall consist of five members
to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council, one of whom must
be a member of the Council and the other four may or may not be members of the
Council, with a simple majority of the Commission being residents within the
city.
         (b)   On the taking effect of this section, the Mayor, with the
consent and approval of the Council, shall appoint a member from the Council to
serve for a period of three years or until the end of the elective term of said
member of said Council, two members to serve for a period of two years, one
member for a period of three years and one member for a period of four years.
      (2)   Thereafter, as the term of each member of said Commission expires,
except for the member from the Council whose appointment shall never exceed the
term to which elected as a Council member, the Mayor shall appoint a
Commissioner for a term of four years. Any Commissioner may be discharged from
office at any time upon request of the Mayor and by vote of the Council. Any
vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by appointment by
the Mayor and/or the consent of the Council, which appointee shall hold office
until the expiration of the term to which he or she was appointed.
   (B)   Organization and meetings.
      (1)   The Golf Course Commission (herein Commission) shall meet as often
as deemed appropriate to fulfill the duties prescribed herein, providing the
Commission shall meet not less than twice annually.
      (2)   The Commission may organize and conduct its meetings in such manner
as the Commission deems appropriate, providing that topical minutes of all
meetings shall be kept and any recommendations to the city be reduced to
writing and shall be deposited with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   To promote the comfortable use and enjoyment of the golf course for
the residents of the city and the general public;
      (2)   To recommend rules, regulations, general maintenance and usage fees
consistent with the overall maintenance and operation of a quality golf course
at minimum expense to the city;
      (3)   To recommend general capital improvements to the golf course and
methods to finance the improvements;
      (4)   To negotiate general operations and management agreements for the
golf course, or amendments to existing agreements, providing all agreements
shall be subject to acceptance by the Mayor and City Council;
      (5)   To supervise the performance of any operations and management
agreements, including a monthly on-site performance audit when the golf course
is open. The audit shall include a review of receipts and expenditures and
shall be reduced to writing and signed by the contract manager and City
Superintendent of Public Works and deposited with the City Clerk; and
      (6)   To address grievances by users of the golf course, or residents of
the city, concerning the general operations of the golf course and, when
appropriate, to resolve or recommend a resolution of the grievance.
   (D)   Budget. It shall be the duty of the Commission to compile and prepare
the preliminary budget for consideration by the Mayor and Council not later
than July 1 each year.
(Ord. 528, passed 8-18-1992; Ord. 645, passed 6-4-2014)
§ 31.03 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION; BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   The city does hereby create a public corporation to carry out the
purposes of Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter 27 (the Municipal Industrial
Development Program Act or “the Act”). This section shall not be construed to
limit or restrict the purposes of the Act, but shall be liberally construed to
effect such purposes.
   (B)   The name of the public corporation shall be the City Industrial
Development Corporation (the Corporation).
   (C)   The Corporation shall have all the powers and be subject to all the
limitations and provisions contained in the Act.
   (D)   A charter (the charter) is hereby issued by the city to the
Corporation. The charter grants to the corporation all powers authorized by the
Act. A copy of the charter is attached to the ordinance codified in this
section as Exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference. The charter is
hereby approved pursuant to Idaho Code § 50-2703(1). The charter may be amended
from time to time by the City Council. The existence of the Corporation
commences at the time the enactment of this section becomes effective.
   (E)   The Board of Directors of the Corporation (the Board) shall be
comprised of five individuals. The initial members of the Board and all
subsequent members shall be appointed by the City Council. Of the members first
appointed, two member shall serve for a term of one year, one for a term of two
years and two for a term of three years. Thereafter, upon expiration of a term
of appointment, each member shall be appointed to a three-year term. If a
vacancy occurs during an unexpired term, the Mayor, with the consent of the
City Council, shall appoint a member to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the
approval of a majority of a quorum shall be necessary for the Board to take any
action.
   (F)   The affairs of the Corporation shall be conducted and carried out by
the Board. The Board shall elect officers from among its own members. Such
officers shall be elected at the initial meeting of the Board in each calendar
year, shall serve until their successors have been duly elected and shall
include a President and a Secretary, and may include a Vice President and an
Assistant Secretary. The Board may elect such other officers as it shall from
time to time determine to be necessary or desirable. The Board shall adopt
bylaws and/or rules and regulations governing the election of officers, the
power and duties of such officers, the filling of vacancies in offices, the
scheduling, giving notice of and conduct of meetings and the conduct of the
Corporation. Such bylaws, rules and regulations may be amended from time to
time by the Board; provided, that any such amendments shall be consistent with
the provisions hereof. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation
but with reimbursement of expenses as may be provided in the bylaws, rules and
regulations of the Board.
   (G)   No director, officer, agent, employee or official of the Corporation
shall have a direct or indirect financial interest in any property to be
included in or any contract for property, services or materials to be furnished
or used in connection with any industrial development facility financed through
the Corporation.
   (H)   The Corporation shall have all the powers granted by the Act. Such
powers shall include, without limitation, all powers set forth in the charter.
   (I)   The city may not give or lend any money or property in aid of the
Corporation, except as expressly authorized by the Act. This provision shall
not preclude the city from dealing with the Corporation on an arms-length
basis.
   (J)   Any net earnings of the Corporation beyond those necessary for
retirement of indebtedness incurred by it shall inure to the city and not for
the benefit of any other person. Alteration of the charter, or dissolution of,
or audits of, the Corporation shall be as provided by the Act and by subsequent
ordinances of the city. Upon dissolution of the Corporation, title to all
property owned by the Corporation shall vest in the city.
(Ord. 614, passed 5- -2009)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCES AND FEES
Section
   
32.01   Fee schedules
§ 32.01 FEE SCHEDULES.
   (A)   The fee schedule for the following shall be:
 
Fingerprints    $5
VIN inspections $5
 
   (B)   (1)   If a request for a police report is made and the request is for
more than 100 pages of paper records; includes records from which nonpublic
information must be deleted; or the actual labor associated with locating and
copying documents for a request exceeds two person hours, then the following
fee schedule, which represents the actual labor costs associated with locating,
copying and/or duplicating the requested material, shall apply:
 
Actual review time necessary to comply with the requirements of $10 per hour
Idaho Code Title 9, Chapter 3
Copy costs                                                      $0.25 per page
Costs for actual time spent to locate file/report               $10 per hour
DVD or CD duplication                                           $5
Photograph duplication                                          $2.50 per page
Police reports (excluding motor vehicle accident reports)       $5
 
      (2)   If the provisions of division (B)(1) above do not apply, then the
only fee that may be charged is the actual cost of copying the documents.
      (3)   The fees provided by this section do not apply to requests for
accident reports which require the production of complete, unaltered copies of
an impact report, or its successors, and the final report prepared by the
agency; in such instances, only the actual cost for copies may be charged.
      (4)   All fees paid pursuant to this section shall be paid to the Clerk’s
office prior to receipt of the materials.
(Ord. 619, passed 4-7-2010)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   WATER PROTECTION; WELLS
      
53.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Purpose and scope
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Maintenance of sanitary conditions
   
50.04   Compost
   
50.05   Storage and transportation of solid waste
   
50.06   Enforcement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
      (1)   To establish sanitary standards for the incorporated areas in the
city;
      (2)   To promote and protect the health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the public, including the protection of groundwater and surface
water; and
      (3)   To protect and enhance the value of real property and buildings in
the city.
   (B)   These regulations shall apply to all land and buildings within the
incorporated areas of the city, and it shall be unlawful hereafter to keep,
collect, haul, transport or dispose of solid waste except as herein provided.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Montpelier, Idaho.
   COMPOSTING. The biological decomposition of organic waste under controlled
conditions.
   DISPOSAL SITES. See LANDFILLS.
   LANDFILLS or DISPOSAL SITES. Such areas operated by the county which shall
be the only areas on public or private property within the county where solid
waste may be disposed.
   OWNER or OCCUPANT. Every person in possession, charge or in control of any
dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, place of business, manufacturing or business
establishment where solid waste is created or accumulated.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, institution or
corporation, in plural as well as singular.
   PREMISES. Any dwellings, flats, rooming houses, apartment houses, hospitals,
schools, hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, places of business,
manufacturing or business establishments, or any other building or structure.
   RESIDENCE. The place of dwelling of one head of family and his or her
dependents.
   SOLID WASTE. Any and all trash or litter associated with the construction or
demolition of buildings, to include: Paper; inoperative vehicle bodies, chassis
or parts thereof; cardboard; wood scrap; shingles; concrete; and waste
materials of an inert nature such as ashes, plastic, metals, cinders, tires,
appliances or tree parts; and those items, including liquids which by their
nature are noxious, odoriferous or are subject to the development of bacteria,
viruses or other hazards to health, including waste accumulations of animal or
vegetable matter, including animal parts or carcasses and including waste that
attends the preparation, use, serving, cooking, dealing in or storing of meats,
fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables. The term SOLID WASTE does not include
sewage, human body waste or hazardous wastes as determined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
   STREET, ROAD or ALLEY. A right-of-way which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent properties, used by the public or public travel.
It shall include the terms street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, land place and other such terms.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999)
§ 50.03 MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit or permit to accumulate any solid waste
in any building or on any premises, improved or vacant, or any lot or area,
either public or private, within the unincorporated county, except at the
County Landfill located east of the city on U.S. Highway 89 so that it is or is
likely:
      (1)   To attract flies or fly breeding;
      (2)   To afford food or harborage for rodents;
      (3)   To be a source of noxious or offensive odors or conditions inimical
to public interest or health;
      (4)   To render vehicles or pedestrians unsafe; and
      (5)   To pose a threat of pollution to groundwater or surface water.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to allow to
accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any adjacent
street, alley or sidewalk, owned or occupied by such person, solid waste as
defined herein.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, upon vacating dwellings,
storerooms or any other building, to fail to remove all solid waste from such
buildings and premises, and also the grounds appurtenant thereto, or to fail to
place the same in a sanitary condition within 24 hours after said premises
shall be vacated.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 COMPOST.
   (A)   Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter
used for fertilization purposes only may be transported, kept and used,
provided the same shall not constitute a nuisance, public or private, as
defined by the state code.
   (B)   Compost piles using materials from other sites must have the approval
of the Southeast Idaho District Health Department and the city. Commercial
composting operations are subject to additional zoning and District Health
Department regulations.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner and occupant of any place where
solid waste is created or accumulated to at all times keep or cause to be kept
sanitary containers and, except as otherwise provided, to deposit or cause to
be deposited all solid waste therein. The aforesaid containers shall be
maintained in a secure condition so as to avoid offensive odors, health hazards
and the scattering or spilling of solid waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person transporting solid waste over
public streets, roads, alleys or rights-of-way to do so without providing a
cover and/or securing to the vehicle all solid waste being transported.
Covering loads of solid waste shall be for the purpose of preventing the
scattering, blowing or loss of said solid waste so transported.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste anywhere
in the city except at the County Landfill.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard or deposit any
solid waste in or upon any road, right-of-way, street or alley, sidewalk or
vacant ground, or in or upon any canal irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or
other watercourse.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any law enforcement agent, landfill personnel or other designee of the city
shall be the enforcement officer of this chapter.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with or violates
any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as an infraction
punishable by a fine of $40, as provided in Idaho Code § 18-111.
   (B)   In addition to any infraction penalties and fines, the city may pursue
the following civil remedies, jointly or civilly.
      (1)   Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in
equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful
disposal and transportation of solid waste, to recover damages and to restrain,
correct or abate a violation.
      (2)   If the violation is not abated within 15 days after citation or
arrest is made by the proper enforcing officer, said violation shall constitute
a new and separate offense.
      (3)   The city may abate the violation and bill the landowner for the
amount of costs incurred after determination, by a court or by the plaintiff’s
payment of an infraction penalty, that a violation has occurred. If unpaid at
the end of 180 days, the charges will accrue as taxes upon the property
involved.
(Ord. 561, passed 4-20-1999)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Application for water
   
51.02   Service connection
   
51.03   Permit required for laying pipe and excavation
   
51.04   Depth of service pipe
   
51.05   Installation of stop and waste cock
   
51.06   Service connections must be separate
   
51.07   Placements prohibited near water pipes or mains
   
51.08   Inspection of premises
   
51.09   Discontinuance of service by joint users
   
51.10   Waste prohibited
   
51.11   Unauthorized use of water
   
51.12   Bill payment and charge for turning on water
   
51.13   Notice of discontinuance of use
   
51.14   Authorization to turn water on and off
   
51.15   City water may be shut off without liability
   
51.16   Limiting use of water during emergency
   
51.17   Water service outside city
   
51.18   Watering hours
Water Meters
   
51.30   Installation
   
51.31   Water meter required
   
51.32   Property of the city
   
51.33   Maintained by city; loss or damage by user
   
51.34   Testing
   
51.35   Each meter to be computed separately
Rates and Fees
   
51.50   Fees and other costs
   
51.51   Statements for water use
   
51.52   Nonpayment; owner liability; liens
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 APPLICATION FOR WATER.
   (A)   Any person desiring to be supplied with water from the city waterworks
system shall make an application in writing upon a form to be provided by the
City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The purpose for which water service is requested;
      (3)   Whether the property to be serviced is located within or outside
the city;
      (4)   A description of the premises or building to be supplied;
      (5)   Whether the applicant is the owner of said premises or building, or
a tenant or occupant under contract, and the name and address of the owner if
the applicant does not own the premises; and
      (6)   An acceptance by such applicant of the ordinances, rules and
regulations which may be prescribed by the city relating to water service and
distribution.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.02 SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall refer the same to
the Superintendent of Waterworks.
   (B)   The connection to the city water system shall be made by the city
crews and/or other person authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (C)   If no connection has heretofore been made for serving said property,
and the mains of the water system in the abutting street or streets have been
extended to a point opposite or adjacent to the property, the Superintendent of
Waterworks shall proceed to make connection to the main and extend such
connections to the line of the property, and he or she shall install a stopcock
and meter at or near the curb line.
   (D)   No work shall be done for the purpose of supplying any house or
building then constructed or in the course of construction until the owner of
the property shall have installed the service line from the property line to
the place of intended use.
   (E)   The connection by the city crews shall include accomplishing the
connection, providing the line requested by the property owner, or his or her
authorized agent, to the point of the owner’s property so designated, including
a water shutoff valve and a water meter.
   (F)   The property owner, or his or her authorized agent, shall be
responsible to extend the water service from the public right-of-way, and the
same shall be installed in compliance with all applicable state and local
regulations.
   (G)   All installations shall be performed specifically to the requirements
of the Superintendent of Waterworks and his or her approval and inspection.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR LAYING PIPE AND EXCAVATION.
   (A)   No person or persons, without first having obtained a permit from the
Superintendent of Waterworks, shall be allowed to dig into the streets or under
the sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe.
   (B)   No wells or other excavation of more than 20 feet shall be made
without permission of the city.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 DEPTH OF SERVICE PIPE.
   All service pipes inside property lines shall be laid to a depth of at least
four and one-half feet below the surface of the ground, and when any such pipes
are installed, the same shall be left exposed in the trench for the inspection
of the Superintendent of Waterworks, or his or her authorized representative,
and if not in compliance with the provisions of this section, no service
connection shall be made or water supplied until the requirements of this
section shall have been observed.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.05 INSTALLATION OF STOP AND WASTE COCK.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install in any building any service
pipe for supplying water in such building without providing a stop and waste
cock at an easily accessible point within the building which will ensure the
best drainage of the entire system.
   (B)   The stop and waste cock shall be conveniently and readily accessible
to any occupant of the building.
   (C)   For all existing service pipes wherein a stop and waste cock has not
been installed, the city may direct the property owner or occupant to make such
installation within 30 days from receipt of such notice.
   (D)   If not made within the time fixed, the person owning or having charge
of such building shall be liable for the penalty provided by ordinance.
   (E)   Each day the installation is not performed after the expiration of
said 30 days shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 SERVICE CONNECTIONS MUST BE SEPARATE.
   (A)   (1)   Service pipes hereafter installed must be so arranged that the
supply to each separate house or premises must be controlled by separate
stopcocks placed within or near the line of the street curb.
      (2)   The owner or occupant of each house or premises must pay for all
water used through said service pipe.
   (B)   Where water is now supplied through one service pipe to several lots,
houses or premises, the city may at any time decline to furnish water until
separate service connections are provided, or may discontinue to supply water,
except on the condition that one person shall pay for all the water used
through the same service pipe.
   (C)   All water must be supplied through service pipes attached to the
street mains at the nearest possible point from the house to be supplied, and
in such cases where water is now supplied through a service pipe to any lot,
which service pipe is connected with a main on another street or alley than the
one immediately adjacent to the house or lot to be served, the city may at any
time decline to furnish water until the connection is made with the main
immediately adjacent to the property to be served.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.07 PLACEMENTS PROHIBITED NEAR WATER PIPES OR MAINS.
   (A)   Placing gas, sewer or other pipes in same trench with water pipes or
mains. It is unlawful to place any gas, sewer or other main or pipe in the same
trench with the water service lines or mains.
   (B)   Obstruction not allowed. No telegraph or telephone poles, hitchings or
other posts shall be put down or set within four feet of any water service pipe
or within six feet of any main pipe.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Unrestricted access shall be allowed to the Superintendent of Waterworks or
to any other authorized person at reasonable times to all places supplied with
water from the municipal water plant, to examine the apparatus, the amount of
water used and the manner of its use, and to ascertain any violation of the
rules and regulations controlling the supply of water and the charges made
therefor.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.09 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY JOINT USERS.
   Where two or more parties or premises are supplied by the same service pipe,
the failure on the part of either party to comply with this chapter shall
warrant the Superintendent of Waterworks in withholding a supply of water
though said service pipe until a separate pipe with stopcock, meter and key box
is put in for each separate consumer.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.10 WASTE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any water taker to wastewater or allow it to be wasted by
imperfect stops, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks of water or
troughs to leak or overflow, or to wastefully run water from a faucet or stop,
or through basins, water closets, urinals or other apparatus or to use water in
any violation of the rules and regulations for the control of the water supply
under the provisions of this chapter, or of any rules and regulations to be
hereinafter provided by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.
   (A)   If any water consumer shall permit any other person to use or obtain
water from his or her premises or water fixtures whatsoever, inside or outside
of his or her building, the supply of water of such person may be cut off and
the amount theretofore paid forfeited.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to take water from another
premises or connection.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to take water from a fire hydrant
without authorization.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.12 BILL PAYMENT AND CHARGE FOR TURNING ON WATER.
   (A)   When charges for water, labor or materials are unpaid, or for any
other reason due to the violation of the rules and regulations adopted it
becomes necessary to shut off the supply of water to any premises, then, before
the same is again turned on, the City Clerk shall collect from the user or
owner all delinquent and accrued charges chargeable against said premises,
together with a service charge set by the Mayor and City Council, for turning
the water back on.
   (B)   Any water service delinquent for more than two months shall be turned
off. Notice of discontinuance will be sent to the property owner.
   (C)   The property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner must
be present before the water service is turned back on.
   (D)   One water turn off and turn on during regular working hours will be
allowed with no service charge. Any others during that same period will be
charged a regular service fee.
   (E)   Water turn off or turn on per day after hours or on weekends will be
considered an emergency and billed at an overtime rate set by the City Council.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.13 NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Any water user not using water after the first of any month must
report the same to the City Clerk and have the water shut off, and if he or she
fails to do so, the full amount for said month must be paid. No allowance shall
be made for non-usage for less than the one month.
   (B)   All connections as to charges and all abatements shall be made under
the direction of the City Council and shall be certified by the City Clerk. The
owner of the premises shall be responsible for all water, labor and materials
furnished to said premises.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.14 AUTHORIZATION TO TURN WATER ON AND OFF.
   (A)   Authorization to turn water on and off. It is unlawful for any person
other than an employee of the city to turn water off or on at the curb cock.
   (B)   Turning water on and/or using water without authority. It is unlawful
for any person to turn the water on or permit the water to be turned on, or use
or permit the water to be used when the water is shut off by the city to the
premises for the nonpayment of fees or other violations of the rules and
regulations pertaining to the water supply.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.15 CITY WATER MAY BE SHUT OFF WITHOUT LIABILITY.
   The city may at any time without notice shut off the water from any main or
from any tank or reservoir or from any other part of the water system for the
purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes, and it shall not
be liable for any interference with work or operations of business or other
damage that may result from the shutting off of water for the purpose of making
repairs or for the purpose of laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other
connections, or for any other interruption or cessation of the water supply for
any reason whatsoever.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.16 LIMITING USE OF WATER DURING EMERGENCY.
   (A)   The Mayor may, by proclamation, limit use of water for sprinkling. In
times of emergency, scarcity or dry season, or when the plant is unable to
furnish a sufficient supply of water for all purposes, the Mayor or City
Council shall, by proclamation, limit the use of water for other than domestic
purposes to such an extent as may be necessary for the public good.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to violate the proclamation or
resolution established herein.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17 WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY.
   (A)   Any person or persons adjacent to the city may, with the permission of
the City Council, receive water subject to the rules and regulations prescribed
by this chapter; however, the city reserves the right to shut off such supply
without notice if the supply within the corporate limits shall become
inadequate.
   (B)   Water lines shall not, without prior approval of city, be extended
outside the corporate limits of the city.
   (C)   (1)   If the city determines there will be special benefit and
improvement to the city works system by reason of an extension outside the
city, special arrangements may be made with the city to allow said extension.
      (2)   Provided, however, that the areas to be serviced outside of the
city shall not benefit to a greater extent than like areas provided with the
water service within the city; and provided further, that no such arrangement
shall be made unless adequate water line capacity is available for such service
outside the city.
   (D)   The city shall not provide water service to any consumer whose
residence or place of business is outside the corporate limits of the city
until a contract for water service outside the city has been executed between
the consumer and the city.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.18 WATERING HOURS.
   (A)   Watering hours will be from 5:00 a.m. through 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
through 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   Automatic sprinkler systems can use the same schedule or water any
three hours from midnight to 5:00 a.m. but not both. Hose watering cannot be
used in conjunction with automatic sprinklers.
   (C)   There will be no exceptions including sprinkler systems and washing
cars.
(Res. 250716, passed 7-16-2025) Penalty, see §
51.99
WATER METERS
§ 51.30 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may at any time direct the Superintendent
of Waterworks to place a meter on any service line in the city and change the
method of payment from a flat rate to a meter rate if it be deemed advisable to
do so.
   (B)   All meters shall be installed at or near the curb cock unless existing
conditions prevent such installation, in which case the meter shall be
installed in the basement or at another convenient location.
   (C)   All meters shall be sealed, and the seal shall bear the stamp of the
city. It is unlawful for any person, except the Superintendent of Waterworks or
his or her authorized representative, to break the seal or to damage,
disconnect or interfere with any water meter installed by the city.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.31 WATER METER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Residential.
      (1)   A water meter shall be installed on the following:
         (a)   New construction and secondary lines; and
         (b)   Lots, including vacant lots if water is used thereon, and
undeveloped lots or parts of lots if used to contain livestock or pasture feed
for livestock.
      (2)   The water meter shall be installed in conformity with applicable
rules or regulations contained herein.
      (3)   Meters on one-inch lines or less shall be purchased by the city.
Meters on lines greater than one inch shall be purchased by the owner or his or
her agent. The owner, or his or her agent, is to pay only the difference
between the cost of the one-inch meter and the cost of the larger meter
installed.
   (B)   Commercial.
      (1)   A water meter shall be installed on all businesses.
      (2)   The water meter shall be installed in conformity with applicable
rules or regulations contained herein.
      (3)   (a)   Meters on one-inch lines or less shall be purchased by the
city.
         (b)   Meters on lines greater than one inch shall be purchased by the
owner or his or her agent.
         (c)   The owner, or his or her agent, is to pay only the difference
between the cost of the one-inch meter and the cost of the larger meter
installed.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.32 PROPERTY OF THE CITY.
   (A)   All water meters installed by the Water Department shall be and remain
the property of the city and may be removed or replaced or changed as to size
and type by the Water Department whenever deemed necessary by the Department.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to any other charges by the city, the user or owner
shall reimburse the city the cost of the water meter.
      (2)   Only water meters approved and purchased by the city may be
installed.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.33 MAINTAINED BY CITY; LOSS OR DAMAGE BY USER.
   (A)   The Water Department shall maintain and repair all meters when
rendered unserviceable through fair wear and tear and shall maintain them, if
necessary.
   (B)   Provided, however, that where replacement, repair or adjustment of any
meter, or replacement of the same because of its loss is rendered necessary by
the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any
expense caused to the Water Department thereby shall be charged against and
collected from the water consumer or owner, and water service may be
discontinued until the cause is corrected and the amount of charges collected.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.34 TESTING.
   (A)   Any meter installed on any pipe serving any property shall be removed
and tested by the Water Department at the request of any property owner or
occupant upon the payment of a deposit to cover the charge of the testing.
   (B)   (1)   If said meter is found to be accurate, within the limits of the
guarantee by the manufacturer of the meter, the amount deposited shall be
retained by the city.
      (2)   If, however the meter is found to be inaccurate beyond the limits
of said guarantee, the deposit will be refunded.
   (C)   The meter shall be corrected or exchanged, and the water rentals
collected from the owner or tenant requesting the test shall be adjusted by
giving such owner or tenant credit on the charge made against him or her for
the succeeding month of the amount with which he or she was overcharged by
reason of the defective meter during the month concerning which complaint was
made.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.35 EACH METER TO BE COMPUTED SEPARATELY.
   Where an individual consumer is supplied with water through more than one
metered service, charges shall be computed separately for each individual
meter.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
RATES AND FEES
§ 51.50 FEES AND OTHER COSTS.
   (A)   Anyone who obtains a connection to the water system of the city shall
be required to pay a fee therefor, and other applicable costs. All fees and
costs herein will be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The person obtaining the connection, in addition to the connection
fees, shall pay the actual cost incurred by the city crews as established by
resolution of City Council.
   (C)   Any connection outside the city limits will be at a fee not less than
double the in-city connection fee and monthly rate fee. All fees associated
with this chapter may be set by resolution of City Council.
   (D)   The city water rates shall be $33.50 per month plus $0.90 per 1,000
gallon over 28,000 gallons per month.
      (1)   Contractors or similar associations or persons using water shall be
$50.00 per month or per Water Purchase Permit plus $2.00 per 100 gallons, a
$500 meter deposit, the same being refundable, shall be deposited with the city
at, and during, the usage of the water.
      (2)   The user fees and hookup fees for nonresident users shall be double
the fees for resident users.
   (E)   Any person or entity desiring to connect to the city water shall pay a
fee to the city prior to connection in the sum of $5,000.
      (1)   The rates and fees set forth above may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Any fees or rates previously adopted and approved by the city which
vary from the rates set forth in this division (E) shall remain in full force
and effect if not altered herein.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 675, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 676, passed 10-4-
2023; Res. 250423, passed 4-23-2025; Res. 250716-1, passed 7-16-2025)
§ 51.51 STATEMENTS FOR WATER USE.
   (A)   Clerk to furnish statements for water use and water shutoff.
      (1)   For flat rate water service, the City Clerk shall furnish to each
property owner, landlord or landlady, or his or her agent, or to the tenant in
possession, by the first day of the month, a statement of the amount due for
water rental for the next ensuing month.
      (2)   For metered water service, the City Clerk shall, in like manner,
furnish a statement for the amount due for water rental for the month
immediately prior thereto.
      (3)   If any person neglects to pay his or her water rent by the
thirtieth day of said month, or shall fail or refuse to pay the water rent to
the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall notify the Superintendent of Waterworks,
who shall cause the water to be turned off from the premises of such
delinquents. Before the water is again turned on, all pertinent provisions of
this chapter must first be complied with.
   (B)   Failure to receive statements. The failure of any user of water to
receive notice or statement of nonpayment of water fees will not affect the
rights of the city to shut off water for nonpayment of bills.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 51.52 NONPAYMENT; OWNER LIABILITY; LIENS.
   (A)   Water rentals; effect of nonpayment. On or before the first day of
each month hereafter, the City Clerk shall notify the Superintendent of
Waterworks of all delinquent accounts, and it shall be his or her duty to
immediately shut off the water from any building or premises for which the
water rental has not been paid. No owner or tenant who has defaulted in the
payment of water rent, or any subsequent owner or tenant of a building or
premises from which water has been shut off, shall receive service until all
past due delinquencies on said premises are paid in full, together with the
charges for turning the water on.
   (B)   Owner liable; liens for unpaid bills.
      (1)   The owner of the premises shall at all times be liable to the city
for all water, labor and material furnished to said premises at either the
owner’s or tenant’s request.
      (2)   In the event that the charges for water, labor and material
furnished upon any premises for any purposes are not paid when due and payable
in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk may
make and file a lien in behalf of the city for the amount due within the time
and in the manner provided for filing liens of mechanic and materialman under
the provisions of the laws of the state, and such lien shall bind the premises
in the same manner and to the same extent as such materialman’s and shall be
foreclosed in the same general manner. Upon foreclosure thereof, attorneys’
fees and costs shall in like manner be allowed, or the city may sue to recover
the amount due for such rental, labor and materials from the person or persons
liable without filing a lien, the person shall be liable to pay all costs and
attorneys’ fees. In like manner, a lien may be filed and foreclosed or suit
brought to enforce the payment for any water, labor or material furnished or
supplied by the city.
   (C)   Disconnection for late payment.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $50 or a turn-off charge in the sum of $50 (a total of
$100 for both).
   (D)   Water vacation rate policy
      (1)   Vacation rate definition. The city shall establish a water vacation
rate applicable to residential properties that are vacant or unoccupied for an
extended period during winter months or extended vacation periods.
      (2)   Eligibility. To qualify for the vacation rate, the property must be
unoccupied for a continuous period of no less than 30 days, and the property
owner must submit a written request to the City Clerk’s office no later than 30
days before the requested start date of the vacation rate.
      (3)   Rate structure. The vacation rate shall be set at 50% of the
standard monthly water utility charge and shall be effective starting October 1
of the fiscal year in which the ordinance is passed.
      (4)   Billing and application. The vacation rate will apply for the
approved duration and will revert to standard billing once occupancy resumes.
      (5)   Grandfathering clause. Properties that were previously vacant and
not charged under a vacation rate policy shall be subject to a new vacation
rate starting October 1 unless otherwise exempted by the City Council.
   (E)   Delinquent fees for shutoffs
      (1)   Delinquent fee definition. A $100 delinquent fee shall be assessed
to any water utility account that remains unpaid after the fourteenth of the
month preceding a scheduled shutoff date.
      (2)   Notification process. A formal written notice shall be issued by
the city to the account holder at their last known address, 10–15 days prior to
the scheduled shutoff date, informing them they are on the shutoff list.
      (3)   Fee enforcement. The $100 delinquent fee will be charged regardless
of whether the property’s water service is physically disconnected if the
account remains unpaid by the established deadline. Payment made after the
issuance of the notice but before disconnection shall still be subject to the
delinquent fee.
      (4)   Exceptions. Any hardship cases or disputes may be reviewed by the
City Clerk’s office on a case-by-case basis, and as approved by City Council.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 684, passed 5-21-2025)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction for each day said person shall remain
in violation of this chapter. The fine for infraction violation shall be as for
other infractions under the state code.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter may have civil charges filed against them with the original criminal
charges.
   (C)   First time violators of §
51.18 will be given a warning. Tickets will be issued for the second
violations. On the third violation, the resident will be required to purchase a
meter.
(Ord. 577, passed 12-9-2003; Res. 250716, passed 7-16-2025)
CHAPTER 52: WATER PROTECTION; WELLS
Section
Drinking Water Protection Plan
   
52.01   Title and purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Drinking water protection districts
   
52.04   Notice of proposed action to operator of public or community water
supply
   
52.05   Nonconforming uses
   
52.06   Enforcement
   
52.07   Amendments
Wells; Drilling Restrictions
   
52.20   Definitions
   
52.21   Restrictions on drilling
   
52.22   Permit required
   
52.23   Review by City Council
   
52.24   Prohibited area for drilling
 
   
52.99   Penalty
DRINKING WATER PROTECTION PLAN
§ 52.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the Drinking Water Protection Plan.
   (B)   (1)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses
due to contamination of the public water supply, and to formalize groundwater
protection/pollution abatement and control procedures.
      (2)   Specific goals are to:
         (a)   Protect human life and health;
         (b)   Ensure that the public is provided with a sustainable safe
potable water supply;
         (c)   Minimize expenditure of public money for pollution remediation
projects;
         (d)   Minimize regulations on land use; and
         (e)   Minimize business interruptions.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL RUNOFF WASTEWATER. Water diverted for irrigation but not
applied to cropland, or runoff of irrigation tail water from the cropland as a
result of irrigation.
   AQUIFER REMEDIATION-RELATED WELLS. These wells shall include those used to
prevent, control or remediate aquifer pollution, including, but not limited to,
superfund sites.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that serves at least 15
service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least
25 year-round residents.
   COMMUNITY WELLHEAD. The upper terminal of a well; includes adapters, ports,
seals, valves and other attachments.
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLY DISTRICT (DWP).
      (1)   A land use designation on the land use map, or a zoning designation
on a zoning map, that modifies the basic underlying designation in some
specific manner.
      (2)   The DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLY DISTRICT will also appear in
the hazardous component of the comprehensive plan. A map will define specific
area districts centering on wells supplying drinking water to a public water
system.
      (3)   The map is delineated using one of the following methods and
following the guidelines established in the state’s wellhead protection plan:
         (a)   Calculated fixed radius;
         (b)   Arbitrary fixed radius;
         (c)   Simplified variable shapes;
         (d)   Semi-analytical and analytical methods;
         (e)   Hydrogeologic mapping; and
         (f)   Numerical modeling.
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT IA. A minimum fixed radius
extending not less than 50 feet in radius from the wellhead supplying potable
water to the public water supply(s).
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT IB. A three-year time of travel
district (TOT), as defined in this section.
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLY DISTRICT II. A six-year time of travel
district (TOT), as defined in this section.
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT III. A ten-year time of travel
district (TOT), as defined in this section.
   FACILITY. Refers to any business or corporation that is built, installed or
established to serve a particular purpose.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. A hazardous waste treatment, storage or
disposal facility which receives hazardous material as described in 40 C.F.R. §
260.1.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL.
      (1)   Any waste or material which, because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
         (a)   Cause or significantly contributes to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or
         (b)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
      (2)   Any material or substance designed as a hazardous or toxic
substance defined by 40 C.F.R. § 261.2, or any material or substance designated
as a hazardous or toxic substance by the state, acting through the DEQ or any
successor agency.
   INJECTION. The subsurface emplacement of fluids.
   LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT OPERATION. As defined elsewhere in this code.
   NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that is not a community
water system.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.
      (1)   A system that provides the public with piped water for human
consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the
year.
      (2)   Such term includes:
         (a)   Any collection, treatment storage and distribution facilities
under control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection
with such system; and
         (b)   Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such
control that are used primarily in connection with such system.
      (3)   A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM is either a community water system or a
noncommunity water system.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A solid waste disposal operation where the wastes are
spread on land in thin layers, compacted to the smallest practical volume and
covered with cover material once each day of operation in order to safeguard
against environmental pollution, nuisances and health hazards.
   SPECIAL DRAINAGE WELLS.
      (1)   Used for disposing of water from sources other than direct
precipitation.
      (2)   Examples of this well type include:
         (a)   Landslide control drainage wells;
         (b)   Potable water tank overflow drainage wells;
         (c)   Swimming pool drainage wells; and
         (d)   Lake level control drainage wells.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Water discharged as a result of rain, snow or other
precipitation.
   TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT). The time required for groundwater to move from a
specific point to a well.
   UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL. Any excavation or artificial opening into the
ground which meets the following three criteria:
      (1)   A bored, drilled or dug hole, or a driven mine shaft, or a driven
well point;
      (2)   It is deeper than its largest straight-line surface dimension; and
      (3)   It is used or intended use for injection.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
§ 52.03 DRINKING WATER PROTECTION DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   There is hereby established a Drinking Water Protection Overly
District, identified and described as all the area within the ten-year TOT
district around public water supplies as shown on the official zoning map.
      (2)   It is further established that these areas be composed of four
districts, as they are defined in this subchapter.:
         (a)   Drinking Water Protection Overlay District IA;
         (b)   Drinking Water Protection Overlay District IB;
         (c)   Drinking Water Protection Overlay District II; and
         (d)   Drinking Water Protection Overlay District III
      (3)   The Board of Commissioners may record with the County Recorder’s
office a metes and bounds description of the Drinking Water Protection Overlay
District.
   (B)   Prohibited uses within Zone IA of the Drinking Water Protection Area.
      (1)   Uses permitted with Zone IA shall be limited to necessary public
water supply wellhead equipment, including the following:
         (a)   Wellhead facility buildings;
         (b)   Water storage tanks;
         (c)   Disinfecting equipment;
         (d)   Disinfecting chemical storage; and
         (e)   Approved landscaping.
      (2)   All other uses shall be prohibited.
   (C)   Prohibited uses within Zone IB of the Drinking Water Protection Area.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within Zone
IB of the Drinking Water Protection Areas:
      (1)   Sanitary landfills;
      (2)   Livestock confinement operations;
      (3)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities;
      (4)   Injection well is a prohibited use, except for closed systems;
      (5)   Existing sewer lines shall not be closer than 100 feet of a
wellhead or of new sanitary system and sewer lines shall not be closer than 150
feet of a wellhead;
      (6)   Existing septic tanks or drain fields shall not be closer than 100
feet of a wellhead and new installation of septic tanks or drain fields shall
not be closer than 200 feet away from the wellhead;
      (7)   Junk or salvage yards;
      (8)   Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires and all other petroleum
products; and
      (9)   (a)   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the
collection, handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any
hazardous solid or liquid material or waste having a potential impact on
groundwater, and any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing
groundwater quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit.
         (b)   The special use permit process may be instigated by the Zoning
Administrator during the application review process.
   (D)   Prohibited uses within Zone II of the Drinking Water Protection Area.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within Zone II of
the Drinking Water Protection Area:
      (1)   Sanitary landfills;
      (2)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities;
      (3)   Injection well is a prohibited use, except for the following:
         (a)   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth):
            1.   Geothermal heat;
            2.   Heat pump return; and
            3.   Cooling water return.
         (b)   Shallow well injection only (less than 18 feet in depth),
including:
            1.   Storm runoff;
            2.   Agricultural runoff wastewater;
            3.   Special drainage water;
            4.   Aquifer recharge;
            5.   Aquifer remediation; and
            6.   Septic systems (general).
      (4)   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on groundwater, and
any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing groundwater
quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit process, may be
instigated by the Zoning Administrator during the application review process.
   (E)   Prohibited uses within Zone III of the Drinking Water Protection Area.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within Zone III of
the Drinking Water Protection Area.
      (1)   Injection well is a prohibited use, except for the following:
         (a)   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth):
            1.   Geothermal heat;
            2.   Heat pump return; and
            3.   Cooling water return.
         (b)   Shallow well injection only (less than 18 feet in depth):
            1.   Storm runoff;
            2.   Agricultural runoff wastewater;
            3.   Special drainage water;
            4.   Aquifer recharge;
            5.   Aquifer remediation; and
            6.   Septic systems (general).
      (2)   (a)   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the
collection, handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any
hazardous solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on
groundwater and any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing
groundwater quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit.
         (b)   The special use permit process may be instigated by the Zoning
Administrator during the application review process.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
§ 52.04 NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION TO OPERATOR OF PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY WATER
SUPPLY.
   (A)   Whenever there is a request which requires a special use permit from
the Planning and Zoning Commission for land lying within a Drinking Water
Protection District, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the entity
operating the public or community water supply within that overlay district.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a granting of easements
for monitoring wells if the Commission deems it appropriate for protection of
the public water supply.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
§ 52.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any legal use existing at the time of the adoption of this subchapter and
listed as a prohibited use herein shall become a legal nonconforming use and
may not be expanded or improved, except as otherwise provided in the zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
§ 52.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, government entity or
business to occupy or use the land within the area designated in the Drinking
Water Protection Overlay District of Zone IA, IB, II and III contrary to, or in
violation of, any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 AMENDMENTS.
   Proposed amendments to this subchapter will require advance notice to all
entities operating public or community water supplies that this subchapter
affects.
(Ord. 579, passed 1-4-2005)
WELLS; DRILLING RESTRICTIONS
§ 52.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRILLER. The person supervising, drilling or participating in the actual
drilling, deepening or modification of the well.
   DRILLING. Any modification, deepening or actual drilling of a well as
defined herein.
   OCCUPANT. A person seeking to drill, deepen or modify a well as the owner or
person having control of the property or location where the well is to be
drilled.
   PERSON. Any individual, trust, estate, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity.
   WELL. An artificial excavation or opening in the ground more than 18 feet
deep and vertical depth below land surface for which groundwater of any
temperature is sought or obtained.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 52.21 RESTRICTIONS ON DRILLING.
   All drilling, deepening or modification of wells within the city shall be
discretionary with the city and by written permit only.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.22 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The drilling, deepening or modification of a well within the city
shall require an occupant to apply and obtain a written permit to drill prior
to drilling, deepening or modifying any well.
   (B)   The application for a drilling permit, among other information, shall
include the following:
      (1)   Plans and specifications for the drilling, deepening or
modification;
      (2)   Exact location of the well;
      (3)   Owner or occupant of the property;
      (4)   The person drilling, deepening or modifying the well;
      (5)   Applicable procedure to seal or safeguard the well from
contaminates; and
      (6)   Other such pertinent information as the Superintendent of Public
Works or his or her authorized personal representative may require.
   (C)   The permit shall be signed by the occupant or driller.
   (D)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall review the application for
permit to drill and may, in his or her discretion, approve the same or request
review by the City Council.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 52.23 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   In the event the Superintendent of Public Works denies the application for
permit to drill, the applicant may petition the City Council for approval of
the permit to drill.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 52.24 PROHIBITED AREA FOR DRILLING.
   (A)   Contaminates and other pollutants have been identified within the
County Middle School Aquifer System as defined hereinafter: In a clockwise
direction beginning at the centerline at the intersection of Washington and
Sixth Streets, thence south along Sixth Street to the intersection of Jefferson
and Sixth Streets, thence west along Jefferson Street to the intersection of
Jefferson and Eighth Streets, thence north on Eighth Street to the intersection
of Eighth Street and Washington Street, thence east on Washington Street to the
point of beginning.
   (B)   Drilling, deepening or modifying wells within the County Middle School
Aquifer System as described herein is prohibited.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions of §§
52.20 through
52.24 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, for
each offense shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $300 or six months in jail
or both fines and jail.
(Ord. 569, passed 5-1-2001)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
   
53.002   Connection to sanitary sewer required
   
53.003   Construction site sewage waste facilities
Discharge and Pretreatment
   
53.015   Unpolluted water not permitted in sanitary sewer
   
53.016   Unpolluted water discharged to storm drain
   
53.017   Prohibited discharges
   
53.018   Approval required for wastewater
   
53.019   Refusal of use of system
   
53.020   Independent sewer service line required
   
53.021   Sewer service lines
   
53.022   Injury to or tampering with sanitary sewer system unlawful
   
53.023   Grease traps or interceptors
Administration
   
53.035   Duties of the Public Works Superintendent
   
53.036   Permits required
   
53.037   Side sewer extension or repair permit required
   
53.038   Installation and maintenance of sewer service line
   
53.039   Right to revoke permissions
   
53.040   Sewer construction, plans, specifications and inspection
   
53.041   Right to enter premises for inspection
   
53.042   Industrial wastes
   
53.043   Special agreements
   
53.044   Extensions to sewer system
   
53.045   Sewer service outside the city
Sewer System Design
   
53.060   Sewer system materials and installations
   
53.061   Sewer system design
   
53.062   As-built drawings and engineer’s certification
   
53.063   Developer or property owner’s responsibility
   
53.064   Backflow prevention devices
Enforcement
   
53.075   Citation; appearance
   
53.076   Failure to appear unlawful
Rates and Fees
   
53.090   System of charges
   
53.091   Sewer connection fee
   
53.092   Service line fees
   
53.093   Service call charge
   
53.094   Monthly sewer rates
   
53.095   Metered service
   
53.096   Sewer rates outside the city
   
53.097   Billing procedure and periods
   
53.098   Due date
   
53.099   Delinquent accounts
   
53.100   Vacation or shut-down rates
   
53.101   Wastewater Collection and Treatment System Improvement Fund
   
53.102   RV dumping fee
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Superintendent of Public Works of the city or his
or her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts
per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory determinations made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side sewer which begins
two feet outside the outer face of the building wall.
   CITY. The City of Montpelier, Idaho.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine, in parts per million by
weight, which must be added to the sewage to produce a specified residual
chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff (storm drainage) and
wastewater (sanitary sewage).
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, or for any
type of business or enterprise, or for any other purposes not otherwise
described or covered in the definition of DWELLINGS.
   COMMERCIAL USER. All persons not specifically classified as domestic or as
an industrial waste contributor.
   DWELLINGS.
      (1)   AUTO COURT, MOTOR COURT, TRAVEL TRAILER COURT, MOTEL or HOTEL. The
combination or group of two or more dwelling units occupying a building site or
area under own ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient living
accommodations.
      (2)   DUPLEX. A building designed, built, rented or leased for occupancy
by two families living independently of each other.
      (3)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING or APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or
portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to
be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more
families or persons living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking within the premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for or occupied by one
family for living or sleeping purposes and having one kitchen or set of cooking
facilities.
      (5)   TRAILER HOUSE or MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle used or so constructed as
to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways
and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling
or sleeping place for one or more persons.
   GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food and from
the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
   GROUND GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any flow discharged to the wastewater treatment system
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following
divisions:
      (1)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
      (2)   Division B: Mining;
      (3)   Division D: Manufacturing;
      (4)   Division E: Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and
Sanitation Services; and
      (5)   Division I: Services.
   Mg. Million gallons.
   Mgd. Million gallons per day.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body or surface or groundwater developed by a naturally occurring process of
nature.
   PARTS PER MILLION. A weight-to-weight ratio; the PARTS PER MILLION value
multiplied by the factor eight and three hundred forty-five thousandths shall
be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter and is a measure of the acidity or
alkalinity of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures
outlined in Standard Methods.
   PRIVATE SEWER.
      (1)   A sewer serving two or more buildings, residences or properties,
constructed by private contract outside of the public right-of-way and
remaining under private ownership and jurisdiction and which shall be
maintained by said private owners.
      (2)   PRIVATE SEWERS shall be designed, constructed and maintained by
said private owners to the same design, construction and maintenance standards
as are public sewers.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary or
combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds. All PUBLIC SEWERS shall be located in dedicated public rights-
of-way or easements. PUBLIC SEWERS shall be at least eight inches in diameter.
   REPLACEMENT. Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Wastes that are derived principally from dwellings,
business buildings, institutions and the like, exclusive of stormwater, surface
waters and industrial waste.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sanitary sewage or industrial wastes,
or a combination of the two, and into which stormwater, surface water and
groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SERVICE CHARGE. The charge levied on all users of the sewage system for the
purpose of repayment of city indebtedness for the construction and installation
of the system and for its efficient maintenance and operation, and in
establishing such rates and charges the city has taken into account the cost
and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible
delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies and any amounts
necessary to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve
required for these.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. A sewer line connected to the sewer main.
   SEWAGE. Wastewater.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Wastewater treatment plant or other like facilities.
   SEWER. Any pipe or conduit used for conveying wastewater or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWER MAIN. The pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement and running
approximately parallel to the street, road, alley or easement for the
collection of wastewater from the customers, and which is owned, operated,
controlled and maintained by the city.
   SIDE SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer,
sometimes referred to as the SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION or SEWER SERVICE LINE.
   STANDARD SEWAGE. Sewage and acceptable wastes that are within specifications
regarding pH, BOD, dissolved oxygen, suspended solids and grease.
   STORM DRAIN. Any pipe or conduit conveying stormwater, surface waters and
groundwater drainage, but excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Superintendent of Public Works for the
city.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Any water or liquid containing none of the following: Free
or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may impart taste
and odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution; and odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases. It shall
contain not more than 30 parts per million each of suspended solids or
biochemical oxygen demand. Analytical determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   WASTEWATER. The water-carried human, animal or household wastes in a public
or private sewer, and may include groundwater infiltration, surface drainage
and industrial wastes.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM or SEWAGE COLLECTION AND
TREATMENT SYSTEM. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of domestic, commercial and industrial waste, including sewers as
well as the wastewater treatment plant.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. An assemblage of devices, structures, equipment
and holding ponds or lagoons for treating domestic, commercial and industrial
waste.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.010) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.002 CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every parcel of land or premises within the boundaries of the city,
improved for occupancy and occupied or used by any person or persons, or as a
commercial business, shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   The owner or person in charge of such land shall make, or cause to be
made, such connection within 60 days after receiving official notice from the
city to so connect.
   (C)   All charges associated with the laying of pipe from the home or
facilities to be served to the city’s mains, and all other costs incurred in
connecting to said mains, shall be borne by the property owner. All such
connections to the city’s mains shall be properly designed and constructed in
conformity with requirements specified by the city.
   (D)   If a parcel of land is not within 300 feet of a sewer, or otherwise
not practical, connection is optional.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.020) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.003 CONSTRUCTION SITE SEWAGE WASTE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section’s purpose shall be to require sewage waste
facilities at all new construction sites.
   (B)   Sewage facilities to be provided.
      (1)   Sewage waste facilities, such as a portable waste facility or other
similar unit, shall be required on or within 300 feet of all new construction
sites arising after the effective date of this section.
      (2)   The portable waste facilities shall meet or exceed any requirements
imposed by the Southeastern Idaho District Health Department, and/or any other
governmental entity regulating health standards regarding portable sewage waste
facilities.
(Ord. 601, passed 3- -2008)
DISCHARGE AND PRETREATMENT
§ 53.015 UNPOLLUTED WATER NOT PERMITTED IN SANITARY SEWER.
   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer without having received written
permission from the Superintendent of Public Works to take such action.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.030) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.016 UNPOLLUTED WATER DISCHARGED TO STORM DRAIN.
   (A)   Stormwater shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm drains, or to a natural outlet approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged
upon approval of the Superintendent of Public Works to a storm drain, combined
sewers or natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.040) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.017 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described wastewaters to the wastewater
collection and treatment system:
   (A)   Any solids, liquids or gases which may, by themselves or by
interaction with other substances, cause fire or explosive hazards or in any
other way be injurious to person, property or the operation of the wastewater
collection and treatment system;
   (B)   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which either singly
or by interaction with other substances are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance or repair;
   (C)   Any solids, greases, waxes, slurries or viscous material of such
character or in such quantity that it, in the opinion of the Superintendent of
Public Works, may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer, or otherwise
interfere with the proper functioning of the wastewater collection and
treatment system;
   (D)   Any toxic substance, chemical elements or compounds in quantities
sufficient to impair the operation or efficiency of the wastewater treatment
facilities and cause the effluent thereof to exceed State Board of Health water
requirements for the receiving stream;
   (E)   Any liquids having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having
any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment or personnel of the wastewater collection and treatment system;
   (F)   Any radioactive isotopes without obtaining a special permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works;
   (G)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than 140°F;
   (H)   Any garbage that has not been properly ground; or
   (I)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair or other material capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper
operation of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.050) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.018 APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR WASTEWATER.
   Review and acceptance of the Superintendent of Public Works shall be
obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any water or wastes
having:
   (A)   A total of more than 30 pounds of suspended solids in any one day;
   (B)   A total of more than 30 pounds of BOD in any one day; and
   (C)   An average flow of one-hundredth mgd or more.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.060) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.019 REFUSAL OF USE OF SYSTEM.
   The Superintendent of Public Works may prohibit the discharge into the
public sewer of sewage that does not comply with the limitations set forth in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.070) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.020 INDEPENDENT SEWER SERVICE LINE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The sewer main line and sewer service line(s) shall be so arranged
that there is a separate and independent sewer service line to each individual
building, place of business or tract of land.
   (B)   After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a
separate and independent side sewer (building service line) shall be provided
for every new building connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.080) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.021 SEWER SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Existing branch service lines. Where sewer service is now provided
through one sewer service line to several customers (branch service lines), the
city, by resolution of the City Council, may decline to continue to accept
sewage from said premises until separate sewer service lines are provided at
the owner’s expense. Where more than one dwelling is served from one such
service line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the
same manner as if each did, in fact, have an individual sewer service line.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.090)
   (B)   Sewer service line maintenance. All sewer users shall keep their
individual sewer service lines in good repair and shall keep them in such good
condition that they shall not allow excessive amounts of groundwater to enter
into the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.100)
(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.022 INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle or
otherwise interfere with any portion of the city sewage collection or treatment
system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private property.
Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from
handling or otherwise tampering with or plugging said sewer system, the
violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of
said system and/or for any damages that may result from the tampering with or
plugging of said sewer system. It is unlawful for any person to deposit any
substance which may tend to obstruct the flow of the sewer in any sewer
opening.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.110) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.023 GREASE TRAPS OR INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease traps required. In all cases where a building is used as a
hotel, boardinghouse, restaurant, service station, garage and the like, the
owner or occupant shall provide a properly constructed grease trap through
which all wastes of a greasy nature shall be drained. The Superintendent of
Public Works shall have authority, and he or she is authorized and directed to
compel any person to provide and use a grease trap as aforesaid whenever, in
his or her judgment, the same is necessary.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.120)
   (B)   Interceptor or removal facilities required to remove harmful
ingredients.
      (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or other necessary removal
facilities shall be installed on the premises when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, high concentrations of
blood, fruit, vegetable or grain liquors, milk wastes or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients.
      (2)   All interceptors or removal facilities shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and shall be so located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner or occupant, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation
at all times.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.130)
(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 53.035 DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent of Public Works is empowered, and it is made his or her
duty, in all cases where there is a public sanitary sewer within 300 feet, to
notify every owner or person in charge of land or premises requiring a sanitary
sewer building connection as specified in §
53.002 to comply with the provisions of §
53.002 within 90 days or cease to use or occupy the land. A lessee of land
shall be deemed to be in charge.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.140) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.036 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permits required.
      (1)   It is unlawful to install or alter any sanitary sewer or plumbing
within the city or to tap onto or connect to any sanitary sewer line, whether
lateral, main or interceptor, without having first obtained from said city a
permit therefor.
      (2)   An application for a connection to the city sewer system shall be
made at the office of the City Clerk, and no connection shall be made to any
sewer main without a valid permit therefor having been issued by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof, without first obtaining a written permit to perform said work from the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.150)
   (B)   Excavation permit required. No permit shall be granted to do sewer
work in any street, alley or public easement until the applicant has first
obtained an excavation permit as required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.160)
(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.037 SIDE SEWER EXTENSION OR REPAIR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   When any sewer service line (side sewer) or private sewer connected
with any public sewer becomes obstructed, broken or out of order on private
property (outside of any public rights-of-way or easements) the owner, agent or
tenant of such premises shall repair the same at his or her own expense. No
person shall construct, relay, repair or extend any side sewer or private sewer
until the person doing said work has obtained the appropriate sewer permit for
same.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to extend any private sewer or side
sewer beyond the limits of the building or property for which a permit has been
given without obtaining a new permit for the desired extension. The existence
of a sewer permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work
for which an excavation permit may be required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.170) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.038 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER SERVICE LINE.
   When a permit for a sewer service line (side sewer) has been granted, the
sewer tap at the sewer main and the sewer service line from the sewer main to
the private property line shall be installed by the city. Thereafter, the sewer
service line shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner receiving
the sewer service. All sewer service lines (side sewers) within any public
rights-of-way or easements shall be constructed by the city; except that sewer
service lines in any new subdivisions may be installed as part of the
construction of the new sewer collection system within said subdivision; and
provided, further, that said service lines are constructed, inspected, tested
and certified as being in conformance with the city, federal and state standard
drawings and standard specifications governing the construction of sewer
service lines. Sewer service lines may also be installed by contract in
conjunction with city-sponsored projects or when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent of Public Works, it is in the city’s best interests to have or
allow said sewer service lines to be installed other than by city personnel.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.180) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.039 RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSIONS.
   Permission given to connect sewers and drains shall be upon the express
condition that the Superintendent of Public Works may for good cause revoke the
same, and the person making such connection, or his or her successor in
interest, shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such
permission being revoked.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.190) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.040 SEWER CONSTRUCTION, PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   All construction or reconstruction of public, private and side sewers
shall be in accordance with the city, federal and state standard drawings and
standard specifications and subject to inspection by the city.
   (B)   Plan and profile drawings shall be prepared for all new sewer mains
(whether public or private) and for all sanitary sewer extensions,
reconstructions or renovations, and all such plan and profile drawings must be
reviewed and approved by the City Superintendent before any construction work
on said sewer lines is started.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.200) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.041 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the right to enter upon any
premises connected with any public sewer at all reasonable hours to determine
that there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If conflict is
noted, the owner of said premises or his or her agent shall be directed to
alter, repair or reconstruct said sewer facilities to conform to the
requirements of this chapter within 15 days.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.210) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.042 INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   (1)   Each person or firm desiring to make a connection to the public
sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes thereto shall prepare
and file with the Superintendent of Public Works a report that shall include
actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the
waste to be discharged.
      (2)   Private treatment facilities may be authorized by the city;
provided, that all federal, state and local laws and regulations are fully
complied with.
   (B)   Industrial waste charges may be based upon the amount of flow,
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids or any combination thereof
as may be recommended by the City Engineer or this chapter.
   (C)   The sewage collection and treatment charges for industrial waste shall
completely pay for all collection and treatment costs associated with said
wastes.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.220) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.043 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
persons or organization whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment system
either before or after pretreatment.
   (B)   Provided, that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
wastewater treatment system by reason of the admission of such wastes and no
extra costs are incurred by the city without recompense by said person or
organization.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.230) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.044 EXTENSIONS TO SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Extension of sewer mains within the city. The city may authorize to
construct, or cause to be constructed, extensions to the sewer system if one of
the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The annual anticipated revenue made available to the city from the
customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less than one-tenth
of the actual cost to the city for the construction of said extension;
      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works declares that the sewer main
extension is needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire
sewage collection system; or
      (3)   The city approves a contract for the construction of the extension
with a party or parties desiring sewer service; provided, however, that
subdividers or developers within or adjacent to the city shall construct at
their own expense all sewer mains within their subdivisions or developments,
except that the city may be responsible for those sewer line costs set forth in
§
53.060.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.240)
   (B)   Extension of sewer mains in areas contiguous to city. In areas
contiguous to the city that may be annexed to the city, the city may require
such areas to be annexed before sewer service is provided. Prior to annexation,
the city shall require the execution and approval of an annexation agreement
which shall detail the conditions for sewer service.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.250)
   (C)   Extension of sewer lines outside city. Sewer lines shall not, without
the city’s approval, be extended outside the corporate limits of the city;
however, when in the opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works there will
be special benefit and improvement to the city by reason of an extension
outside the city, special arrangements may be made with the city to allow said
extension; provided, however, that the areas to be serviced outside of the city
shall not benefit to a greater extent than like areas provided with sewer
service within the city; and provided, further, that no such arrangement shall
be made unless adequate sewer line capacity and sewage treatment capacity is
available for such sewer service outside the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.260)
(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.045 SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall not provide sewer service to any
consumer whose residence or place of business is outside of the corporate
limits of the city until a contract for sewer service outside the city has been
executed between the consumer and the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.270) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN
§ 53.060 SEWER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   All sanitary sewer main line and storm drain main line materials,
manholes, inlet boxes, french drains and the like, and their installation,
shall be in accordance with city, federal and state standard specifications of
the construction of sanitary sewers and the applicable standard drawings
depicting various sewer line installation details.
   (B)   All sewer service line materials and their installation shall be in
accordance with the city standard specifications of the construction of
sanitary sewers and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting
the various sewer service line installation details.
   (C)   All sewer system material shall be of the class, strength, thickness
and the like, necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over
the pipe, the type of material and bedding around the pipe, and the type,
magnitude and extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe.
   (D)   All materials must be approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.400) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.061 SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The plans for all sewer lines, sewage lift stations, sewage
treatment facilities and the like, shall be designed, signed and sealed by a
registered professional engineer licensed in the state.
      (2)   All sewer lines, lift stations, sewage treatment facilities and the
like shall be designed in accordance with State Health Department requirements.
      (3)   Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight-inch diameter.
Minimum storm drain size shall be eight-inch diameter. Larger sizes shall be as
required by the city’s overall sewer system master plan or as are needed to
provide adequate sewage-carrying capacity for the area (and surrounding
developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the city. Minimum building
service line size shall be four-inch diameter.
   (B)   Depth. In general, sewers shall be sufficiently deep so as to receive
sewage from basements and to prevent freezing. Sewer lines shall have at least
three feet of cover (from the top of sewer line pipe to the ground or street
surface) unless a special design is approved by the City Engineer whereby the
sewer line is protected from freezing by special means or methods and the sewer
is protected from heaving by the installation of crushed gravel backfill
material under, around and over the pipe.
   (C)   Slope.
      (1)   All sewer mains shall be designed and constructed to provide mean
velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet per second. All sewer
service lines (side sewers) shall be designed and constructed to provide mean
velocities, when flowing full, of not less than three feet per second. The
following are minimum slopes which should be provided; however, slopes greater
than these are desirable:
         Minimum Slope in Feet Per 110 Feet      (2)   Under special conditions, if detailed
         justifiable reasons are given, slopes slightly less than those required above (i.e., to
         provide two or three feet per second velocity when flowing full) may be permitted. Such
         decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be three-tenths of the
         diameter or greater for the design average flow. Whenever such decreased slopes are
         proposed, the design engineer must furnish with his or her report his or her computations of
         the depths of flow in such pipes at the minimum and average rates of flow for a typical
         day.      (3)   Sewers shall be laid with uniform slopes between manholes, i.e., a manhole
         shall be constructed at each point where the sewer line slope or grade changes.   
         (D)   Manholes. Manholes shall be located not more than 400 feet apart on lines 15 inches in
         diameter or smaller. Manholes may be located up to 600 feet apart on lines larger than 15
         inches in diameter. Manholes shall be installed at all locations where sewer line eight
         inches in diameter or larger intersect, join together or make a bend. All dead-end sewer
         lines shall have a manhole installed on the end thereof.   (E)   Sewer mainline drop through
         manholes. Lateral sanitary sewer lines shall not enter a manhole at an elevation appreciably
         higher than the sewer main line. The flowline(s) of any lateral line(s) shall be positioned
         within the manhole as follows.      (1)   The flowline of the main sewer line shall be at
         least five-hundredths of a foot below the flowline of any of the lateral sewer lines
         entering the manhole. Where the diameter of the main line and the lateral line differ by
         less than five-tenths of a foot, the top of the lateral line shall be positioned even with
         the top of the main line on its high (inlet) side.      (2)   Where the diameter of the main
         and lateral differ by five-tenths of a foot or more, the eight-tenths depth points of the
         two sewer line inverts shall be positioned at the same elevation.      (3)   Where a lateral
         line should enter a manhole at an elevation of less than three feet above the main sewer
         line, the grade or slope of the lateral shall be adjusted so that its flowline is located
         (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.      (4)   Individual building
         service lines may not enter manholes; except that not more than two individual building
         service lines may enter a “dead-end” manhole (a manhole on the upstream and permanent end of
         a sewer line); and provided further, that the individual building service lines must enter
         the manhole at such elevation that the top of the service line is level with the top of the
         sewer main line and that the poured-in-place concrete floor of the manhole brings the
         flowlines of the service lines into the flowline of the mainline in a smooth continuous
         manner.   (F)   Sanitary sewer lines and water lines. Sanitary sewer lines and water lines
         shall, wherever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street. Preferably, water
         lines shall be located 13 feet west or north of the street centerline and the sanitary sewer
         at 13 feet east or south of the street centerline. Where storm drains are needed, these
         shall preferably be located along the street centerline. The above-referenced locations and
         dimensions may be varied to accommodate unusual circumstances; however, a ten-foot (out-to-
         out) horizontal separation between water line facilities and sewer facilities (either
         sanitary or storm) and an 18-inch (out-to-out) vertical separation between said facilities
         shall always be maintained unless a specific variance to this requirement is obtained from
         the City Engineer. The applicable separation requirements of the State Health Department
         shall also be complied with.   (G)   Drawing requirements.      (1)   All drawings shall be
         on linen or Mylar, in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly show the
         dimensions, locations, sizes and the like, of all facilities represented thereon. All sewer
         line manholes, inlet boxes, building service lines and the like shall be clearly shown and
         identified by name and by station or other means of horizontal location.      (2)   Sewer
         lines shall be shown in both plane and profile unless the length of said sewer line or sewer
         line extension is so short that the City Engineer waives this requirement.      (3)   If a
         profile of the sewer line is not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by
         elevations on the flowline of the pipe at all manholes, inlet boxes and the like, and at
         other such locations and intervals as the City Engineer may require.      (4)   Drawings
         shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals 100 inches unless the amount of detail,
         topography and the like necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., one inch
         equals 50 feet or one inch equals 40 feet) to provide the clarity and completeness needed on
         the drawings.   (H)   Approval. The design of all sewer lines and all sewer line plans must
         be approved by the City Engineer.(Prior Code, § 13.08.410) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§
         53.062 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION.    (A)   As-built or record drawings
         of sewer line plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, and the corrected original
         drawing(s) shall be provided to the city.   (B)   As-built plans shall include a
         certification thereon signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work
         that the as-built drawing of the sewer lines are true and correct and that he or she (the
         registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the sewer line
         installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done in conformance
         with the city, federal and state standard specifications for the construction of sanitary
         sewers and storm sewers.(Prior Code, § 13.08.420) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.063
         DEVELOPER OR PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.    (A)   Subdivision developer’s or property
         owner’s responsibility for sewer lines.      (1)   The owner or developer of any piece of
         property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the
         sewer line costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a
         sewer line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the city’s sewer main
         system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for
         the necessary and required system of sewer lines within the interior of the tract of
         land.      (2)   (a)   The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all
         needed sewer lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of any
         piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized
         unless phased construction of the sewer main system is specifically allowed or provided for
         in the annexation or development agreement.         (b)   In lieu of actually constructing
         said required sewer line or sewer lines, the property owner or developer may deposit
         adequate moneys with the city to fully cover the cost(s) of said required sewer line
         construction.      (3)   (a)   The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will
         normally be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight-inch diameter sanitary sewer
         line. The additional cost of providing a sanitary sewer line of a size greater than eight
         inches will normally be a city responsibility. The city will reimburse the developer for the
Sewer    extra cost of the additional sanitary sewer line size (over the eight-inch diameter size
Size     referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the
(inches) developer and the city; provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or
         development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer size
         larger than an eight-inch diameter line, or if the type of development is such as to produce
         a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight-inch diameter sewer line, then the
         owner or developer of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire
         cost of whatever size of sewer line is needed to accommodate his or her
         development.         (b)   The additional cost of providing any extra sewer line depth
         required by the city (over and above that sewer line depth required to adequately serve the
         owner or developer’s property when assuming at least a 12-foot sewer line depth at the
         uppermost end of the sewer line extended through or along said property) will be a city
         responsibility, and the city will reimburse the owner or developer for the cost of said
         extra depth of sewer line as agreed upon and as set forth in the annexation or development
         agreement between the developer and the city.      (4)   (a)   If the property owner or
         developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of
         any street, alley or easement where a sewer line is located or required, he, she or they
         shall be responsible for only one-half of the cost of said sewer line while the property
         owner on the other side of said street, alley or easement shall be responsible for the other
         half of the cost of said sewer line construction. However, in the absence of any mutual
         agreement between the property owners, the city may participate with the first owner or
         developer to the extent of paying for one-half the cost of an eight-inch diameter sewer line
         across said referenced property frontage.         (b)   The second property owner will
         thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the city for his or her half of the costs of this
         sewer line construction at the time he or she (the second property owner or developer)
         begins to develop or build upon his or her property that is adjacent to the sewer line
         installed by the first property owner; provided further, however, that if the sewer line
         construction is for an area or a development that is outside of the city limits or if the
         length of the sewer line construction in which the city would be participating (as referred
         to above) exceeds 1,000 lineal feet, the city may decline to participate in the cost of said
         sewer line construction, except to pay for the extra cost differential between the size and
         depth of the sewer line required to serve the development and the actual size and depth of
         line that the city designates shall be installed to meet the requirements of its sewer
         system master plan. When this situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner
         or developer who first initiates or actually begins the development of his or her property
         shall be responsible for “front-ending” the entire cost of the sewer line construction and
         for actually constructing said sewer line.         (c)   The second (or other) property
         owners shall thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the property owner for his, her or
         their share of the costs of the sewer line along his, her or their frontage at the time he,
         she or they (the other adjacent property owners or developers) begin to develop or build
         upon his, her or their property adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property
         owner. In the absence of any agreement between the first property owner or developer
         covering the cost of said sewer line(s) the referenced other adjacent property owners or
         developers shall pay to the city the amount of $12 per lineal foot (or such other amount as
         the city may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of sewer line
         across his, her or their frontage. The city, in turn, will reimburse this same amount to the
         first party, which reimbursement shall be deemed adequate and appropriate compensation for
         his, her or their share of the cost of said sewer line.(Prior Code, § 13.08.430)   
         (B)   Subdivision developer’s or property owner’s responsibility for sewage lift
         stations.      (1)   (a)   Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practicable to keep sewage
         lift stations to the smallest number possible.         (b)   When a sewage lift station and
         its related facilities is required, it and the sewer main system directing sewage to it
         shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to serve a single
         property owner or developer.      (2)   The cost of the sewage lift station shall be
         equitably divided between the developer and the city as set forth in the annexation or
         development agreement.(Prior Code, § 13.08.440)(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.064 BACKFLOW
         PREVENTION DEVICES.    (A)   Device requirements.      (1)   Every sewer connection from the
         enactment of this chapter shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device, which shall
         be purchased, installed and maintained by the sewer user.      (2)   All persons presently
         connected to the sewer system are encouraged to install and maintained an approved backflow
         prevention device.      (3)   The backflow prevention device and installation shall be
         approved by the Superintendent of Public Works prior to installation.   (B)   Liability for
         damages. The city shall not be liable to any person for any damages caused directly or
         indirectly by sewage.(Ord. 552, passed 4-1-1997) Penalty, see §
         53.999 ENFORCEMENT§ 53.075 CITATION; APPEARANCE.    (A)   Whenever it is determined by any
         police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person or persons has violated any
         provisions of this chapter, the officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such
         person or persons a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of
         competent jurisdiction within the city.   (B)   This citation shall contain the name and
         address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the
         offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court,
         and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and such person or persons shall
         appear in said court within five days after such citation is issued and served.   (C)   The
         issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder.
         (Prior Code, § 13.08.450) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.076 FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL.
            It is unlawful for any person or persons to fail or neglect to appear in response to and
         as required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such
         citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon
         appearance by the person cited or his or her attorney.(Prior Code, § 13.08.460) (Ord. 532,
         passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
         53.999 RATES AND FEES§ 53.090 SYSTEM OF CHARGES.    All systems of charges and fees to
         users, within and without the city, shall assure that each recipient of wastewater
         collection and treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation
         and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of any waste collection and treatment
         services provided by the city.(Prior Code, § 13.08.280) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.091
         SEWER CONNECTION FEE.    (A)   Before any sewer connection permit is issued for the
         installation of any sewer service connection (side sewer), the person making the application
         therefor shall pay to the city a sewer connection fee according to the following schedule.
                                                          Minimum Slope in Feet Per 110 Feet      (2)   Under special conditions, if detailed
                                                          justifiable reasons are given, slopes slightly less than those required above (i.e., to
                                                          provide two or three feet per second velocity when flowing full) may be permitted. Such
                                                          decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be three-tenths of the
                                                          diameter or greater for the design average flow. Whenever such decreased slopes are
                                                          proposed, the design engineer must furnish with his or her report his or her computations of
                                                          the depths of flow in such pipes at the minimum and average rates of flow for a typical
                                                          day.      (3)   Sewers shall be laid with uniform slopes between manholes, i.e., a manhole
                                                          shall be constructed at each point where the sewer line slope or grade changes.   
                                                          (D)   Manholes. Manholes shall be located not more than 400 feet apart on lines 15 inches in
                                                          diameter or smaller. Manholes may be located up to 600 feet apart on lines larger than 15
                                                          inches in diameter. Manholes shall be installed at all locations where sewer line eight
                                                          inches in diameter or larger intersect, join together or make a bend. All dead-end sewer
                                                          lines shall have a manhole installed on the end thereof.   (E)   Sewer mainline drop through
                                                          manholes. Lateral sanitary sewer lines shall not enter a manhole at an elevation appreciably
                                                          higher than the sewer main line. The flowline(s) of any lateral line(s) shall be positioned
                                                          within the manhole as follows.      (1)   The flowline of the main sewer line shall be at
                                                          least five-hundredths of a foot below the flowline of any of the lateral sewer lines
                                                          entering the manhole. Where the diameter of the main line and the lateral line differ by
                                                          less than five-tenths of a foot, the top of the lateral line shall be positioned even with
                                                          the top of the main line on its high (inlet) side.      (2)   Where the diameter of the main
                                                          and lateral differ by five-tenths of a foot or more, the eight-tenths depth points of the
                                                          two sewer line inverts shall be positioned at the same elevation.      (3)   Where a lateral
                                                          line should enter a manhole at an elevation of less than three feet above the main sewer
                                                          line, the grade or slope of the lateral shall be adjusted so that its flowline is located
                                                          (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.      (4)   Individual building
                                                          service lines may not enter manholes; except that not more than two individual building
                                                          service lines may enter a “dead-end” manhole (a manhole on the upstream and permanent end of
                                                          a sewer line); and provided further, that the individual building service lines must enter
                                                          the manhole at such elevation that the top of the service line is level with the top of the
                                                          sewer main line and that the poured-in-place concrete floor of the manhole brings the
                                                          flowlines of the service lines into the flowline of the mainline in a smooth continuous
                                                          manner.   (F)   Sanitary sewer lines and water lines. Sanitary sewer lines and water lines
                                                          shall, wherever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street. Preferably, water
                                                          lines shall be located 13 feet west or north of the street centerline and the sanitary sewer
                                                          at 13 feet east or south of the street centerline. Where storm drains are needed, these
                                                          shall preferably be located along the street centerline. The above-referenced locations and
                                                          dimensions may be varied to accommodate unusual circumstances; however, a ten-foot (out-to-
                                                          out) horizontal separation between water line facilities and sewer facilities (either
                                                          sanitary or storm) and an 18-inch (out-to-out) vertical separation between said facilities
                                                          shall always be maintained unless a specific variance to this requirement is obtained from
                                                          the City Engineer. The applicable separation requirements of the State Health Department
                                                          shall also be complied with.   (G)   Drawing requirements.      (1)   All drawings shall be
                                                          on linen or Mylar, in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly show the
                                                          dimensions, locations, sizes and the like, of all facilities represented thereon. All sewer
                                                          line manholes, inlet boxes, building service lines and the like shall be clearly shown and
                                                          identified by name and by station or other means of horizontal location.      (2)   Sewer
                                                          lines shall be shown in both plane and profile unless the length of said sewer line or sewer
                                                          line extension is so short that the City Engineer waives this requirement.      (3)   If a
                                                          profile of the sewer line is not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by
                                                          elevations on the flowline of the pipe at all manholes, inlet boxes and the like, and at
                                                          other such locations and intervals as the City Engineer may require.      (4)   Drawings
                                                          shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals 100 inches unless the amount of detail,
                                                          topography and the like necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., one inch
                                                          equals 50 feet or one inch equals 40 feet) to provide the clarity and completeness needed on
                                                          the drawings.   (H)   Approval. The design of all sewer lines and all sewer line plans must
                                                          be approved by the City Engineer.(Prior Code, § 13.08.410) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§
                                                          53.062 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION.    (A)   As-built or record drawings
                                                          of sewer line plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, and the corrected original
                                                          drawing(s) shall be provided to the city.   (B)   As-built plans shall include a
                                                          certification thereon signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work
                                                          that the as-built drawing of the sewer lines are true and correct and that he or she (the
                                                          registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the sewer line
                                                          installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done in conformance
                                                          with the city, federal and state standard specifications for the construction of sanitary
                                                          sewers and storm sewers.(Prior Code, § 13.08.420) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.063
                                                          DEVELOPER OR PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.    (A)   Subdivision developer’s or property
                                                          owner’s responsibility for sewer lines.      (1)   The owner or developer of any piece of
                                                          property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the
                                                          sewer line costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a
                                                          sewer line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the city’s sewer main
                                                          system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for
                                                          the necessary and required system of sewer lines within the interior of the tract of
                                                          land.      (2)   (a)   The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all
                                                          needed sewer lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of any
                                                          piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized
                                                          unless phased construction of the sewer main system is specifically allowed or provided for
                                                          in the annexation or development agreement.         (b)   In lieu of actually constructing
                                                          said required sewer line or sewer lines, the property owner or developer may deposit
                                                          adequate moneys with the city to fully cover the cost(s) of said required sewer line
                                                          construction.      (3)   (a)   The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will
                                                          normally be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight-inch diameter sanitary sewer
                                                          line. The additional cost of providing a sanitary sewer line of a size greater than eight
                                                          inches will normally be a city responsibility. The city will reimburse the developer for the
                                                          extra cost of the additional sanitary sewer line size (over the eight-inch diameter size
Sewer Size (inches)                                       referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the
                                                          developer and the city; provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or
                                                          development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer size
                                                          larger than an eight-inch diameter line, or if the type of development is such as to produce
                                                          a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight-inch diameter sewer line, then the
                                                          owner or developer of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire
                                                          cost of whatever size of sewer line is needed to accommodate his or her
                                                          development.         (b)   The additional cost of providing any extra sewer line depth
                                                          required by the city (over and above that sewer line depth required to adequately serve the
                                                          owner or developer’s property when assuming at least a 12-foot sewer line depth at the
                                                          uppermost end of the sewer line extended through or along said property) will be a city
                                                          responsibility, and the city will reimburse the owner or developer for the cost of said
                                                          extra depth of sewer line as agreed upon and as set forth in the annexation or development
                                                          agreement between the developer and the city.      (4)   (a)   If the property owner or
                                                          developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of
                                                          any street, alley or easement where a sewer line is located or required, he, she or they
                                                          shall be responsible for only one-half of the cost of said sewer line while the property
                                                          owner on the other side of said street, alley or easement shall be responsible for the other
                                                          half of the cost of said sewer line construction. However, in the absence of any mutual
                                                          agreement between the property owners, the city may participate with the first owner or
                                                          developer to the extent of paying for one-half the cost of an eight-inch diameter sewer line
                                                          across said referenced property frontage.         (b)   The second property owner will
                                                          thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the city for his or her half of the costs of this
                                                          sewer line construction at the time he or she (the second property owner or developer)
                                                          begins to develop or build upon his or her property that is adjacent to the sewer line
                                                          installed by the first property owner; provided further, however, that if the sewer line
                                                          construction is for an area or a development that is outside of the city limits or if the
                                                          length of the sewer line construction in which the city would be participating (as referred
                                                          to above) exceeds 1,000 lineal feet, the city may decline to participate in the cost of said
                                                          sewer line construction, except to pay for the extra cost differential between the size and
                                                          depth of the sewer line required to serve the development and the actual size and depth of
                                                          line that the city designates shall be installed to meet the requirements of its sewer
                                                          system master plan. When this situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner
                                                          or developer who first initiates or actually begins the development of his or her property
                                                          shall be responsible for “front-ending” the entire cost of the sewer line construction and
                                                          for actually constructing said sewer line.         (c)   The second (or other) property
                                                          owners shall thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the property owner for his, her or
                                                          their share of the costs of the sewer line along his, her or their frontage at the time he,
                                                          she or they (the other adjacent property owners or developers) begin to develop or build
                                                          upon his, her or their property adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property
                                                          owner. In the absence of any agreement between the first property owner or developer
                                                          covering the cost of said sewer line(s) the referenced other adjacent property owners or
                                                          developers shall pay to the city the amount of $12 per lineal foot (or such other amount as
                                                          the city may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of sewer line
                                                          across his, her or their frontage. The city, in turn, will reimburse this same amount to the
                                                          first party, which reimbursement shall be deemed adequate and appropriate compensation for
                                                          his, her or their share of the cost of said sewer line.(Prior Code, § 13.08.430)   
                                                          (B)   Subdivision developer’s or property owner’s responsibility for sewage lift
                                                          stations.      (1)   (a)   Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practicable to keep sewage
                                                          lift stations to the smallest number possible.         (b)   When a sewage lift station and
                                                          its related facilities is required, it and the sewer main system directing sewage to it
                                                          shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to serve a single
                                                          property owner or developer.      (2)   The cost of the sewage lift station shall be
                                                          equitably divided between the developer and the city as set forth in the annexation or
                                                          development agreement.(Prior Code, § 13.08.440)(Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.064 BACKFLOW
                                                          PREVENTION DEVICES.    (A)   Device requirements.      (1)   Every sewer connection from the
                                                          enactment of this chapter shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device, which shall
                                                          be purchased, installed and maintained by the sewer user.      (2)   All persons presently
                                                          connected to the sewer system are encouraged to install and maintained an approved backflow
                                                          prevention device.      (3)   The backflow prevention device and installation shall be
                                                          approved by the Superintendent of Public Works prior to installation.   (B)   Liability for
                                                          damages. The city shall not be liable to any person for any damages caused directly or
                                                          indirectly by sewage.(Ord. 552, passed 4-1-1997) Penalty, see §
                                                          53.999 ENFORCEMENT§ 53.075 CITATION; APPEARANCE.    (A)   Whenever it is determined by any
                                                          police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person or persons has violated any
                                                          provisions of this chapter, the officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such
                                                          person or persons a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of
                                                          competent jurisdiction within the city.   (B)   This citation shall contain the name and
                                                          address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the
                                                          offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court,
                                                          and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and such person or persons shall
                                                          appear in said court within five days after such citation is issued and served.   (C)   The
                                                          issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder.
                                                          (Prior Code, § 13.08.450) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.076 FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL.
                                                             It is unlawful for any person or persons to fail or neglect to appear in response to and
                                                          as required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such
                                                          citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon
                                                          appearance by the person cited or his or her attorney.(Prior Code, § 13.08.460) (Ord. 532,
                                                          passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
                                                          53.999 RATES AND FEES§ 53.090 SYSTEM OF CHARGES.    All systems of charges and fees to
                                                          users, within and without the city, shall assure that each recipient of wastewater
                                                          collection and treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation
                                                          and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of any waste collection and treatment
                                                          services provided by the city.(Prior Code, § 13.08.280) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)§ 53.091
                                                          SEWER CONNECTION FEE.    (A)   Before any sewer connection permit is issued for the
                                                          installation of any sewer service connection (side sewer), the person making the application
                                                          therefor shall pay to the city a sewer connection fee according to the following schedule.
Apartment houses, duplexes and similar multiple living
units
For each building                                         $500
Each additional living unit in excess of one              $250
Commercial buildings and others not specifically covered  $500
elsewhere
   Plus for each plumbing fixture in excess of six per $10
premises
Condominiums
   Per living unit                                     $500
Industrial facilities                                     As may be established by the city
Mobile home courts or mobile home subdivisions
   For each space or lot                               $500
Motels, motor motels, cabin courts, travel trailer courts $500
   Each room, cabin or trailer space an additional     $50
Single-family dwellings
   Each sewer connection                               $500
 
   (B)   (1)   The sewer connection fee set forth in division (A) above must be
paid whenever sewer service is requested and subsequently provided to any
dwelling, trailer house, business, commercial building or any other such
building or establishment that does not have a permit to connect to or actually
is connected to the city’s sewer system at the date of passage of the ordinance
codified in this chapter.
      (2)   The sewer connection fee referenced in this section will not apply
to or be charged against the reconstruction of any existing sewer service line
serving any existing dwelling, building and the like. It is intended that this
sewer connection fee be charged only where a new building is being constructed
upon previously undeveloped property. These fees may be changed from time to
time by resolution of the city as such changes are deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.290) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.092 SERVICE LINE FEES.
   At the time an applicant applies for city sewer service, a service line
installation fee shall be assessed. The service line fee is to cover the costs
incurred by the city in installing the sewer service line and shall be based on
the actual cost of labor and materials. The fees shall be reviewed from time to
time and thereafter revised by resolution of the city so that said fees and
costs adequately cover the costs actually incurred by the city in installing
these service lines.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.300) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.093 SERVICE CALL CHARGE.
   The Superintendent of Public Works may require a service charge in an
amount, not to exceed the actual cost to the city for service calls which are
only for the convenience and benefit of the customer.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.310) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.094 MONTHLY SEWER RATES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   This is a user charge system for a small community which follows
model number one in Appendix B of the Federal Register, dated September 27,
1978 (43 FR 44022). The treatment works is primarily dependent and will utilize
the equivalent use concept. The equivalent use system has been set up based on
flow.
      (2)   A sewer user charge shall be levied on all users of the sewage
collection and treatment facilities to cover the actual or estimated cost of
operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of this facility. The user
charge system shall distribute these costs to each user or user class in
approximate portion to such user’s contribution to the total wastewater load of
such facilities.
   (B)   Basis for rates. The sewer user rates for each user (or user class)
shall be based on the user’s contribution to the total wastewater loading of
the treatment facilities in comparison to a standard equivalent user as defined
below. Each user (or user class) shall be assigned a number to be multiplied by
a constant monthly rate. Special users contributing sewage of excessive flow
and/or strength, for which the tabulated equivalent users below do not apply,
shall be individually calculated as provided below. The constant monthly cost
factor shall be set by resolution of the city.
   (C)   Equivalent user. For the purpose of this section, ONE EQUIVALENT USER
means contributing 210 gallons per day of wastewater containing not more than
seven-tenths of a pound of five-day BOD and five-tenths of a pound of suspended
solids. The equivalent user flow has been developed from population and sewer
usage records which indicate an average single dwelling unit has three and one-
half people contributing 70 gallons per day per person. Standard engineering
data indicates two-tenths of a pound of five-day BOD and fourteen-hundredths of
a pound of suspended solids respectively per person per day. The basic
equivalent user shall be subject to revision if population, water usage, sewage
volume and/or other information indicates flow and/or strength significantly
different from that defined herein. Revisions of the basic equivalent user
criteria shall normally only be made upon the recommendation of a registered
professional engineer.
   (D)   Equivalent user schedule. The number of equivalent users to be
assigned each user and/or user class shall be in accordance with the following
equivalent user schedule. Assignment of equivalent users shall apply for one
year until the next annual user charge review. Users so indicated or not
included in this schedule shall be considered special users and shall be
evaluated separately as provided below. If the information indicates that the
strength of sewage contributed by any of the following users is in excess in
comparison with the allowable limits listed above, then a surcharge shall be
levied against such users as provided below. Any of the users in the following
schedule may be classified as special users if information on their
contribution flow and/or strength indicates a need to do so. A single user
having more than one classification of use shall be the sum of the fees. The
minimum monthly sewer user charge shall be one equivalent user. Equivalent user
schedule (one minimum), see Addendum 1, attached to the ordinance codified in
this chapter.
   (E)   Surcharge for excessive strength.
      (1)   When any user contributes wastewater having an average BOD and/or
suspended solids loading in excess of the designated allowable limits
hereinafter designated, a surcharge shall be levied against such user. Said
surcharge shall be based on the average degree of excess loading and applied as
a percentage of the basic user charge, as provided in the above schedule, or
otherwise for special users. The BOD and suspended solids loading shall be
determined from estimates or tests made by city officials or the City Engineer.
      (2)   The user’s monthly surcharge shall be computed by the user of the
following equation, where “US” represents the user’s monthly surcharge to be
added to the basic user’s monthly charge, “UMC” represents the basic user’s
monthly charge (for treatment only) and shall not be less than one, “b”
represents the average BOD loading above which is a user’s wastewater
contribution, expressed in parts per million, “B” represents the allowable
limit of BOD loading above which a user’s surcharge shall be levied, designated
as being 200 parts per million, “s” represents the average suspended solids
loading of the user’s wastewater contribution, expressed in parts per million,
and “S” represents the allowable limit of suspended solids loading above which
a user’s surcharge shall be levied, designated as being 140 parts per million.
      (3)   A copy of the list of users surcharged, the characteristics of
their sewage and the surcharge for each shall be kept on file at all times in
the office of the City Clerk.
   (F)   Special users.
      (1)   If, in addition to excessive strength, a user is determined to add
flow to the wastewater treatment facilities in excess of 6,500 gallons per
month, the above formula shall be increased by a factor of total flow divided
by 6,500 gallons per month multiplied by one equivalent user. In order to
determine the flow of this special user, the city may monitor sewage and water
flow in order to determine total flow. The value of UMC used in the formula
above will be the same value as assigned single dwelling units.
      (2)   A copy of the list of special users, the characteristics of their
sewage, and the special user’s monthly charge shall be kept on file at all
times in the office of the City Clerk.
   (G)   Review and revision of rates. The sewer user charges shall, as a
minimum, be reviewed annually and updated by resolution of the city to reflect
actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the sewage
collection and treatment facilities. Any revisions of the user charges shall be
based on actual operation, maintenance, replacement and financing expenses and/
or on significant changes in the total number of equivalent users, the total
daily flow, the total daily BOD and/or the total daily suspended solids. The
city may install flow-measuring devices and/or collect wastewater samples at
any time in any user’s service line to determine actual usage as a basis for
revisions of the user’s charge. Revisions due only to changes in expenses and
user class shall be made by the city. Revisions involving users flow, BOD and/
or suspended solids shall normally only be made upon the recommendation of a
registered professional engineer. All changes in user charges applicable to
this chapter shall be computed by the methods outlined herein.
   (H)   User request for rate change. Any sewer user who feels his or her user
charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his or her premises within the
spirit and intent of the foregoing provisions may make written application to
the city requesting a review of his or her user charge. Said written request
shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and strength
of his or her wastewater in comparison with the value upon which the charge is
based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Any flow
measurements and/or testing of wastewater shall be approved in detail by the
city and/or the City Engineer. Review of the request by the city shall
determine if it is substantiated or not, including recommended further study of
the matter for the city and/or user by a registered professional engineer.
   (I)   Monthly rate. The basic rate for sewer shall be $41.50 a month.
   (J)   Connection. Any person or entity desiring to connect to the city sewer
shall pay a fee to the city prior to connection in the sum of $5,000.
      (1)   The rates and fees set forth above may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Any fees or rates previously adopted and approved by the city which
vary from the rates set forth in this division (J) shall remain in full force
and effect if not altered herein.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.320) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993; Ord. 675, passed 10-4-
2023; Ord. 676, passed 10-4-2023; Res. 250423, passed 4-23-2025)
§ 53.095 METERED SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever the city shall deem it appropriate and in the best interest
of the city and its citizens to require a user to have the sewer and/or water
service to his or her facilities metered to more appropriately determine the
amount of service provided such user by the system, the city may by resolution
require the user to install a meter and/or meters which will accurately measure
the service provided, and the city may further establish by resolution the
rates to be charged for such service as will properly pay the fair share of the
services provided such user.
   (B)   The cost of the meter and its installation shall be borne by the user.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.330) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.096 SEWER RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The following monthly rates are designated as those to be charged for sewer
service to customers outside the city limits, namely, two times the rates
charged for sewer service to customers inside the city limits, and the sewer
connection fee and the sewer service line installation fee shall be two times
the normal rate charged to customers inside the city limits, and in addition,
the city may require voluntary annexation to the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.340) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.097 BILLING PROCEDURE AND PERIODS.
   (A)   Accounts shall be charged a rate in accordance with the rate schedule
found in §
53.096, or as such may hereinafter be amended and revised by the city, and may
be included separately or in conjunction with the monthly water bill or garbage
bill.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall furnish to each property owner, landlord,
tenant or agent a monthly statement of the amount due for sewer service for
that month(s).
      (2)   The failure of any sewer user to receive notice or statement will
in no way affect the obligation of the user to remit monthly or bimonthly as
required.
   (C)   The initial billing for premises occupied less than one month shall be
charged only for that portion of the month during which the premises were
occupied.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.350) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.098 DUE DATE.
   (A)   Bills rendered for sewer service are payable upon receipt and become
past due ten days from the date on which rendered. When the past due date falls
on a legal holiday or on a day when city offices are not open for business, the
next regular business day is considered the past due date.
   (B)   When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid on the
date of mailing as shown by the postmark.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.360) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.099 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   (1)   When bills are not paid within 30 days from the past due date,
the City Superintendent of Public Works shall issue an order to shut off and
discontinue water service to such delinquent customers. In case service is
discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until:
         (a)   The delinquency is paid; or
         (b)   Until arrangements for payment satisfactory to the City Clerk
have been made, together with a fee of $25 for discontinuing the restoring
service.
      (2)   The fee of $25 shall be payable whenever a service trip is made for
the purpose of discontinuing service because of nonpayment even though an
actual shutoff may not actually have occurred.
   (B)   In the event that a delinquent customer fails to pay his or her bill
within the time set forth above, the city may discontinue city water service,
or remove or close sewer connections, and enter upon the property for
accomplishing such purposes.
   (C)   The expense of digging up and plugging the sewer service line as well
as the expense of restoring said sewer service line back to an operable
condition is a debt due to the city and may be recovered by legal action
against the sewer user in addition to the $50 fee set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.370) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.100 VACATION OR SHUT-DOWN RATES.
   When any person, firm, business or other determines that his or her home,
business or the like is going to be vacant, not used or shut down for a period
of time of a month or longer, he, she or they may so notify the Superintendent
of Public Works, who is herewith empowered to decrease the monthly sewer rate
for said home, business or the like to one-half its normal rate for the time
that said home, business or the like, is actually not being used or operated.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.380) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.101 WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   There is established a Wastewater Collection and Treatment System
Improvement Fund, to be maintained by the City Clerk in managing the fiscal
affairs of the city. All revenues derived from the charging of any fees,
charges, rates and so forth, as such are set forth herein, shall be deposited
in said fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes of paying existing or
future indebtedness connected with or relating to maintaining, repairing,
studying, controlling, enlarging, extending, enhancing or improving the
wastewater collection and treatment system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.390) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 53.102 RV DUMPING FEE.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the "RV Dumping Fee Ordinance." Its
purpose is to establish fees for RV dumping services within the City of
Montpelier.
   (B)   Effective upon passage, the RV dumping fee shall be set at $10 per
use. The fee applies to all recreational vehicles (RVs) utilizing the
designated dumping facilities within the city limits. The fee is applicable to
each separate RV. The fees may be amended or changed hereafter by resolution
during regular City Council meetings.
   (C)   Dumping of toxic chemicals or anything other than RV sewage is
prohibited and the person who dumps the same shall be responsible and liable
for any and all costs associated with removal of the prohibited substances.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-18-2024)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not
more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day said violation occurs shall be a separate
offense.
   (B)   Failure to comply with the requirements of §
53.003 shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for up to six months. Each
day of violation shall be a new and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.470) (Ord. 532, passed 5-18-1993; Ord. 601, passed 3- -
2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   State motor vehicle laws adopted
   
70.02   U-turns prohibited on four-lane streets
   
70.03   Speed limits
   
70.04   Dynamic braking devices and the like
   
70.05   Vehicles on city lands
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED.
   The city adopts the state motor vehicle laws as set forth in Idaho Code
Title 49, which is incorporated herein as if set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.010) (Ord. 441, passed 1-5-1971)
§ 70.02 U-TURNS PROHIBITED ON FOUR-LANE STREETS.
   No person shall cause any motor vehicle to make a U-turn by turning said
vehicle 180 degrees any place on any four-lane street within the city limits,
except as otherwise marked at the direction of the City Council, including, but
not limited to, all of Fourth Street and Washington Street between Fourth
Street and Twelfth Street.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.020) (Ord. 451, passed 10-4-1972) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Within the city, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing,
every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when special hazards
exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
other highway conditions.
   (B)   Within the city, where no special hazards exist that require lower
speed for compliance with division (A) above, the speed limit shall be 25 mph
unless posted otherwise.
   (C)   Within the city, where no special hazards exist that require a lower
speed limit than is posted, then the speed limit shall be as posted.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.030) (Ord. 531, passed 5-4-1993) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   “Dynamic braking device” defined. For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. A device used primarily on trucks for the
conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to air compressor
for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, commonly referred
to as a jake brake, engine brake or compression brake.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.010)
   (B)   Operation unlawful; exception. It is unlawful for any person to
operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the
city, except for the aversion of imminent danger.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.020)
(Ord. 537, passed 7-20-1994) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 VEHICLES ON CITY LANDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      IMPROVED PARKING OR ROADWAYS. The parking areas and roadways located on
city properties which are improved and maintained by the city, other than
dedicated city streets and alleys, including, but not limited to, golf courses,
cemeteries, City Hall, parks and other recreational areas.
      PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
      VEHICLE. Every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Parking or travel of a vehicle on city property is restricted to
improved parking areas or improved roadways.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to park or operate a vehicle on city
properties in unimproved parking areas or roadways unless authorized by the
city.
(Ord. 556, passed 5-5-1998) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violators of §
70.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as set forth
in the state code.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.020)
   (C)   A violation of any speed limit set forth in §
70.03 is an infraction, as defined by the state code, and the fines and
penalties adopted for a speeding infraction under state code shall be
applicable for violation of §
70.03. In the event such fines and penalties are not applicable for any reason,
then the fine shall be $50 plus cost.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.030)
   (D)   Violations of §
70.04 shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$300.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.030)
   (E)   Violations of §
70.05 shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$300.
(Ord. 451, passed 10-4-1972; Ord. 531, passed 5-4-1993; Ord. 537, passed 7-20-
1994; Ord. 556, passed 5-5-1998)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Restricted parking during winter months; public and private property
   
71.04   Unlawful parking
   
71.05   Removal of vehicles
   
71.06   Enforcement
   
71.07   Notice of removal and impounding
   
71.08   Lien and procedure of sale
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Provide for regulation of parking on the city’s properties;
   (B)   Provide for regulation of parking on public streets;
   (C)   Provide for regulation of parking upon private parking open to the
public; and
   (D)   Provide penalties for violations thereof.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle which remains upon the streets or other public
property for a period of longer than 48 hours, the owner of which cannot be
located or the owner refuses to remove the same upon direction of the police
officers.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
   STOLEN VEHICLE. A vehicle or property which law enforcement has reasonable
grounds to believe to be stolen.
   TRAILER. Any vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons or
property or being drawn by a motor vehicle or animals.
   UNIDENTIFIED VEHICLE. Any vehicle or personal property where ownership
thereof cannot be ascertained.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
§ 71.03 RESTRICTED PARKING DURING WINTER MONTHS; PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Restriction of parking vehicles or other personal property on city
streets during winter months and removal of improperly parked vehicles.
      (1)   No person shall cause any vehicle or any other personal property to
be parked, placed or left on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way
located in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during the
winter months of November, December, January, February and March.
      (2)   Any vehicle parked so as to obstruct the free movement of traffic
or snow removal, the emergency use of the streets or causing a traffic hazard
may be removed upon order of the Police Department.
   (B)   Parking restrictions on private property open to public.
      (1)   Persons owning private property open to the public or their
authorized agents may post said property restricting or limiting parking to
certain hours and/or prohibiting parking during other hours.
      (2)   Any private property open to the public wherein parking is
restricted shall be posted indicating the parking restrictions.
   (C)   Parking restrictions on public streets and city properties.
      (1)   The city may post property limiting or restricting parking on
public streets, parks, golf courses, cemeteries and other city properties.
      (2)   Any public streets, parks, golf courses, cemeteries and other city
properties wherein parking is restricted shall be posted indicating the parking
restrictions.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999; Ord. 562, passed 11-1-2023) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons or owners or occupants of vehicles to
park any vehicle or trailer contrary to signage setting forth the restrictive
parking, except that signage for winter parking hours is not required.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Removal of vehicle or other personal property from private property.
      (1)   No person shall cause any motor vehicle or personal property to be
parked, placed or left on any private property without first securing the
consent of the owner thereof or his or her agent.
      (2)   A complaint having been duly signed by the owner of the property or
his or her agent of the action prohibited herein shall permit the Police
Department to remove, or cause to be removed, said vehicle or other personal
property to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
   (B)   Removal of unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles.
The Police Department is hereby authorized in its discretion, in addition to
any penalty that may be provided therefor, to remove such unidentified, stolen,
wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property, as herein
defined, found upon any public street or property of the municipality, to the
nearest garage or other place of safety.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   All vehicles and other personal property impounded or heretofore impounded
by the Police Department shall be kept in custody and under control at such
garage or other place as designated by said Police Department until redeemed by
the owner thereof, as herein provided.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
§ 71.07 NOTICE OF REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   (1)   Upon removal of a vehicle or other personal property from a
public street or from public property, the police officer causing the vehicle
or personal property to be removed shall notify the Police Department and cause
notice by certified mail to be sent to the owner and lien holder listed with
the Department of Law Enforcement or county records.
      (2)   If there is no certificate of title on file in either of said
Departments, then notice shall be sent to the apparent owner as determine by
the registration certificate or other identification found in the vehicle, but
if no identification of the owner can be found in the vehicle, no notice need
be given.
   (B)   The notice shall include:
      (1)   The make, year, model, color and license place number of the
vehicle;
      (2)   The approximate place where the vehicle was found;
      (3)   The place where the vehicle was removed to; and
      (4)   A statement that the vehicle can be sold for removal and storage
charges if not claimed within 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
§ 71.08 LIEN AND PROCEDURE OF SALE.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall remove, store or keep any such
vehicle at the request of any such police officer shall have a lien on such
vehicle for the reasonable value of such services. Such lien shall be superior
and prior to any mortgage or title-retaining contract on such vehicle, and if
such charges are not paid within 30 days after the mailing of the notice
required by §
71.07, or after 30 days after the date of removal if no notice is required
under §
71.07, the person, firm or corporation performing the same may proceed to sell
the property at public auction by giving ten days’ public notice of the sale by
advertising in some newspaper published in the county where such property is
situated, or if there be no newspaper published in the county, then by posting
notice of sale in three of the most public places in the county for ten days
previous to such sale. The proceeds of the sale must first be applied to the
discharge of the lien and costs. The remainder, if any, must be paid over to
the owner of the vehicle.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall
pay, in addition to any costs assessed by the court, a civil penalty of $25. In
addition to any penalties set forth therein, said vehicle may be impounded and
removed as set forth herein.
(Ord. 562, passed 8-17-1999)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
72.01   Purpose
   
72.02   Definitions
   
72.03   Driver’s license required
   
72.04   Speed limit
   
72.05   Stop required at all intersections
   
72.06   Operation on extreme right-hand side of roadway required
   
72.07   Lights required
   
72.08   Operation; restrictions; hours
   
72.09   Crossing street; direct route required
   
72.10   Compliance with state laws
   
72.11   Further restrictions
 
   
72.99   Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to assist users of tracked vehicles, commonly described as
snowmobiles, to transport snowmobiles from places of storage to locations for
recreation or other purposes not located upon public streets, alleyways or
other public thoroughfares located within the city limits, the following
restrictions, regulations and penalties will be enforced by the law enforcement
agencies of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.010) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
§ 72.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC STREET. A street, alleyway or other public thoroughfare which is
maintained for winter use.
   SIDEWALK.
      (1)   Walkways used for public use which are maintained for use in the
wintertime.
      (2)   The term will not include walkways not cleaned and maintained for
winter use during periods of time when snow is on the ground.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.020) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
§ 72.03 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall be allowed to operate a snowmobile along a maintained
public street, alley or thoroughfare located within the city unless he or she
has been issued a valid state operator’s license in accordance with state
statutes for the purpose of operating a motor vehicle upon a public highway.
   (B)   Said operator will be required to have said driver’s license in his or
her possession while operating said snowmobile on the public thoroughfare.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.030) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 SPEED LIMIT.
   No snowmobile or snow machine may be operated upon any city street or
thoroughfare within the city limits at a rate of speed in excess of 15 mph.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.040) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 STOP REQUIRED AT ALL INTERSECTIONS.
   Operators of snowmobiles on public streets in the city shall bring said
snowmobile to a full and complete stop at every intersection where two or more
streets cross, regardless of the type of traffic control displayed at the
various intersections or in the absence of said traffic-control sign or symbol.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.050) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
§ 72.06 OPERATION ON EXTREME RIGHT-HAND SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any operation of snowmobiles on the public streets or thoroughfares of
the city shall be restricted exclusively to the extreme right-hand side of said
roadway while operating said snowmobile as closely to the right-hand side of
the street as possible, and the operation of a snow machine directly in the
lane of traffic as utilized by wheeled vehicles is prohibited.
   (B)   It is further prohibited to operate snowmobiles on public streets in
any manner other than single file along the extreme right-hand side of the
road.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.060) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on the streets of the city,
regardless of the time of day or night or prevailing weather conditions, unless
the rear illuminary or taillight and the headlight or lamp are lit.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.070) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS; HOURS.
   (A)   No operation between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. It is unlawful to
operate a snowmobile within the city limits between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
the public streets, and the use of a snowmobile shall further be prohibited
during any of these hours when the operation of said snowmobile would cause a
public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.080)
   (B)   No operation on private property without permission. It is unlawful to
operate any snowmobile upon any privately owned real estate in the city limits
without the express and specific consent of the legal occupant of said
property.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.090)
   (C)   No operation on pedestrian walkways. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a snowmobile on any public sidewalk or walkway maintained for winter
use for pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.100)
(Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 CROSSING STREET; DIRECT ROUTE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any snowmobile to cross any public street
except when in the most direct route across the street, this being direct and
straight across the street.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.110) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.
   In addition to the regulations contained herein, the operators of all
snowmobiles will be required to obey all laws of the state motor vehicle
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.120) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
§ 72.11 FURTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No more than one passenger allowed. Operators of any snowmobile shall
not carry or otherwise transport more than one person on said machine while
said vehicle is being operated on the public streets of the city irrespective
of the size or age of the passengers.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.130)
   (B)   No pulling, towing or pushing. Operators of snowmobiles shall not
pull, tow or push any other type of conveyance or item or equipment such as
sleds, sleighs, toboggans, trailers, skids or skis while operating snowmobiles
on public streets in the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.140)
   (C)   No racing mufflers. All snowmobiles and snow machines operated on the
streets of the city shall at all times be equipped with a factory stock
muffler. This division (C) prohibits the use of a racing muffler on a
snowmobile on the public streets of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.150)
(Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   All violators of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $300 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail,
not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 10.12.170) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   School zones
      
II.   Prohibited access during snow conditions
      
III.   Snowmobiles
      
IV.   Use of roller devices
SCHEDULE I. SCHOOL ZONES.
   The speed limit on the following streets shall be reduced while children are
present or while the designated traffic-control device so indicates while the
lights are flashing
 
Street                   Speed Limit Penalty
Boise Street from Fourth 20 mph      Fined as set forth in Idaho Code § 49-658
Street to Second Street              (2)
Clay Street from Fifth   20 mph      Fined as set forth in Idaho Code § 49-658
Street to Seventh Street             (2)
Fourth Street from                   Fined as set forth in Idaho Code § 49-658
Webster Street to        20 mph      (2)
Verlene Street
Washington Street from               Fined as set forth in Idaho Code § 49-658
Sixth Street to Seventh  20 mph      (2)
Street
 
(Ord. 627, passed 1-5-2011)
SCHEDULE II. PROHIBITED ACCESS DURING SNOW CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicles or use the
following locations for the purpose of recreational activities, including
sledding, snowboarding and related activities, during winter conditions when
the street is covered or partially covered with snow, ice or some form thereof.
 
Location                              Penalty
Jefferson Street between Third Street Fined as set forth in Idaho Infraction
and Second Street*                    Rule 9(35)
*This does not apply to local traffic for egress and ingress to properties
located thereon
 
   (B)   The Mayor, per request of the Chief of Police, shall cause such
barricades and signage to prevent the use of the street set forth herein during
snow conditions.
(Ord. 574, passed 1-7-2003)
SCHEDULE III. SNOWMOBILES.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any snowmobile or snow machine to operate
said machine or vehicle for any purpose in any of the following locations.
 
Location             Penalty
The city cemetery    As set forth in §
                     70.99
The city golf course As set forth in §
                     70.99
Fourth Street*       As set forth in §
                     70.99
*Except when crossing in accordance with state statutes
 
(Prior Code, § 10.12.160) (Ord. 442, passed 1-19-1971)
SCHEDULE IV. USE OF ROLLER DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use or operate a skateboard or roller blade
or similar device in the following locations.
 
Location                                             Penalty
Washington Street                                    As set forth in state laws
The abutting sidewalks or property open to the
public between the intersection of Washington Street As set forth in state laws
and Fourth Street
The intersection of Washington Street and Twelfth    As set forth in state laws
Street
 
(Ord. 583, passed 3-15-2005)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   CITY CEMETERY
      
95.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Owning, keeping or harboring poisonous or dangerous animals
   
90.03   Authority to enforce
   
90.04   Rabies vaccination, quarantine and disease control
   
90.05   Terms of impoundment and redemption or other disposition
   
90.06   Proper care of animals
   
90.07   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
90.08   Placing food or garbage
Dogs
   
90.20   License required
   
90.21   License fees
   
90.22   Kennels
   
90.23   Rabies vaccination required for licensing
   
90.24   Confinement of unspayed female dogs
   
90.25   At large dogs
   
90.26   Prohibited areas
   
90.27   Disturbing the peace; barking
   
90.28   Confinement of biting dog
   
90.29   Dangerous dogs
   
90.30   Training to fight and attack commands prohibited
   
90.31   Impounded dogs
   
90.32   Adoption; fees and requirements
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUSE. Any intentional, willful or negligent conduct resulting in bruising,
bleeding, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones,
subdural hematomas, soft tissue swelling or death.
   ALLOW. To forbear or neglect to restrain or prevent, regardless of intent or
participation.
   ALTERED. An animal which is sterilized by removal of sexual organs
(testicles or ovaries). May also be referred to as NEUTERED or SPAYED.
   ANIMAL. A mammal, bird, reptile, fish or amphibian.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person(s) employed by the city to administer and
enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement requirements contained in
this chapter.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or
owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal.
   AT HEEL. A dog being next to a person (not more than a foot away in any
direction) and obedient to that person’s command.
   AT LARGE. An animal that is off the premises of the owner and not on a leash
ten feet or less in length, or not confined in a motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business for the care of
animals, including, but not limited to, the boarding, grooming, breeding,
training or selling of animals.
   CRUELTY.
      (1)   Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering
or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including, but not limited to,
failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the
elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious
food in sufficient quantity.
      (2)   In case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused,
such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal
veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination and animal
training and hunting, CRUELTY shall mean a failure to employ the most humane
method reasonably available.
   CUSTODIAN. Any person having custodial care of an animal by his or her
choice, or at the request of, or with the consent of, the owner of the animal,
including, but not limited to, the parent(s) or guardian(s) of a minor child.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal:
         (a)   Which, when unprovoked by teasing, taunting or a threatening
manner by any person, approaches said person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon the streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places, common areas within
subdivisions or mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, common grounds of
apartment buildings, condominiums or townhouse developments or private property
not solely owned or possessed by the owner or custodian of the animal;
         (b)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or domestic animals or livestock;
         (c)   Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or domestic animal or livestock without justifiable provocation;
         (d)   Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting or any animal trained for fighting; or
         (e)   Which has been trained as an attack animal, except dogs used by
law enforcement agencies.
      (2)   An animal will not be considered DANGEROUS if it engages in any of
the above listed actions toward a person or animal that is either:
         (a)   Committing a trespass or other tort upon the premises of the
animal’s owner or custodian; or
         (b)   Committing a crime against the animal’s owner or custodian. An
animal will not be considered DANGEROUS if any of the above actions occur when
the animal is being teased, tormented or abused, or if the actions were in
reaction to either a crime committed by a person or an attempt by the person to
commit a crime.
   DESIGNATED PROVIDER. Any premises designated by the city for the purpose of
impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
   DISPOSITION.
      (1)   Adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or
placement or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal.
      (2)   DISPOSITION includes placement for sale of an animal to the general
public or removal of an animal from any pet shop to another location.
   HUMANE TRAP. A trap that is either designed to capture an animal alive and
unharmed to be relocated or a trap designed to kill that does so quickly and
without undue suffering to the animal such as mice and garden pests described
herein.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The taking into custody of an animal by any person, police
officer, animal control officer or other authorized representative thereof.
   LIVESTOCK. Cows, sheep, horses, goats, pigs, hogs, llamas, donkeys, burros
and mules or any other similar animals whose mature size is approximately that
of those set out herein.
   MISUSE. The willful or intentional causing of an animal to perform non-
customary tasks, excepting those tasks and actions required of dogs used by law
enforcement agencies, which could be dangerous or harmful to the animal or any
person.
   MULTIPLE-ANIMAL HOUSING. Any premises or portion thereof where three or more
dogs or more than five cats, over the age of three months are kept or harbored
solely for the hobby of the owner or tenant of the premises without any
pecuniary gain.
   MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed
to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting a
person or other animal.
   OWNER. Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or
having charge of, harboring, exercising control over or having property rights
to, any animal for five or more consecutive days, or whose child, or other
person over whom guardianship is exercised, who resides with said person, so
harbors or keeps an animal.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL. Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans,
endangers the life or health of a person or another animal or substantially
interferes with the rights of a person, other than its owner or custodian, to
enjoyment of life or property.
(Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.02 OWNING, KEEPING OR HARBORING POISONOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Special use permit required. It is unlawful to own, keep or harbor a
reptile, bird or other animal which is poisonous or dangerous to the health or
welfare of the residents of the city within the city without first applying for
and being granted a special use permit by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.010)
   (B)   Application. Application for a special use permit for the owning,
keeping or harboring of a poisonous or dangerous reptile, bird or animal shall
be made to the City Council on the form attached to the ordinance codified in
this section and made a part hereof by reference as though set out in full.
Applicant shall also publish legal notice for two consecutive weeks of a
hearing before the City Council on the intended owning, keeping and harboring
of a specific reptile, bird or animal.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.020)
   (C)   Approval or denial. Following the public hearing referred to in
division (B) above, the City Council may approve or deny the application. In
the event the application is approved, the City Council may issue the same with
any and all restrictions deemed reasonable and prudent by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.030)
(Ord. 487, passed 9-23-1980) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   (A)   Animal control officers, in addition to city police officers, are
hereby authorized to carry out the duties necessary to enforce this chapter,
including licensing, inspections and enforcement and including issuance of
state uniform citations for any violations of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct, or attempt
to hinder or obstruct, a police officer or an animal control officer in the
discharge of his or her duties specific to this chapter.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 RABIES VACCINATION, QUARANTINE AND DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   Rabies vaccination. The owner or custodian of any dog or cat shall be
responsible for having the animal vaccinated for rabies by a licensed
veterinarian and for keeping immunization current. Vaccinations must begin when
the animal has reached the age of four months. Every owner or custodian must,
upon request of an animal control officer or police officer, produce proof of
such vaccination(s).
   (B)   Suspected rabies; quarantine procedures.
      (1)   Any owner or custodian of any animal which shows symptoms of
rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall surrender the animal for
impoundment and isolation (quarantine) to a licensed veterinarian for a period
of 14 days or shall securely confine the animal on his or her premises for said
period of time. The choice of place of quarantine shall be at the discretion of
the animal control officer or the Police Department. All costs of quarantine
shall be borne by the animal owner or custodian. If an owner or custodian
refuses to surrender or confine the animal, animal control officers are hereby
authorized to seize the animal and transport it to a licensed veterinarian.
Animal control officers or police officers are hereby authorized to immediately
impound any quarantined animal found outside the quarantine area and arrange
for its confinement in accordance with this section.
      (2)   If the animal has been confined by its owner or custodian, on the
next working day following the 14-day quarantine, the owner or custodian shall
take the animal to a licensed veterinarian for examination and to be examined
and to obtain a rabies vaccination if the owner has not provided a current
valid rabies vaccination certificate to the Police Department. A copy of the
examination results and a current certificate of rabies vaccination must be
provided to the Police Department no later than the following day.
      (3)   Failure of the owner to comply with any of these provisions shall
result in the immediate impoundment of the animal, and it shall be subject to
disposition in accordance with the policies of this chapter. If an animal
quarantined is determined to be free of rabies, it shall be returned to the
owner or custodian upon payment of all costs of confinement, examination and
vaccination. If such charges are not paid, the animal shall not be returned and
shall be subject to disposition in accordance with the policies and procedures
of this chapter.
   (C)   Premature destruction; preservation of the head. It is unlawful for
any person to kill or have killed any animal suspected of being rabid;
provided, however, that an animal control officer or other law enforcement
officers may kill any such animal if he or she determines that the animal is so
vicious or wild that it cannot be restrained and impounded or that further
pursuit would result in losing the animal, and if the animal can be killed so
as not to damage the head. The head of any animal so killed must be severed
from the body and sent to the Public Health Department for examination and
diagnosis immediately as time is of critical importance due to the degradation
of the tissue.
   (D)   Control of contagious disease. It is unlawful for any person to
knowingly permit or allow any animal with a contagious or infectious disease
upon the public streets, roads and way of this city; or to be within any public
transportation facility or other public building or place; or to expose such
animal in a public building or place whereby the health and safety of any
person may be affected.
   (E)   Impoundment by property owner.
      (1)   Any person finding an animal at large upon his or her property may
impound that animal and shall immediately notify the Sheriff’s dispatch
personnel that he or she is holding the animal in his or her own possession and
provide a description of the animal and the name of the animal owner, if known.
The dispatch should notify a police officer or an animal control officer to
impound the animal at the first reasonable opportunity to do so.
      (2)   If the name of the owner or custodian is known or can be easily
obtained, the officer may return the animal to the residential address of the
owner. If there is no one present, the officer may impound the animal and shall
leave written notice at the residence of the person or place to contact to
reclaim the animal. The animal control officer shall then attempt to make
arrangements for the dog’s confinement.
   (F)   Impoundment by officers. In addition to any other remedies provided in
this chapter, animal control officers and police officers are authorized to
impound and confine any of the following animals:
      (1)   Any dog without a valid license tag;
      (2)   Any animal at large;
      (3)   Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order;
      (4)   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care. Upon determination by any police officer or veterinarian that the injury
or illness is untreatable, the animal may be euthanized by the officer or
veterinarian without regard to the waiting period set out in §
90.05. Costs of medical care or euthanasia shall be borne by the owner or
custodian;
      (5)   Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected;
      (6)   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
      (7)   Any animal that is reasonably believed to be dangerous or a threat
to public health and safety;
      (8)   Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed; and
      (9)   Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, e.g., due to
the owner’s death, arrest or eviction from his or her residence, and there is
no sign of care for the animal.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 TERMS OF IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OR OTHER DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The designated provider shall provide suitable and adequate food and
water for all animals impounded.
   (B)   (1)   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three working days
shall:
         (a)   Be turned over to the designated provider and converted to its
property; or
         (b)   Become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption
or euthanized in a humane manner after that recommendation by a licensed
veterinarian.
      (2)   (a)   The Animal Control Director or Police Chief may refuse to
allow adoption to any person who has pled guilty or been convicted of a
violation of this chapter. Appeal or denial may be made in writing within three
days to the City Council.
         (b)   Specific animals shall not be held at the center pending the
Council’s decision but may be adopted by other persons or euthanized as
provided in division (B)(1) above.
         (c)   The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next available
regularly scheduled meeting and may either affirm or reverse the denial. If the
denial is reversed, the person may adopt any animal which is available after
the Council’s decision.
         (d)   Fees for adoption and euthanasia shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   If the name of the owner is readily available through license records,
the designated provider staff, animal control officer or police officer shall
attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail, or by hand delivery of a
notice, or by notice attached to the door of the residence of the animal’s
impoundment, providing the deadline for reclaiming the animal, the conditions
under which the animal may be redeemed, including a detailing of the costs of
confinement and the consequences of failure to redeem by the deadline.
   (D)   The designated provider or Police Department shall keep a record of
all animals impounded, which shall include a description of the animal, date of
impoundment, date of notification of impoundment, method of notification, date
of redemption and record of fees paid or date of other disposition. In the case
of adoption, the record shall include the name, address and phone number of the
person buying or adopting the animal. If the owner requests the dog after the
three days has passed, the owner shall reapply for and must meet adoption
criteria for the dog.
   (E)   Redemption shall be made by providing satisfactory proof of ownership
and paying the required city fees and charges. Other fees, including, but not
limited to, private impoundment fees, daily care fees and medical costs must be
paid in full to the designated provider. City fees shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the City Council. Copies of such resolutions shall be
kept on file and made available in the office of the City Clerk.
   (F)   Any person who has surrendered two or more dogs for disposition by the
animal shelter (County Animal Shelter) or has two or more dogs impounded for
any reason shall not be eligible to hold a dog license in the city.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.06 PROPER CARE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Proper care of animals.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to
fail to provide the animal with any of the following:
         (a)   Clean water daily and sufficient, good and wholesome food;
         (b)   Proper shelter and protection from weather, including shade in
summer and protection from extreme cold in winter;
         (c)   Appropriate veterinary care to prevent suffering and/or treat
disease; a clean and wholesome living environment; and protection from abuse or
misuse.
      (2)   No owner or custodian of any animal shall willfully abandon such
animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property,
without the consent of the owner thereof to provide care for the animal.
      (3)   The owner or custodian of any animal which dies shall within 24
hours provide for the burial, cremation or other disposition of the body of
such dead animal in a safe and sanitary manner.
      (4)   Animal control officers shall dispose of any animal found dead in
the city whose owner or custodian cannot be readily ascertained by removing the
body for disposition.
      (5)   No person shall dye or color any rabbit, baby chick, ducklings or
other fowl or dog or cat or sell, offer for sale, barter or give away rabbits
less than three weeks of age or dogs or cats less than six weeks of age for any
purpose. Research facilities shall be exempt from the provision of this
section.
   (B)   Sanitation requirements.
      (1)   No owner or custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such
animal to soil, defile, urinate or defecate on any public property or upon any
street sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the
members of a homeowner’s or condominium association, or upon private property
other than that of the owner unless such owner or custodian immediately removes
and disposes of feces deposited by such animal by collection of the feces and
removal of such to the property of the animal owner or custodian for
disposition thereafter in a manner permitted by law.
      (2)   (a)   No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the
city shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on any
property so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or
offensive living condition on the owner’s or custodian’s property or the
property of others.
         (b)   Offensive living conditions shall include, but are not limited
to, exposure to the odor of accumulated feces or urine.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any conduct defined in this
chapter as cruelty to animals. Such prohibition shall include, but not be
limited to, the following.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to overload or override an animal,
or to expose any animal, excluding animals used in law enforcement, to any
other unreasonable danger to its health or life.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to willfully or maliciously strike, beat,
abuse or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage
in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to
such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away any vicious
or trespassing animal.
      (2)   This does not apply to on-duty law enforcement officers duly
engaged in the lawful performance of duty while protecting persons from
potential immediate harm.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensed
veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, to administer poison to any animal, or
knowingly expose any animal to any poisonous substance, or ground glass, or
leave any such substance in any place with the intent to injure any animal.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (C) are not applicable to
exterminators or property owners using poisons or traps as part of a pest
control program, or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to
control insects and wild rodents, or to employees of the animal control shelter
in the discharge of their duties related to euthanasia.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to set any trap which is likely to be
injurious to domestic animals.
      (2)   Traps obtained from the Police Department or designated provider
are deemed not to be in violation of this section.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent property owners from
setting humane traps to capture and dispose of lawn and garden pests, rats,
mice, gophers, moles, voles or other animals which constitute a nuisance or are
deleterious to their enjoyment of life or property.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 PLACING FOOD OR GARBAGE.
   It is unlawful to place or offer food or garbage in a public place or a
place with public access in a way that attracts stray animals, including dogs,
cats, raccoons, skunks and other rodents or vermin believed to carry disease,
and creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog within the
city limits to keep, harbor or own any dog without first obtaining a license
for said dog as provided in §
90.21, except licensing shall not apply to dogs under the age of four months.
   (B)   Rabies vaccination is recommended at four months of age and required
for licensure.
   (C)   The city-issued license tag must be displayed on the dog, usually on
the collar.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   License fee non-transferable. Fees may be set and/or modified from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   The license fee for the license mentioned in §
90.20 shall be an amount for any altered dog and a separate amount for any non-
altered dog.
      (2)   A license purchased for a particular dog will not be transferable
to another dog. Each dog will require a new license meeting the requirements of
§
90.23.
   (B)   License fee; due when. Said license fee shall be due and payable on or
before January 15 of each year and shall be obtained by application to the City
Clerk. The dog license must be renewed every year.
   (C)   Replacement license tag. If a dog’s license tag becomes lost, a
replacement tag must be purchased.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 582, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-
2015)
§ 90.22 KENNELS.
   (A)   No owners, keepers or harborers of dogs may keep more than three dogs,
except as permitted in agriculture zoned lands within the city.
   (B)   Any kennel established shall be distanced far enough away from any
residence not owned by the kennel owner so as not to be a disturbance or
nuisance to neighbors. Such kennel will be at least 100 feet from any
neighbor’s property lines.
   (C)   All dogs in kennels must meet the license requirements for this
subchapter.
   (D)   A kennel license and fee will be required. Yearly license renewal is
required to establish and maintain a kennel under this provision.
   (E)   Persons involved in the breeding of dogs shall be required to obtain a
kennel license.
   (F)   The Police Chief may waive the limitation on the number of dogs and
increase that number for those who are providers of foster care for animal(s).
   (G)   (1)   Inspections may be performed without appointment and at the
discretion of and by a police officer, animal control officer and/or public
health official.
      (2)   Inspections shall be conducted on at least an annual basis.
(Ord. 582, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.23 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED FOR LICENSING.
   (A)   Each dog licensed within the city will have a current vaccination
certificate for rabies from a licensed veterinarian. A license will not be
issued without this certificate.
   (B)   Any unlicensed dog impounded and claimed by the owner will be given
these vaccinations by a licensed veterinarian at the claimant’s expense.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.24 CONFINEMENT OF UNSPAYED FEMALE DOGS.
   The owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog, not spayed, during the time
she shall be in heat, shall keep such dog totally inaccessible to any male dog
except one chosen for selective breeding.
(Ord. 582, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.25 AT LARGE DOGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog to allow
said dog to run at large within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Such animal shall be confined and restricted to the premises of the
owner, keeper or harborer and shall be allowed to go at large only in the
company and control of its owner, keeper or harborer.
(Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 PROHIBITED AREAS.
   (A)   All dogs are prohibited from going upon any city park, the golf course
and the City Cemetery, unless otherwise specified by signage.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or neglectfully allow or
permit domestic animals upon city properties, unless authorized by the city and
subject to such terms and conditions as set forth in other applicable
ordinances.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 526, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 556, passed 5-5-
1998; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 DISTURBING THE PEACE; BARKING.
   It is unlawful to allow any dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood by habitually barking or howling.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 CONFINEMENT OF BITING DOG.
   (A)   Any dog biting a person or other animal shall be confined for a period
of 14 days at a suitable place of impoundment approved by the Chief of Police
and may be examined by a licensed veterinarian at the owner’s expense.
   (B)   Confinement shall include solitary kenneling and exclusion from other
animals or persons during the 14-day period. If this is possible, the dog may
be quarantined at the home of the owner, if within in the city.
   (C)   In circumstances where testing is required, the dog must be
quarantined for at least 14 days under veterinary observation and then
destroyed for the purposes of necropsy.
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 90.29 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Dangerous conduct by dog prohibited.
      (1)   The owner or custodian of any dog which commits any of the acts
defined in this chapter as dangerous may be cited for a misdemeanor, and the
police officer or animal control officer may seize and impound the dog until
the matter has been adjudicated.
      (2)   The conduct shall not be deemed dangerous if the victim (person,
domestic animal or livestock) was committing a tort against the dog’s owner or
custodian, or committing a trespass or other tort on the premises of the dog’s
owner or custodian. Specifically prohibited are the following acts:
         (a)   If the dog acts although unprovoked by teasing, taunting or a
threatening manner by any person, approaching said person in an apparent
attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places,
common areas within subdivisions or mobile home or recreational vehicle parks,
common grounds of apartment buildings, condominiums or townhouse developments,
or private property not solely owned or possessed by the owner or custodian of
the dog; or
         (b)   Biting, inflicting injury, assaulting or otherwise attacking a
human being or domestic animal or livestock without justifiable provocation.
   (B)   Prohibited animals/dog(s). No person may own or harbor or have
custodial care of any of the following types of dangerous animals or dog(s):
      (1)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or domestic animals or livestock, unless restrained and/or confined as provided
in this chapter; or
      (2)   Any dog which has been trained as an attack dog, except dogs used
by law enforcement agencies.
   (C)   Impoundment and/or destruction.
      (1)   (a)   Any dog whose owner or custodian has been found guilty of or
entered a plea of guilty to the offense of dangerous conduct by his or her dog
is subject to impoundment and/or destruction.
         (b)   For a first offense, the court shall set the matter for
sentencing and notify the office of the city prosecutor of the date, time and
place of sentencing.
         (c)   The prosecutor may request that the court order the destruction
of the dog. If the court determines that destruction is warranted, it shall
issue an order authorizing any animal control officer or police officer to
enter the property where the dog is located and to seize the dog and impound it
for destruction if the animal has not been voluntarily surrendered by 5:00 p.m.
on the date of sentencing.
      (2)   Destruction of a dangerous animal is permitted even if it has not
been involved in a bite or injury of a person (breaking of the skin and has no
history of rabies vaccination).
   (D)   Subsequent violations.
      (1)   (a)   Upon the conviction or plea of guilty to a second or
subsequent offense of dangerous animal conduct, regardless of the form of the
current or any prior judgment, if the subsequent conduct involved the dog being
dangerous, the court shall order destruction of the dog.
         (b)   If the court determines that destruction is warranted, it shall
issue an order authorizing any animal control officer or police officer to
enter the property where the dog is located and seize the dog and impound it
for destruction if the dog has not been voluntarily surrendered by 5:00 p.m. on
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   If the subsequent conduct did not involve the dog being dangerous,
the court may, but is not required to, order destruction of the dog regardless
of the form of the current or prior judgment.
   (E)   Owner liability.
      (1)   An adult owner or custodian of a dangerous dog shall be liable for
all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or by any animal
caused by an unprovoked attack by any dangerous animal, plus all costs, civil
judgments or penalties, criminal fines, final terms, veterinary fees, shelter
impound fees and any other penalties and orders.
      (2)   In the event that the owner or custodian of the dangerous dog is a
minor, the minor’s parent or guardian shall be so liable.
   (F)   Failure to surrender dog. It shall be a separate offense to fail to
surrender a dog for impoundment and/or destruction.
(Ord. 518, passed 12-5-1989; Ord. 530, passed 1-5-1993; Ord. 582, passed 3-15-
2005; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30 TRAINING TO FIGHT AND ATTACK COMMANDS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess, harbor or maintain any animal for
the purpose of fighting or to train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal
for the purpose of causing or encouraging it to attack or fight human beings or
other animals.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   (A)   Impounded dogs; kennel fee.
      (1)   The owners, keepers or harborers of any dog impounded at the
veterinary clinic of the approved provider may also be subject to pay the city
a kennel fee per day for each day or part thereof the dog is impounded.
      (2)   Impound fees, a reasonable estimate of veterinarian expenses,
diagnostic tests and the like will be paid by owner of the dog at the time of
impoundment with balance due upon release of the dog.
      (3)   All costs set forth herein will not be reduced or dismissed upon
release or destruction of the dog.
   (B)   Isolation or quarantine.
      (1)   In the event special medical, veterinarian services or isolation
are necessary, then an additional impound fee will apply. The impounded dog may
be euthanized after three days if not redeemed.
      (2)   Any dog that is in the custody of the city that is terminally
suffering, upon the advice of a veterinarian, shall be euthanized at no
liability cost to the city or the approved veterinarian provider.
   (C)   Redeeming impounded dogs.
      (1)   Any person redeeming a dog shall, prior to or at the time of
redemption, purchase a license and fulfill all licensing requirements of this
chapter and pay all required fees to the City Clerk. Impoundment fees must be
paid to the designated service provider.
      (2)   Fees may be set and/or modified from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.
 
Licensed
First offense                  No penalty charge
Second offense (with same dog) Set fee plus impoundment fee
Third offense (with same dog)  Set fee plus impoundment fee
Not licensed
First offense                  Set fee plus impoundment fee
Second and subsequent offenses Set fee plus impoundment fee
 
(Ord. 488, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 582, passed 3-15-2005; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-
2015)
§ 90.32 ADOPTION; FEES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General conditions. Adoption of a dog from a designated provider shall
be allowed upon agreement by the adopter to abide by conditions set out herein
and in the adoption agreement and upon payment of the required fees.
   (B)   Alteration. Any dog adopted shall be altered (spayed or neutered) by a
licensed veterinarian either prior to adoption or within 30 day of adoption, or
as soon thereafter as the animal is old enough to be altered. If the animal
remains in the city and is not already altered, the adopter shall agree to
provide evidence of alteration to the Police Department within 30 days. For
animals too young to be altered within 30 days of adoption, proof of alteration
must be provided within 30 days of the age they become eligible for alteration,
which date will be designated on the adoption paperwork. Any person who has
adopted a dog or cat from the center who fails, neglects or refuses to so
provide evidence of alteration may be charged with a violation.
   (C)   Fees. The adoption fee, which shall include license fees, shall be set
by resolution of the City Council. The designated provider may determine
adoption criterion and its own fee structure.
(Ord. 602, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Violation(s) of this chapter for failure to license and/or for
animals at large is an infraction punishable by the fixed infraction penalty
set out in the state code.
      (2)   All other violations of this chapter are misdemeanors punishable by
a fine only up to $1,000.
   (B)   Any violation of §
90.02 by an owner, keeper or harborer of a poisonous or dangerous reptile, bird
or other animal by keeping or harboring such a poisonous or dangerous reptile,
bird or other animal without a special use permit, or by failing to comply with
the special use permit, shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, said owner, keeper or harborer shall be fined in a sum not less than
$25 nor more than $300 for each day in violation hereof.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.040) (Ord. 487, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. 602, passed 4-2-
2008; Ord. 651, passed 6-3-2015)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
   
91.01   Purpose and scope
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Dumping refuse on streets unlawful
   
91.04   Unsanitary premises unlawful
   
91.05   Exterior building maintenance
   
91.06   Exterior premises
   
91.07   Enforcement
   
91.08   Storage of inoperable vehicles
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the city by protecting neighborhoods against blighting and
deteriorating influences, by establishing minimum requirements for maintenance
of all buildings, premises and vacant lands.
(Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLIGHTED. Characterized by unsightly conditions including accumulated
debris; rotting, crumbling, peeling or rusting fences, structures or buildings,
dead or substantially damaged landscaping; noxious weeds and plants; improperly
maintained or located compost materials; and any other conditions of disrepair
and deterioration that substantially contributes to the decline in the
appearance of a neighborhood.
   DEBRIS. Substance of little or no apparent economic value, present in a
state of apparent disarray; the remains of broken or damaged items.
   DETERIORATION. The substantial lowering of quality of the condition or
appearance of a building or parts thereof characterized by holes, breaks,
rotting, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or any other evidence of
physical decay or neglect or lack of maintenance.
   FIRE HAZARD. Anything or act which increases the hazard of fire to a
condition that is greater than normal condition as may be recognized by persons
who are regularly engaged or trained in preventing, suppressing or
extinguishing fires, or any thing or act which may obstruct, delay, hinder or
otherwise interfere with the operation of the Fire Department or the safe
egress of occupants in the event of fire.
   GARBAGE. Food waste, useless wastes or materials, trash, rubbish, refuse or
litter.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. Presenting an immediate likelihood for causing serious
personal harm due to a condition of incompletion, deterioration, improper
building construction, breakage, leakage or exposure.
   INFESTATION. The apparent presence of damaging or unhealthful insects or
rodents.
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Any vehicle which, in its current state, whether due to
broken, defective or missing parts, including missing or flat tires, missing
doors, missing or badly damaged windshields or broken or defective parts which
are essential for movement, is not capable of being used as a regular means of
transportation.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   Anything tangible or intangible which is injurious to health or
morals or which is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to
the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the
customary manner of any watercourse, public park, square, street or highway is
declared a nuisance.
      (2)   The specified public nuisances defined in this section are not
inclusive and do not limit or impair the effect of this section where a public
nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists within the limits of the city.
   OCCUPANT. An individual, partnership, corporation or any other entity that
through rights of ownership or rental has the use of real property for
residential or commercial purposes.
   OWNER. An individual, partnership, corporation or any other entity that has
a lawful claim of equitable or legal title to property as more fully identified
in the official recordings of the county.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. An individual, partnership, corporation or any other
entity with the responsibility to oversee, maintain and protect the property
and the authority to make emergency repairs.
   SOUND CONDITION. Able to support reasonable and anticipated loading or
weather conditions.
(Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 91.03 DUMPING REFUSE ON STREETS UNLAWFUL.
   Any person within the city limits who shall dump, place or deposit any
trash, refuse, matter or filth or any other substance or who shall dump any
carcasses of dead animals, rags, paper, trash or waste of any kind whatsoever
on any lot or lots, street or streets, alley or alleys, within the city limits,
except as permitted by order of the City Council, shall be:
      (A)   Deemed guilty of having committed a public nuisance; and
      (B)   Upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 363, passed 9-2-1953; Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 UNSANITARY PREMISES UNLAWFUL.
   Any person or persons in charge of any premises who shall suffer any
basement, cellar, yard, grounds or premises belonging to or controlled by him
or her as owner, agent or tenant to become nauseous, foul, offense or injurious
to the public health, security or safety, or unpleasant or disagreeable to
adjacent residents or persons passing, shall be deemed guilty of having
committed a public nuisance and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 363, passed 9-2-1953; Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 EXTERIOR BUILDING MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Surface materials. Exterior building surfaces must be finished with
appropriate materials customarily used for exteriors.
   (B)   Maintenance. Exterior surfaces shall be maintained so as to be free of
deterioration or blighted appearance and shall not present a threat to health
or safety.
   (C)   Prohibited conditions. Prohibited conditions include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Exterior paint which is substantially peeling, flaking, cracking,
blistering or otherwise exposing bare and unprotected surfaces;
      (2)   Window openings which are not maintained with glass or other
similar materials;
      (3)   Exterior surfaces which are composed of plastic sheeting or
insulation materials; and
      (4)   Exterior surfaces which are structurally unsafe, including loose
stone, brick or cement blocks.
(Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 91.06 EXTERIOR PREMISES.
   (A)   All properties shall be maintained free from any accumulation of
garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, waste materials, rags, empty containers,
mattresses, discarded furnishing and appliances, graffiti, bedding materials,
rotting hay, straw or other feed materials, scrap metals or any other
condition:
      (1)   Which may substantially contribute to a blighted condition;
      (2)   Which may attract or harbor insects, rodents, snakes or skunks; or
      (3)   Which may be a fire hazard.
   (B)   All properties shall be kept free of insects, rodents, skunks and
other noxious pests.
   (C)   Vehicles which are inoperative may not be kept outside of enclosed
buildings, except commercial establishments as duly authorized under the zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections. The enforcement officer, or any city police officer, is
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine compliance with this
chapter. Unless an emergency or imminent hazard exists, the officer will
attempt to make reasonable accommodations with the occupant, owner or property
manager to meet with or have a telephone conference with such person to review
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Notice to comply.
      (1)   (a)   If there is reason to believe that the property is not in
compliance with this chapter, the enforcement officer may issue a letter of
noncompliance requesting that the property be brought into compliance by a
specific date, and setting the compliance date not less than 30 days from the
date of the letter, thereby giving reasonable notice to abate the nuisance.
         (b)   The letter of noncompliance shall be sent first class mail,
postage prepaid to the owner, occupant or property manager. The letter should
include a copy of this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, lessee, manager or
person in charge thereof, of any lot, building or premises where any nuisance
exists, to remove, abate or destroy any existing nuisance without delay.
      (3)   (a)   The occupant may apply in writing to the City Clerk for
additional time to comply with the ordinance by reason of hardship.
         (b)   The enforcement officer may issue a written compliance agreement
which shall state the reason for declaring a hardship and shall provide a date
for compliance and the specific terms and conditions for compliance.
         (c)   The agreement shall be signed by the occupant and enforcement
officer.
   (C)   Emergency.
      (1)   If an emergency or imminent hazard exists, then the city or its
authorized agent(s) are authorized to take such appropriate action as may be
reasonably required to avert the imminent hazard or emergency.
      (2)   When the city or its authorized agent(s) respond to an emergency or
imminent hazard, then the occupants shall be severally and jointly obligated to
pay the cost to the city or its authorized agents.
   (D)   Review of standards for maintenance.
      (1)   Occupant may make written application to the City Clerk for review
of applicable standards for maintenance of the property in question.
      (2)   The application shall specifically state and detail the following:
         (a)   Why a review of maintenance standards as they apply to his or
her property is appropriate;
         (b)   Why enforcement of current standards does not protect
surrounding property values; and
         (c)   Why the property standards as applied to his or her property do
not impact surrounding property and depreciate property values.
   (E)   Civil sanctions. In addition to any remedies or criminal sanctions
provided herein, the city may bring a civil suit to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 660, passed 8-7-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Storage in open view prohibited; exception. No person shall allow any
motor vehicle not in running condition, or parts thereof, to be stored in open
view in any residential area, except when said vehicle is being actively
restored to operation.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.010)
   (B)   Service of written notice. Police officers in and of the city, or
other persons authorized by the City Council, shall serve written notice upon
the person storing or maintaining said vehicles requesting the person so served
to remove said vehicle or show proof that he or she is actively restoring the
same to operation within ten days of said service.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.020)
(Ord. 474, passed 7-11-1978) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   If the written notice to comply and/or the compliance agreement
with determined timeline results in continued noncompliance, any person found
in violation of an offense pertaining to property, for the first offense, shall
be guilty of an infraction punishable by the fixed infraction penalty set out
in the state code.
      (2)   Any person found in subsequent or continuing violation by failing
to comply with any of the portions of this chapter pertaining to property shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day said person shall remain in violation
of this chapter.
   (C)   In the event the person so served fails to remove an inoperable
vehicle, or to satisfactorily prove that he or she is actively restoring said
vehicle to operation within ten days, as provided in §
91.08, then said person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor each day thereafter
that said motor vehicle remains upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.030) (Ord. 474, passed 7-11-1978; Ord. 660, passed 8-7-
2019)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Fire hazards; removal of weeds, vegetation and inflammable trash
   
92.02   Open burning
Theater Fire Safety Regulations
   
92.15   Applicability
   
92.16   Occupancy limits
   
92.17   Temporary seats in aisles
   
92.18   Interference with ingress and egress
   
92.19   Obstruction of fire exits
   
92.20   Smoking
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 FIRE HAZARDS; REMOVAL OF WEEDS, VEGETATION AND INFLAMMABLE TRASH.
   (A)   It is made the duty and responsibility of property owners within the
city to see that their respective lots are kept free from weeds and other like
vegetation and inflammable trash that may become a fire hazard when dry and
inflammable.
   (B)   It is made the duty of the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire
Department, whoever is designated by the Mayor to do so, to:
      (1)   Notify any property owner of the presence of weeds, dry grass or
inflammable trash on his or her property; and
      (2)   Remove the same within ten days from the date of receiving said
notice.
   (C)   If said property owner shall fail or refuse to comply with said order
of removal, then the city may do so, and the expense of such removal by the
city shall be and become a lien on such property, and the Clerk shall notify
the owner thereof as to the amount of such expense and that payment of the same
shall be made within ten days of such notice.
   (D)   Upon such failure or refusal of the property owner to pay such removal
expense, the Clerk shall certify the amount to the County Treasurer for
collection along with the other taxes assessed and to be collected against such
owner’s property on which said grass, weeds or inflammable trash has been
removed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.010) (Ord. 307, passed 9- -1944) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   The burning of combustible materials out of doors within the city
shall be permitted in daylight hours only and when prevailing winds are less
than ten mph.
   (B)   No major structures, including, but not limited to, homes, garages and
large outbuildings, or excessive debris from the destruction of such buildings,
shall be intentionally burned, except that the Fire Department of the city may
do such burning for the purpose of practice under such conditions that are
reasonable and prudent.
   (C)   The burning shall not cause any unreasonable discomfort, annoyance or
risk to persons or residents of the city.
   (D)   The burning shall be not less than ten feet from the nearest building.
   (E)   All burning shall be continually supervised by a responsible person 18
years of age or older.
   (F)   Any person burning shall first notify the dispatcher at the city
police station of the nature of the combustible materials to be burned, the
person supervising said burn, the location of the burn and the approximate
times when the burn shall take place.
   (G)   The person burning said combustible materials shall be responsible for
any and all damages caused by the burning.
   (H)   The rules set forth herein shall not apply to any person burning
combustible materials out of doors within the vicinity of the city for the
purpose of preparing edible foods.
   (I)   Any person who fails to notify pursuant to division (F) above shall
reimburse the city for all costs of the Fire Department response to the
burning.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.020) (Ord. 496, passed 6-21-1983) Penalty, see §
92.99
THEATER FIRE SAFETY REGULATIONS
§ 92.15 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall and are meant to apply to any room
or vestibule wherein any show, convention or other like gathering is being
held, or where persons may gather or congregate to witness the same.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.010) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936)
§ 92.16 OCCUPANCY LIMITS.
   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, operator or employee of any theater
building or room, or other like places where entertainment is held and given,
wherein permanent chairs or seats and aisles or passageways are provided, to
permit any person or persons to enter said building or room where shows or
other entertainment is being given, after all the permanent seats are occupied,
to the end that there shall be no more persons in said theater building or such
room after all the seats have been taken.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.020) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 TEMPORARY SEATS IN AISLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, operator or other employee of any
such theater building or room where an entertainment is being given and where
permanent seats are provided, and aisles or passageways between said rows of
seats are used, or to be used by the public in going into to out of said
building or room, to permit, provide or allow any temporary chairs or seats to
be placed in said aisles or passageways for any purpose while persons are in
said building; provided, that this does not apply to employees who are
cleaning, or otherwise taking care of said theater or room, and while no
entertainment of any kind is being given.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.030) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 INTERFERENCE WITH INGRESS AND EGRESS.
   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, operator or employee of any theater
building or room or other like places for public gatherings of any kind,
churches excepted, to allow any person or persons to congregate in the foyer or
room at the back of the seats and inside of the room or theater where the
people have gathered so that the same may interfere with ingress and egress,
freely, to the outside of said theater or room.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.040) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE EXITS.
   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator or employee of any theater
or like room where the public may in numbers be present, to permit the
passageways to the fire exits to be in any manner used for any purpose, but the
same shall be clear and free from any and all persons, materials or other
obstructions, from the passageways in the buildings to the passageways leading
to said exit doors.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.050) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 SMOKING.
   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator or employee to permit any
person to smoke cigars, cigarettes, pipes and the like in said theater building
or room while the same is occupied by the public or during any entertainment or
other meeting being held in said theater building or like room.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.060) (Ord. 275, passed 9-8-1936) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits or neglects or refuses to
comply with the provisions of §
92.02, except §
92.02(F), shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall, for each offense, be punished by a fine in any sum not exceeding $300.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.020) (Ord. 496, passed 6-21-1983)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Park curfew established
   
93.02   Hours
   
93.03   Park facility fees
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PARK CURFEW ESTABLISHED.
   There is established what is known as a park curfew law within the city, the
provisions of which shall be as hereinafter set forth in the following
sections.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.010) (Ord. 482, passed 7-8-1980) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 HOURS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to be upon or about the parks of the
city or to place vehicles or camping equipment thereon for purposes of camping,
whether the same be a city park, or a park or public place owned and controlled
by County School District No. 33, or to loiter about said premises between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. daily.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons attending activities
authorized by city authorities or school district authorities extending later
than 11:00 p.m., or persons who obtain the prior written consent of the Mayor
of the city for activities extending later than 11:00 p.m. in city parks or
property.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.020) (Ord. 482, passed 7-8-1980) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 PARK FACILITY FEES.
   (A)   Title and purpose. This section shall be known and may be referred to
as the City Ordinance Establishing Fees for the Reservation of City Parks. Its
purpose shall be to set fees for the reservation of Montpelier city parks and
pavilions to obtain funds for the maintenance and upkeep of the park.
   (B)   Fee for reserving park facilities. To reserve Montpelier parks,
pavilions and amenities thereof, a $100 deposit shall be given to the City
Clerk, $50 dollars of which shall be refundable, following inspection of the
premises, to ensure they have been cleaned and left in satisfactory condition.
   (C)   Amendment of fee. The Mayor and City Council may decrease or increase
the above fee pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 605, passed 11 - -2007; Ord. 683, passed 4-23-2025)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person failing to obey the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding $300.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.030) (Ord. 482, passed 7-8-1980)
CHAPTER 94: CITY CEMETERY
Section
   
94.01   Cemetery established
   
94.02   Design; map; records
   
94.03   Conveyance of lots; certificate
   
94.04   Purchase of lots
   
94.05   Limitations on burial spaces
   
94.06   Interment
   
94.07   Cemetery fees
   
94.08   Limitations on transfer
   
94.09   Rules and regulations
   
94.10   Cemetery restrictions
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 CEMETERY ESTABLISHED.
   The following described land situated in the county is established and set
apart for the burial of the dead and shall be known as the City Cemetery:
Commencing at a point 151 and one-half feet west of the northeast corner of the
southeast half of Section 34, Township 12 State Route 44 EBM, running thence
north 159 and one-half feet; thence east 1,476 feet; thence south 445 and one-
half feet; thence west 1,476 feet; thence north 286 feet to the place of
commencing, containing 14 and eighty-seven hundredths of an acre of land.
(Ord. 93, passed - -1906; Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.02 DESIGN; MAP; RECORDS.
   (A)   The cemetery shall be divided and laid out in sections, lots and
burial spaces, with suitable avenues, walks and alleys, designated and numbered
in such manner as may be deemed expedient.
   (B)   A correct map or plat thereof shall be made out and acknowledged by
the Mayor and shall be filed and maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   All sales, conveyances or transfers of burial spaces in said cemetery
shall be designated in said plat or map.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall keep cemetery records, in numerical order, of
sections, lots and burial spaces with separate columns ruled therein for the
name of the owner, the amount sold for and date of sale.
   (E)   When any burial space thereof shall be sold or transferred, the Clerk
shall make an entry of the name of the owner, the amount sold for and date of
sale opposite the number of the burial space on the record and shall also
designate the burial spaces sold by coloring or otherwise indicating the same
on the plat or map.
(Ord. 93, passed - -1906; Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.03 CONVEYANCE OF LOTS; CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The conveyance of burial spaces in said cemetery shall be by
certificate, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, under the seal
of said city.
   (B)   The certificate shall describe the burial spaces as shown by said plat
or map which such certificate is intended to convey.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.04 PURCHASE OF LOTS.
   Applications for purchases of cemetery spaces shall be made to the City
Clerk. The application shall be under oath and shall, among other information,
contain the following:
   (A)   The legal name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   The legal name and address of the person whom the space is being
purchased for, if different from the person applying for the purchase of said
space; and
   (C)   Satisfactory proof of residency qualifications for resident fees.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.05 LIMITATIONS ON BURIAL SPACES.
   (A)   The purchase of burial spaces is limited to four or fewer burial
spaces, providing that any person may apply to the city for the purchase of
more than four burial spaces.
   (B)   The city at its sole discretion may approve said application for more
than four burial spaces. The city may further set such terms and conditions for
the purchase of more than four burial spaces as deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.06 INTERMENT.
   (A)   Any person owning a burial space in said cemetery desiring to make any
interment therein shall apply to the City Clerk, and, upon payment of the
sexton’s fees, the Clerk shall deliver to the sexton or person in charge the
number of the block and burial space in which he or she is to be interred; and
the Clerk shall also make an entry in a suitable book, to be known as the
burial record, of the name of the deceased, the date of his or her death, the
block, burial space in which he or she was interred. No interment shall be made
except on the certificate of the Clerk above mentioned and as directed herein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be buried in the cemetery
unless the casket is placed in an outside enclosure made of concrete,
fiberglass, steel or plastic or of such other material approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 CEMETERY FEES.
   (A)   All fees for purchase, transfer, interment or any other fee associated
with the cemetery shall from time to time be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   The present fee, by current resolutions in effect, is: $250 to open
and close graves; $200 for four burial spaces for an established resident; and
$2,500 for one burial space for nonresidents. The transfer fee shall be $25.
   (C)   The fee for digging or opening a new grave at the cemetery during a
weekend or holiday shall be $385.
   (D)   Purchase fees shall be paid at the time of purchase.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001; Res. 110316, passed 3-16-2011; Res. 140618, passed
6-18-2014)
§ 94.08 LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFER.
   (A)   The purchaser of a burial space may transfer the burial space to any
person, providing transfer of a burial space shall only be effective when
approved and registered with the city and upon payment of the transfer fee.
   (B)   In the event transfer documents have been lost or are not traceable,
then the burial space shall be limited to descendants of the original purchaser
or their spouses.
   (C)   The owner or holder of a valid certificate for a burial space may
transfer the burial spaces to the city. The city shall pay such price for the
burial space as the city from time to time may deem appropriate.
(Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.09 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council shall make and adopt rules and regulations from time to
time prescribing in detail for the general control, management and oversight of
said cemetery not in conflict with the provisions contained in this chapter and
may, upon special circumstances, waive the fee requirements herein.
(Ord. 93, passed - -1906; Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 94.10 CEMETERY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the city, to be
upon or about the City Cemetery from the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to allow dogs harbored, owned or under
his or her control to be in the cemetery.
   (C)   No trees or shrubs shall be planted or installed in the cemetery
without the written permission of the sexton.
(Ord. 538, passed 7-20-1994; Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $300 and/or a sentence to serve not more than six
months in the County Jail.
(Ord. 538, passed 7-20-1994; Ord. 567, passed 4-3-2001)
CHAPTER 95: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
95.01   Permit required
   
95.02   Permit issuance
   
95.03   Denials or revocation of permit
   
95.04   Appeal procedure
   
95.05   Fees
   
95.06   Exemptions
   
95.07   Insurance
§ 95.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a special event, sponsor a
special event, or cause a special event to be held without first having
obtained a special event permit from the city.
   (B)   A special event permit shall not be issued until a fully completed
special event permit application and payment of fees are received by the city.
The special event permit application must comply with ordinances and applicable
state and federal laws.
   (C)   Special events permit applications must be submitted to the city no
less than 15 days prior to the event.
   (D)   The special event permit application shall include the following
information
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and designated
representatives.
      (2)   A description of the event and times it will be conducted.
      (3)   A detailed location description and route if applicable with
staging areas and parking descriptions.
      (4)   The purpose of the event.
      (5)   If roads and/or sidewalks will be closed, the applicant will be
required to explain how motorists, business owners, and residents will be
notified in advance of the event.
      (6)   Expected number of participants attending the event.
      (7)   Number and types of vehicles or animals involved in the event.
      (8)   Location size and types of any canopies, awnings, food service
booths, or other temporary structures shall be shown on a map.
      (9)   Description and location of any sound systems, amplification
devices and electrical devices to be used during the event.
      (10)   Estimated number of attendees or spectators.
      (11)   Details regarding food service and whether alcohol will be sold
during the event.
      (12)   Details regarding traffic control and security for the event.
      (13)   Proof of insurance.
      (14)   Clean up plan - where will trash be disposed of, how long to
remove any temporary structures and temporary toilets.
      (15)   A description of potential issues or dangers and how the applicant
intends to remedy the same.
      (16)   An indemnity agreement, specifically indemnifying the city from
any and all claims caused directly or indirectly by the special event.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.02 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Mayor's designee shall issue a permit after consideration of the
application and all information has been obtained and these standards are met:
      (1)   The proposed event is appropriate for the size and use for which
the requested location has been established or designated.
      (2)   The proposed event will not interfere with a previously permitted
event or previously approved construction or maintenance work.
      (3)   The proposed event will not substantially or unnecessarily
interfere with traffic in the area contiguous to the event, or that, if the
activity will substantially interfere with traffic, there will be sufficient
city resources available at the time to mitigate the disruption.
      (4)   The proposed event is scheduled to occur during normal business
hours for the city for the particular location requested. Operating hours of
particular facilities are posted therein or may be obtained from the Mayor's
designee or from the department in charge of the facility.
      (5)   The applicant has obtained all necessary approvals, permits, or
licenses from other governmental agencies or otherwise required pursuant to
this code or state or other applicable law.
      (6)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public
assembly points of the events or during a continuous procession will not unduly
interfere with property, fire, police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas contiguous to such public assembly or processional areas.
      (7)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or
will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas.
   (B)   Preference will be given to applicants conducting annual events that
occur on similar dates or weekends for the purpose of protecting the
expectations and enjoyment of the public.
   (C)   Event organizers shall be responsible for providing adequate toilet
facilities and trash receptacles throughout an event venue as required by the
Mayor's designee.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.03 DENIALS OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   No permit shall be denied based solely on the applicant or content of
protected speech scheduled to occur at a special event. No permit shall be
denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable consideration as to
time, manner, or place based upon: race, color, creed, religion, gender,
domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, transgender,
gender identity or gender expression, national origin, or political affiliation
of the applicant and/or participants of the special event.
   (B)   All denials shall be in writing and shall state the specific reason
for such denial. The denial shall be provided in person to the applicant or
shall be mailed to the applicant or other designated person on the permit
application.
   (C)   The Mayor's designee, in denying an application for an event permit
shall, where possible, propose measures to cure the defects in the permit.
   (D)   The permit may be denied issuance if:
      (1)   The special event will conflict in time or location with another
special event or event or the ordinary course of business of city businesses.
      (2)   The applicant fails to comply with, or the special event will
violate any city ordinance or any other applicable law.
      (3)   The applicant makes or allows the making of a false or misleading
statement or omission of material fact on a special event application.
      (4)   The applicant has violated this chapter or has had a special events
permit revoked within the preceding 12 months.
      (5)   The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit
required by any city ordinance or by other applicable law for the special
event.
      (6)   The applicant fails to provide proof that the insurance
requirements for the special event have been met.
      (7)   The special event would severely hinder the delivery of normal or
emergency public services or constitutes a public threat.
      (8)   The special event would otherwise infringe upon the health, welfare
or safety of the community.
   (E)   A special event permit shall be revoked upon the following conditions:
      (1)   If the Police Chief, Fire Chief, risk manager, building official or
other city official, or their designated representatives, find that any of the
provisions of this chapter, city ordinance, special event rule or regulation,
or other applicable law is being violated, they shall immediately notify the
Mayor's designee and based on that information, the Mayor's designee shall
determine whether the special event permit shall be revoked.
      (2)   When, in the judgment of any of the above-named city officials, a
violation exists which requires immediate abatement, the city official shall
have authority to revoke a special event permit in the absence or
unavailability of the City Clerk or Mayor's designee.
      (3)   The applicant made or allowed to be made a false or misleading
statement or omission of material fact on a special event application that was
not discovered until after the special event permit was issued.
      (4)   It is discovered the special event would violate an ordinance, law
or otherwise infringe upon the health, welfare or safety of the community.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.04 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal any denied or revoked permit.
The applicant shall be promptly notified in writing, which shall include the
reason for the decision to deny or revoke the permit. The applicant may appeal
the denial or revocation to the City Clerk who shall promptly consult with the
Mayor to make a ruling on the appeal.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.05 FEES.
   (A)   The city authorizes the City Clerk or Mayor's designee to establish a
non-refundable special events permit fee of $50.
   (B)   Applicant shall pay all required fees with the special events permit
application. Applicants shall also be required to pay all fees and costs
required by city ordinances to conduct specific activities in conjunction with
or as part of a special event. Events conducted by non-profit organization
under a 50l(c)(3) will be required to obtain a permit with the fee potentially
being waived. Whether the fee will be waived for a duly recognized non-profit
shall be in the sole discretion of the city.
   (C)   Seasonal special events will require a onetime permit fee for their
operating season with all dates listed that event will be held with no more
than one event per week during their season.
   (D)   If the city determines that a special event may require the special
attention and involvement of city personnel or city facilities, the city shall
notify the applicant. Prior to issuance of a special event permit:
      (1)   Applicant and city shall agree upon the additional cost the city
will incur as a result of the special event and the applicant shall pay those
costs to the city; and
      (2)   Applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional cost to the
city incurred as a result of special event within five business days of the
date upon which the city informs the applicant of the amount of such additional
cost.
   (E)   Additional charges.
      (1)   Property or equipment damage. Within ten days after the completion
of the event the Mayor's designee shall transmit to the applicant an itemized
bill setting forth any verifiable damages or loss to city equipment or property
known by city to be caused by said applicant during the special event. By
signing and submitting an application, applicants acknowledge that they will be
responsible for any and all damages related to the special event. In the event
that the applicant refuses to pay such bill, the city reserves the right to
seek legal recourse permitted under applicable law for recovery of said damages
and prohibit any future permit being issued to the applicant.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to assess additional cost for the
litter and refuse collection to the extent that the applicant fails to meet its
obligations as set forth in its clean-up plan required pursuant to the
regulations. Charges shall be determined by the City Public Works Department
after he or she receives the verified timesheet of the foreperson in charge of
said clean-up. The current applicable hourly rates for city personnel shall be
charged, and an itemized bill shall be sent to the applicant. In the event that
the applicant refuses to pay such bill, the city reserves the right to seek
legal recourse permitted under applicable law for recovery of said damages.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   A special events permit shall not be required for:
   (A)   An event conducted entirely on the property of a religious
institution, educational institution, college or university campus.
   (B)   First Amendment activity conducted entirely on the sidewalks, in
public parks or on private property.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
§ 95.07 INSURANCE.
   (A)   General liability insurance. Due to the risk of personal injury and
property damage under certain circumstances, insurance will be required under
the following conditions:
      (1)   All athletic competition events.
      (2)   Any special event involving animal(s), fireworks, automobile(s) or
other vehicle(s), including but not limited to watercraft, aircraft, or
motorcycles, or the sale of food. Additionally, requests made by applicants to
use the city equipment.
   (B)   The applicant on behalf of himself/herself or any other persons,
organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made,
by filing a permit application shall represent, stipulate, contract and agree
that they will, jointly and severally, indemnify and hold the city harmless
against any and all liability, including:
      (1)   Court costs and attorney's fees, and attorney's fees on appeal,
      (2)   For any and all claims for damage to property,
      (3)   For any and all injuries to, or death of persons arising from the
sponsor's activities authorized by the special event permit.
      (4)   In such circumstances, a specific indemnification statement shall
be attached to the application by the applicant.
(Ord. 679, passed 6-5-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Title and purpose
   
110.02   Business license required
   
110.03   License fee
   
110.04   Application for license; renewal
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the Business
License Ordinance.
   (B)   Its purpose is to establish the requirement that any individual(s) or
business entity(s) that wish to do business for pecuniary gain, within the city
limits, obtain a business license.
(Ord. 607, passed 10-15-2008) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any individual or entity that intends or desires to run or operate any
business for pecuniary gain within the city limits shall obtain a business
license from the city.
(Ord. 607, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 110.03 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   License fee. Prior to the issuance of a business license, the
applicants shall pay a fee of $25.
   (B)   Amendment of fee. The Mayor and City Council may decrease or increase
the above fee pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 607, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 110.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Business license renewal. Each license issued by the city shall be
effective for a period of one year, at which time the license must be renewed.
   (B)   Application for license. Any person seeking a business license shall
apply for such license by submitting an application to the City Clerk. Said
application can be obtained at the City Clerk’s office. Each application shall
be accompanied by the payment of the $25 fee. A license shall be issued as long
as the applicants are in compliance with the ordinances of the city and the
state.
(Ord. 607, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a license pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine up to $600.
(Ord. 607, passed 10-15-2008)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   State license required
   
111.04   License; revocation or limitations
   
111.05   License fee
   
111.06   State laws adopted
   
111.07   Hours for on-premises consumption
   
111.08   Liquor by the drink; sale, distribution and consumption
   
111.09   Unsealed or opened containers
   
111.10   Application for special permit
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Public intoxication, open containers, see §
130.01
§ 111.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER, WINE and OTHER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. In addition to the common
definition associated therewith, all such beverages now regulated or which are
hereinafter regulated by the state and the applicable definitions of those
beverages under state law.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.010) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall, within the city, distribute or sell beer, wine or other
alcoholic beverages without first obtaining an annual license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.020) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Prior to any license for distributing and selling beer, wine or other
alcoholic beverages being approved and issued by the city, the applicant must
have qualified for and obtained a similar license from the state.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.030) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 111.04 LICENSE; REVOCATION OR LIMITATIONS.
   Any revocations or special conditions placed by the state on the license is
adopted by the city as a revocation and condition of the city license.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.040) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 111.05 LICENSE FEE.
   Prior to issuing a license for the sale or distribution of beer, wine or
other alcoholic beverages, the applicant shall pay a license fee to the city,
which shall be set by resolution of the City Council, and in the absence
thereof, shall be not less than the maximum allowable fee under state law.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.050) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 111.06 STATE LAWS ADOPTED.
   All applicable statutes, rules and regulations of the state controlling,
limiting or qualifying the licensing, use, distribution or sale of beer, wine
or other alcoholic beverages is adopted by the city, subject to such additional
prohibited acts or conduct as may be adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.060) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 111.07 HOURS FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall remain on any licensed premises for on-premises consumption
of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages more than 30 minutes after the time
for lawful distribution or sale of beer, wine and other alcoholic beverages has
expired, except for owners, managers or employees who are reasonably required
to clean up and close the premises.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.070) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 LIQUOR BY THE DRINK; SALE, DISTRIBUTION AND CONSUMPTION.
   Liquor by the drink may be sold, offered for sale or given away upon any
licensed premises, unless otherwise prohibited by law, during the following
hours:
   (A)   On any Sunday, not otherwise prohibited by law, between the hours of
11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.;
   (B)   On Memorial day, not otherwise prohibited by law; and
   (C)   On any Friday and Saturday, not otherwise prohibited by law, between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 632, passed 7-6-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 UNSEALED OR OPENED CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No person shall consume or have in his or her possession any unsealed
or opened container of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages while operating
or riding in a motor vehicle upon any street or premises open to the general
public in the city.
   (B)   No person shall consume or have in his or her possession any unsealed
or opened container of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages on any
sidewalks, public facilities, public parks, building or premises open to the
general public in the city, unless the premises has a license for on-premises
consumption of beer, wine and other alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.090) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.10 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon written application, the Mayor may grant a special permit for the
consumption of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages on specific public
facilities.
   (B)   The application shall identify the public premises or facilities, the
time, the persons consuming beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages and the
persons responsible to the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.100) (Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for
each day said person shall remain in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.110)
   (B)   Any person or entity who violates any provision of §
111.08 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall
be punished as set forth in Idaho Code § 18-113, or if said code has been
repealed, the maximum punishment shall be confinement in jail for a period not
to exceed six months and/or a fine of $1,000.
(Ord. 542, passed 4-18-1995; Ord. 632, passed 7-6-2011)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency
   
130.01   Public intoxication; open containers
   
130.02   Discharge of weapons; air guns; slingshots
   
130.03   Poisoning or killing domestic animals
   
130.04   Nudity
   
130.05   Interference with police officer
Property Offenses
   
130.20   Destruction of property
   
130.21   Throwing stones; playing games in street
   
130.22   Obtaining goods or services without payment
   
130.23   Injury or obstruction of city streets
   
130.24   Opening of fire hydrants
   
130.25   Advertising material on telephone poles
Curfew
   
130.40   Curfew law established
   
130.41   Hours
   
130.42   Exceptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
§ 130.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION; OPEN CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      INTOXICATION. The state of being intoxicated, due to the consumption of
an alcoholic beverage, being otherwise impaired and/or contributing to or
creating a disturbance of the peace, or having a BAC level of .08 or more.
      OPEN CONTAINER. The original receptacle of the alcoholic beverage, whose
seal has been broken or cap removed, or any other container into which the
alcoholic beverage has been placed which does not have affixed thereon a
permanent airtight seal or cap.
      PREMISES. The interior of any business establishment licensed for the
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages thereon.
   (B)   Public intoxication prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to be, at any time, on any street, lane, alley, park or other public
place within the incorporated city limits in an intoxicated condition.
   (C)   Removal from business premises unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove from a business premises, licensed for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages thereon, located within the incorporated
city limits, any open container of an alcoholic beverage.
   (D)   Permitting removal from premises unlawful; exceptions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, or business licensed by the
city for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages thereon, or for any
establishment whereon the consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place, or
any employee or agent of the licensee, to knowingly permit any person to remove
from the licensed premises an open container of an alcoholic beverage.
      (2)   Any business licensed for the sale and consumption of an alcoholic
beverage thereon, located within the incorporated city limits, may apply for a
permit from the City Clerk to allow for the sale and consumption of alcohol
outside of the immediate premises whereon the regular sale and consumption of
alcohol occurs.
      (3)   (a)   The application shall be on a form approved by the Council
and shall specify the location and area where the alcohol shall be consumed.
         (b)   The application shall be granted upon a showing of good cause
and upon a showing that the proposed activity shall not be detrimental to the
public’s health and safety.
(Ord. 625, passed 11-2-2010) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS; AIR GUNS; SLINGSHOTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to have in his, her or their
possession, or in any manner use devices or weapons commonly known as air guns,
slingshots or flippers, on the streets or sidewalks of the city.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits
of the city to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or
firearm of any description, or air gun, or fire, explode or set off any squibb,
cracker or any other thing containing powder or other combustible materials.
      (2)   Except persons may discharge firearms within and upon duly
authorized target and practice ranges, subject to such restrictions and
conditions as may be hereafter recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.010) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906; Ord. 501, passed 2-7-1984)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 POISONING OR KILLING DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully kill any horse or other domestic
animal, the property of another, or to administer poison to any such animal, or
expose any poisonous substance within the limits of the city, with intent that
it shall be taken by such animal.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.020) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 NUDITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to appear in any public place or street within
the city, in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress, or to make any
indecent exposure of his or her person, or private parts thereof, or exhibit or
perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play, or other representation, or shall
be guilty of lewd or lascivious conduct.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.030) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to aid or assist
any person to escape from lawful confinement or any peace officer, or for any
person to resist, molest or threaten any peace officer in the city in the
discharge of his or her official duties, or attempt to prevent any peace
officer from making an arrest or from serving any legal process.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.040) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
PROPERTY OFFENSES
§ 130.20 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully injure, deface or destroy, or
secret any goods, chattels or valuable papers of another, or to take down,
injure or remove and mar, any monument, street sign, tree or any mark used as a
boundary for any tract of land or city lot, or to destroy, deface or alter the
marks or words on any monument or street sign, or to injure any fence,
fountain, shade or fruit tree, or any other kind of public or private property,
or deface any sidewalk with paint or printed handbills or signs, posters or
other advertisement, within the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.010) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 THROWING STONES; PLAYING GAMES IN STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to throw stones or other hard
substances, play ball, marbles, tops or other games on the streets or sidewalks
of the city, whereby the streets may be obstructed either to the inconvenience
or endangerment of travel along such streets or sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.020) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 OBTAINING GOODS OR SERVICES WITHOUT PAYMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to obtain any goods, chattels or other
property under false pretenses, or to enter into any public house, shop or
place and call for refreshments or other articles or things and receive the
same and depart without paying or compensating the owner thereof or arranging
for such payment or compensation.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.030) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23 INJURY OR OBSTRUCTION OF CITY STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Injure or obstruct, or cause to be injured or obstructed, any public
street, alley, sidewalk or bridge, or continue such obstruction so as to render
the same inconvenient to pass, within the limits of the city;
   (B)   Dig up any of the streets, alleys or public grounds, or to leave or
place, or permit to be left or placed, in any street, alley or sidewalk, any
wagon, cart, dray, handcart, sleigh or other vehicle, or any lumber, wood,
timber or any other article or thing whatsoever, in such a manner as to
obstruct or interfere with the public use of such street, alley or sidewalk,
except by permission of the City Council; or
   (C)   Obstruct any sidewalk or street crossing by permitting any animal or
animals, wagon or wagons or other vehicles to stop or stand thereon, within
said city.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.040) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.24 OPENING OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons, not authorized by the city, to
open or cause to be opened or leave running any fire hydrant within the city,
or to waste or suffer to be wasted any water therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.050) (Ord. 89, passed 12-6-1906) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.25 ADVERTISING MATERIAL ON TELEPHONE POLES.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to hang or to tack any signs,
posters, dodgers or other advertising material on any electric light, telephone
or other poles on any of the streets or alleys of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.060) (Ord. 145, passed 5-6-1914) Penalty, see §
130.99
CURFEW
§ 130.40 CURFEW LAW ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A curfew law is established for juveniles under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile who is under the age of 18 years
to remain upon any street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other
public place, or building or place of amusement, eating establishment, vacant
lot and/or any other public place, without being accompanied by an adult having
custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult having custodial
rights of said juvenile.
(Ord. 664, passed 10-20-2020) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.41 HOURS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any juvenile who is under the age of 18 to remain
upon any street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public place,
or building or place of amusement, eating establishment, vacant lot and/or any
other public place, without being accompanied by an adult having custodial
rights, or an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights, of
said juvenile between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the
instances noted in §
130.42.
(Ord. 664, passed 10-20-2020) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.42 EXCEPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this subchapter, the prohibitions of
this subchapter shall not apply:
   (A)   When the juvenile is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of
such juvenile;
   (B)   When the juvenile is returning directly home from a school activity,
school entertainment, school or recreational activity or school dance;
   (C)   When the juvenile is either going to or going from his or her place of
residence to lawful employment and/or is working at the juvenile’s place of
employment;
   (D)   When the juvenile is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the lawful exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; or
   (E)   When the juvenile is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for
normal travel with interstate travel through the county.
(Ord. 664, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person found violating any provision of §
130.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a period of
incarceration in the County Jail up to six months and/or punishable by a $1,000
fine.
   (C)   Any violation of §
130.25 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $300.
   (D)   A violation of §§
130.40 through
130.42 is an infraction punishable by the fixed penalty set out in the state
code regarding curfew violations.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.060) (Ord. 145, passed 5-6-1914; Ord. 541, passed 4-18-
1995; Ord. 625, passed 11-2-2010; Ord. 664, passed 10-20-2020)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Codes
   
150.01   Building codes adopted
   
150.02   Deletions, modifications or amendments to adopted codes
   
150.03   Installation of manufactured homes
   
150.04   Exemptions
   
150.05   Definitions
Construction in Fire Limits
   
150.20   Established
   
150.21   Building materials
   
150.22   Alterations and repairs of wooden buildings
   
150.23   Iron warehouses
   
150.24   Building permit
   
150.25   Foundations
   
150.26   Roofs
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
   The following documents, three copies of which are on file and are open for
inspection to the public, one in the office of the County Clerk and two in the
office of the County Building Official, shall be and are hereby adopted as the
code of the city for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in
the city, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of such International Building Code, 2018 edition, published by the
International Code Council, and the secondary publications referenced herein,
all of which are on file in the office of the County Clerk or Building
Official, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter: The 2018 edition of the International Building Code
(IBC), promulgated by the International Code Council, and amendments adopted
under these rules together with standards incorporated into the IBC by
reference, including but not limited to, the 2018 edition of the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the 2018 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), with amendments for the residential portion, and the
2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the 2018 edition of
the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), as promulgated by the International
Code Council, save and except such portions of the above mentioned codes as are
deleted, modified or amended by the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 668, passed 5-5-2021)
§ 150.02 DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS OR AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES.
   (A)   All 2018 ICC Codes.
      (1)   Insert MONTPELIER CITY wherever [NAME OF JURISDICTION] is present.
      (2)   All fees shall be established by the applicable governing authority
under separate ordinance or resolution, with not more than 80% of paid fees to
be refunded, if authorized by the Building Official, as allowed by code.
   (B)   2018 International Building Code.
      (1)   Any reference to § 101.4 concerning electrical and § 101.4.3
concerning plumbing shall be deleted, thus solely regulated under Idaho Code §§
54-1001 and 54-2601.
      (2)   Amend § 903.2.8 by adding the following exception: Automatic
sprinkler systems are not required in 2-unit or less Group R buildings C.
      (3)   All appendices of the International Building Code, 2018 edition,
are hereby deleted.
   (C)   2018 International Existing Building Code (IEBC).
      (1)   Amend § 3412.2 by inserting June 9, 2008.
      (2)   All appendices of the IEBC, 2015 edition are hereby deleted.
   (D)   2018 International Residential Code.
      (1)   Delete § R105.2(7) and replace with the following: Prefabricated
swimming pools that are less than 48 inches (1220mm) deep.
      (2)   Delete § R109.1.3 and replace with the following: Floodplain
inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as established by
Table R301.2(l), upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, the
Building Official is authorized to require submission of documentation of the
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in § R322.
      (3)   Table R301.2(1) shall be amended to read as follows:
 
Ground Snow Load = 45 lbs/ft, Wind Speed = 90, Seismic Design Category =D1
Weathering = Severe, Frost Depth = 32”. Termite = Slight/Moderate, Decay =
None/Slight, Winter Design Temp = -4 Ice Shield = Yes, Flood Hazards = FIRM
160018 10/17/79, Air Freezing Index = 2000. Mean Annual Temp = 45° F.
 
      (4)   The exception to § R313.1 is deleted and replaced with the
following: Exception: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be
required in townhouses where a two-hour fire-resistance rated wall is installed
between dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing
townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system
installed.
      (5)   Delete § R313.2.
      (6)   Delete IRC § R322.1.10.
      (7)   Delete § R322.2.2, paragraph 2.2, and replace with the following:
The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch (645 mm2)
for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area, or the opening shall be
designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that the
design and installation of the openings will provide for equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
      (8)   All electrical and plumbing requirements of Chapters 25 through 42
shall be deleted, thus solely regulated under Idaho Code §§ 54-1001 and 54-
2601.
      (9)   All appendices of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition,
are hereby deleted.
(Ord. 668, passed 5-5-2021)
§ 150.03 INSTALLATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Manufactured homes, as defined by state law and inspected by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), shall not be subject to the
enforcement provisions of the building codes adopted in this subchapter, but
shall be regulated and inspected as prescribed in Idaho Code Title 44, Chapter
22. The owner, or an agent of the owner, must apply for and receive an
installation permit prior to placing any manufactured home on his, her or their
property.
   (B)   All additions or alterations to any manufactured home must comply with
all building code requirements. The Building Official or appointed
representative is hereby authorized to permit, inspect and collect fees, as
established by the governing body, for manufactured homes placed in the city.
Mobile or manufactured homes not bearing a HUD certification label shall not be
allowed, except as provided for by Idaho Code Title 44, Chapter 25.
(Ord. 668, passed 5-5-2021)
§ 150.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   Agricultural buildings, as defined by § 202 of the 2018 International
Building Code, are exempt from building permits adopted herein but shall remain
subject to the placement requirements established by city zoning regulations.
(Ord. 668, passed 5-5-2021)
§ 150.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, and the codes adopted herein, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED BUILDING OFFICIAL or BUILDING OFFICIAL. The County Building
Official, a political subdivision of the state.
   GOVERNING BODY or LOCAL JURISDICTION. The City of Montpelier, Idaho.
(Ord. 668, passed 5-5-2021)
CONSTRUCTION IN FIRE LIMITS
§ 150.20 ESTABLISHED.
   Fire limits are established in the city and shall be as hereinafter defined:
Extending 400 feet from the north line of Washington Street in said city and
400 feet from the south line of said Washington Street, beginning east of
Eighth Street and extending west to the UPRR right-of-way; also extending from
beginning east of Eighth Street 100 feet on each side of Washington Street
East, to and including east of Fourth Street in said city. This provision does
not include buildings to be used as residences, but only applies to buildings
to be used for business purposes. The fire limits shall also include the four
blocks cornering on Washington and Fourth Streets, excepting therefrom building
for residences, but including buildings for business purposes.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.010) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.21 BUILDING MATERIALS.
   All buildings hereafter erected, enlarged or added to, within said fire
limits as described in §
150.20, shall be constructed of brick, stone, concrete blocks, cement, cinder
brick or such other noncombustible materials herein named, or which shall be in
combination with the materials herein named. Lumber or like materials may be
used inside such buildings.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.020) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.22 ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS OF WOODEN BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Where the exterior walls or roof of any wooden building have been
damaged, or the owner desires to alter or change or otherwise remodel any such
wooden walls or roof, the owner shall apply for a permit to the Mayor and
Council, setting forth in full the specifications of such proposed repairs or
changes with a statement of the materials to be used and the location of said
structure when the same is within the fire limits as set forth above in §
150.20.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council shall determine from such specifications whether
and to what extent such repairs, alterations or changes shall be governed by
the provisions of §
150.21, as to materials to be used and where, and the general construction of
the same. The decision of the Mayor and Council in the premises shall be final
and exclusive, whether such permit shall be granted or not.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.030) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.23 IRON WAREHOUSES.
   Permits for the construction of iron warehouses in the city fire limits may
be granted by the Mayor and Council when the application and specifications for
the same shall show that the warehouse is to be built by nailing the sheet iron
to studding or rafters and erected on a cement foundation detached from any
other building, and wherein hot stoves of any kind are to be installed or used,
but the same may be heated from a central furnace by hot air or steam, situated
in another building. The Mayor and Council, however, reserve the right to grant
or refuse to grant a permit for the erection of said iron warehouse. Further
details may be required besides the specifications as to the proposed erecting
of said warehouse.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.040) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.24 BUILDING PERMIT.
   Every firm, corporation or person before proceeding to erect, alter, repair
or change any building within the fire limits as set forth in §
150.20 shall apply to the Mayor and Council for a permit for such proposed
construction, alteration, repair or change, and with such application furnish
complete plans and specifications for such proposed buildings, showing
location, materials of which to be constructed, and any other data in
connection with said plans and specifications that the Mayor and Council may
request in order to determine that said proposed construction will not violate
any of the provisions of this subchapter. The fee for such permit if within the
fire limits shall be $5.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.050) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.25 FOUNDATIONS.
   All foundations, including walls for any basement, for any building in the
fire limits to be built in said limits, or buildings to be repaired or altered
or changed, may in the judgment of the Mayor and Council be built of cement,
stone blocks, depending on the height of the proposed structure, and such walls
shall not be less than 12 inches thick, if to carry two stories or more.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.060) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.26 ROOFS.
   All the structures, whether new or old, to be repaired, altered or changed
on the outside shall have a roof constructed of fireproof materials, or may
have a lumber roof which shall be covered by fireproof materials, and the
fronts of such buildings or structures facing on any street may be constructed
in the same manner or with the same materials if in the judgment of the Mayor
and Council such materials will prove resistant to fire, or the spreading of
fires, all of which shall be designated or shown in the specifications and
plans.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.070) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for
each day said person shall remain in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of the codes adopted in §
150.01 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and
imprisonment. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.080) (Ord. 312, passed 12-5-1945; Ord. 668, passed 5-5-
2021)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Snow removal
   
151.02   Excavations generally
   
151.03   Wintertime excavations
Sidewalk Construction
   
151.15   Mayor and Council to determine
   
151.16   Notice; affidavit
   
151.17   City Works Superintendent to supervise
   
151.18   Failure to comply
   
151.19   Special assessment
Street Trees and Shrubs
   
151.30   Trees outside property lines
   
151.31   Permits required
   
151.32   Trees, hedges and shrubbery to be trimmed
   
151.33   Weeds
   
151.34   Order to preserve or remove
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   From private property to public streets. It is unlawful for any person
to remove snow from private property onto the traveled portion of the public
streets.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.010)
   (B)   Violator required to remove snow from public streets. Any person
removing snow from private properties onto the traveled portion of the public
streets shall, in addition to any penalties provided in §
151.99, be responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by the city to remove
the snow placed in the traveled portion of the public streets from private
properties.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.020)
(Ord. 500, passed 1-17-1984) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 EXCAVATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Permit and fee. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or
corporation, or association of such, who desires to dig into, cut, break or
otherwise damage the streets, alleys, highways and thoroughfares of the city
for the purpose of laying and installing any water, sewer, gas or telephone
lines, mains or systems, or additions thereto, or connections to said lines,
mains or systems, or additions thereto, without first procuring a permit to do
so from the City Clerk, which permit fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council, and in the absence thereof shall be not less than $25.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.010)
   (B)   Cost of repairing and restoring the streets, alleys and highways. In
addition to the permit fee required by this chapter, any person, firm,
partnership or corporation, or association of such, who shall dig into, cut,
break or damage, or whose actions cause damage to the streets, alleys, highways
and thoroughfares of said city during or, if damage occurs, after the laying of
any water, sewer, gas or telephone lines, mains or systems, or additions and
connections thereto, or from any other cause or purpose whatsoever, shall pay
to the city, or obtain a performance bond sufficient to cover the estimated
cost of restoration which shall be paid or obtained prior to excavation. The
cost of repair shall be set by resolution of City Council and, in the absence
thereof, shall be not less than the actual cost to the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.020)
(Ord. 395, passed 4-5-1961) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 WINTERTIME EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Title and purpose. In order to prevent complications created by
inclement weather during the winter, it is unlawful for any person, contractor,
utility or agents of the same to excavate within the city rights-of-way between
November 15 and March 15 each winter.
   (B)   Emergency exception. If an emergency situation arises and excavation
is needed during the restricted period, the City Superintendent shall have the
authority to authorize such excavation which may need to be commenced prior to
the next scheduled City Council meeting. If the excavation is not required to
be conducted prior to the next City Council meeting, then prior written
permission must be obtained from the City Council. The Council will determine
the number of days in which the emergency work must be completed. Each day that
the work or excavation remains open or unfinished beyond what the Council
specifies will constitute another violation.
(Ord. 671, passed 11-17-2021; Ord. 672, passed 3-9-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 151.15 MAYOR AND COUNCIL TO DETERMINE.
   Whenever the Mayor and the Council in its judgment deem it necessary to
require property owners within the city to construct or repair sidewalks, they
shall take recorded action in an official Council meeting naming the owner and
location of property abutting which it is in such meeting determined sidewalks
shall be constructed or repaired.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.010) (Ord. 371, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.16 NOTICE; AFFIDAVIT.
   (A)   Notice. Whenever it has been determined by the Mayor and Council that
construction or repair of a sidewalk is to be ordered, they shall instruct the
City Works Superintendent to notify the owner of property where the sidewalk is
to be constructed or repaired of the action of the Council and that such
construction or repair shall be completed within 30 days from the date of said
notice.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.020)
   (B)   Affidavit. Upon service of a notice to a property owner to construct
or repair a sidewalk, the City Works Superintendent shall file an affidavit
with the City Clerk setting forth the name of the property owner upon whom the
notice was served, the location of the property where the sidewalk was ordered
constructed or repaired and the date of service of such notice. Upon receiving
such affidavit, the City Clerk shall personally deliver or send by registered
mail the affidavit to the property owner mentioned therein.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.030)
(Ord. 371, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.17 CITY WORKS SUPERINTENDENT TO SUPERVISE.
   It shall be the duty of the City Works Superintendent to furnish
specifications for and supervise the construction or repair of all sidewalks
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.040) (Ord. 371, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.18 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the
specified time, the Mayor and City Council shall remedy the condition or
contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person
to whom the order is directed. The person remedying a condition under a
contract made hereunder shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.050) (Ord. 371, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.19 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within 90 days after
receipt of a statement therefor from the City Treasurer, such cost shall be
levied against the property upon which said hazard exists as a special
assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of
the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment as herein
provided. Such special assessment shall be certified by the Mayor and Council
to the City Treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon such
property, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or
owners thereof, unless paid before, and shall be collected in the same manner
as other taxes against such property.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.060) (Ord. 371, passed 8-1-1956)
STREET TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 151.30 TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINES.
   The Mayor and City Council are given full and complete control over all
trees growing within the confines of the city limits which are outside the
property lines of the respective lots, plots and tracts. They shall have the
authority to govern the planting, trimming, spraying, preservation and removal
of all trees, other plants and grassy areas in public places to ensure safety
and preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.010) (Ord. 372, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.31 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person shall plant or set out any tree or plant in a public place without
first filing an application and procuring a permit from the Mayor and City
Council. The application required herein shall state the number of trees or
plants to be planted, or set out the location, grade and variety of each tree
or plant, the method of planting, including the supplying of a suitable soil
and such other information as the Mayor and City Council shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit shall be issued
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.020) (Ord. 372, passed 8-1-1956) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.32 TREES, HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED.
   (A)   Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim
all trees on property owned or occupied by him or her, overhanging the
sidewalks, streets or alleys, so that the branches thereon will not interfere
with pedestrian or public travel, or to prevent the spread of disease or
insects to public trees and places.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.030)
   (B)   Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim
all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said
hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.040)
(Ord. 372, passed 8-1-1956) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.33 WEEDS.
   (A)   All owners, occupants, tenants or agents of any lot, block, parcel or
subdivision of land are required to cut and remove all weeds from said premises
and to the curb line where existing, in front of or abutting on said premises,
and to keep the same free from weeds.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      WEEDS. Includes all vegetable growth that is unsightly, troublesome,
useless or noxious.
   (C)   All weeds and vegetable growth that has been declared noxious,
destructive and detrimental to the agricultural interests shall be completely
and effectually destroyed. It shall be a sufficient compliance with this
subchapter if all other kinds not so declared noxious are kept closely cut to
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.050) (Ord. 372, passed 8-1-1956) Penalty, see §  
151.99
§ 151.34 ORDER TO PRESERVE OR REMOVE.
   (A)   When the Mayor and City Council shall find it necessary to order the
trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants or weeds upon private
property, they shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition
upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for its
existence.
      (1)   Time for compliance. The order required herein shall set forth a
time limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the
violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property, the Mayor
and City Council shall have the authority to require compliance immediately
upon service of the order.
      (2)   Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall
fail to comply within the specified time, the Mayor and City Council shall
remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the
cost thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person remedying
a condition under a contract made hereunder shall be authorized to enter
premises for that purpose.
   (B)   If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within 90 days after
receipt of a statement therefor from the City Treasurer, such cost shall be
levied against the property upon which said hazard exists as a special
assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of
the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment as herein
provided. Such special assessment shall be certified by the Mayor and City
Council to the City Treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
such property, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or
owners thereof unless paid before and shall be collected in the same manner as
other tax against such property.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.060) (Ord. 372, passed 8-1-1956)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions
of §
151.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and for each day of violation or
failure to comply may be punished by a fine not to exceed $300.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.030)
   (C)   Any person violating §
151.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day said person shall remain
in violation.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.030)
   (D)   (1)   Any person, contractor or utility, or agents of the same,
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of §
151.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and for each day of violation or
failure to comply may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
      (2)   In addition to the fines levied, any person, contractor or utility,
or agents of the same, that cause damage to any property, right-of-way or
utility installation belonging to the city shall reimburse the city in full for
the cost of restoring any damage caused. The extent and cost of damages shall
be determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 395, passed 4-5-1961; Ord. 500, passed 1-17-1984; Ord. 671, passed 11-17-
2021; Ord. 672, passed 3-9-2022)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Definitions
   
152.002   Title and authority
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Jurisdiction
   
152.005   Interpretation
   
152.006   Administration
   
152.007   Combining of permits
   
152.008   Vacations and dedications
   
152.009   Variances
   
152.010   Enforcement
Subdivision Approval
   
152.025   Subdivision required
   
152.026   Subdivision application procedure
   
152.027   Preliminary plat
   
152.028   Final plat
Design Standards
   
152.040   Minimum design standards required
   
152.041   Dedication
   
152.042   Location
   
152.043   Specifications
   
152.044   Street names
   
152.045   Intersections
   
152.046   Pedestrian walkways
   
152.047   Easements
   
152.048   Blocks
   
152.049   Lots
   
152.050   Planting strips and reserve strips
   
152.051   Public sites and open spaces
   
152.052   Large-scale developments
Improvement Standards
   
152.065   Purpose
   
152.066   Responsibility for plans
   
152.067   Required public improvements
   
152.068   Guarantee of completion of improvements
Special Developments
   
152.080   Purpose
   
152.081   Hillsides
   
152.082   Planned unit and condominium developments
   
152.083   Floodplains
   
152.084   Cemeteries
   
152.085   Mobile home subdivisions
   
152.086   Mobile home
   
152.087   Travel trailer parks
   
152.088   Large-scale development subdivision
   152.089   Tiny homes
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word SHALL is mandatory; MAY
is permissive; and the word SHOULD is preferred. The masculine shall include
the feminine.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.010)
   BLOCK. A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
   BOARD. The Board of City Council members.
   BUILDING. A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or
more families, or the structure designed or used for occupancy by people for
commercial or industrial uses.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. An imaginary line established by subdivision
regulations and zoning ordinances requiring all buildings to be set back a
certain distance from lot lines and street rights-of-way.
   BUILDING SITE. An area proposed or provided and improved by grading,
filling, excavation or other means for erecting pads for buildings.
   CEMETERY. A lot that has been planned for the selling of sites for the
burial of animal or human remains.
   CITY. The city having jurisdiction of the parcel of land under
consideration.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission, as appointed by the Council
to administer this chapter, having jurisdiction over the parcel of land under
consideration.
   COMMITTEE. The technical committee appointed by the Council to assist with
the technical evaluation of subdivisions and to make recommendations to the
Commission. The membership of the COMMITTEE shall include, but not be limited
to, persons that are engaged in either private or public work with specific
knowledge in the following areas:
      (1)   Road design and construction;
      (2)   Sewer and water facility design and construction;
      (3)   Health requirements for water and sewer facilities;
      (4)   Environmental planning criteria such as geology, water systems,
vegetation and the like;
      (5)   Solid waste;
      (6)   Recreational and open space;
      (7)   Schools;
      (8)   Utilities; and
      (9)   Fire Department.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan, comprehensive plan or comprehensive development
plan adopted by the local authority and showing the general location and extent
of present and proposed development, including, but not limited to, housing,
industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks, schools and other community
facilities.
   CONDOMINIUM. An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common in real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property, or in any combination thereof.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the municipal governing body.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The office of the County Recorder.
   COVENANT. A written promise or pledge.
   CULVERT. A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or
driveway.
   DEDICATION. The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public. Land becomes DEDICATED when accepted by the city as a public
dedication, either by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes,
or by the recording of a plat showing such DEDICATION.
   DEVELOPER. Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself or
herself.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or other structure proposed or built for
occupancy by people.
   DWELLING UNIT (PRE-FAB). A building or other structure, proposed or built
for occupancy by people that is designed for initial transportation on streets
and highways which arrives at a site where it is installed on a permanent
foundation.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public
to use land for specific purposes.
   ENGINEER. Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream or watercourse, lake or other body of standing way which has been
or may be covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The FLOODPLAIN
includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe.
      (1)   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent,
with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
      (2)   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. A floodway whose limits have been designated
and established.
      (3)   FLOOD. The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated
by overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of standing water.
      (4)   FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY. A flood magnitude which has a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      (5)   FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater of any watercourse.
      (6)   FLOODWAY-ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines limiting a designated
floodway.
      (7)   FLOODWAY FRINGE.
         (a)   The part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway
encroachment lines limiting a designated floodway.
         (b)   Such areas will include those portions of the floodplain which
will be inundated by a flood of 100-year frequency but which may be developed
for use under land use regulations without material effect upon the floodwater-
carrying capacity of the floodway and floodwater levels. Such areas are
characterized by shallow flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the city.
   HIGHWAY. A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
   HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision, or portion thereof, having an average
slope of 10% or more.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
   LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision, the size of which consists of 50 or
more lots or dwelling units.
   LOT. A parcel, plot, tract or other land area of suitable size, as required
in these regulations and existing zoning ordinances, and created by subdivision
for sale, transfer or lease.
   LOT AREA. The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street,
highway, alley, road or other rights-of-way.
   LOT SPLIT. A division of an original platted city lot, tract or parcel of
land, as set forth at the time of incorporation of the city, into three parts.
A LOT SPLIT may be allowed as long as the LOT SPLIT:
      (1)   Results in all involved lots being consistent with the current
zoning of the area where the lots exist;
      (2)   Is located with frontage on an existing city street;
      (3)   Has water and sewer access to the lot or adjacent to the lot so
that all involved lots will have access to water and sewer services;
      (4)   Will not require the city to adopt additional parking, city streets
or run new sewer and water lines or increase substantially the use of said
water or sewer lines or any result which may require additional costs to the
city; and
      (5)   Contains lots which will have to meet the standards of the city for
roads, running new sewer and water lines and EMS services.
   LOT TYPES.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on only
one street.
      (3)   REVERSED LOT. A lot with frontage on a side street or other right-
of-way other than an interior or corner lot.
      (4)   THROUGH LOT. A lot with frontage on more than one street, not a
corner lot. Also known as a DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. THROUGH LOTS are prohibited
under these regulations.
   MOBILE HOME.
      (1)   A single-family dwelling designated for transportation after
fabrication on streets and highways, on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other
trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent
foundations, connections to utilities and the like.
      (2)   A pre-fab dwelling unit or travel trailer is not to be considered
as a MOBILE HOME. A travel trailer is one that can legally be towed by
passenger car.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A park designed and intended for the purposes of rental
spaces where residence is in mobile homes exclusively.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively and land owned by the
occupant.
   MONUMENT. Any permanent marker, either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe or
iron or street rods, used to permanently establish any tract, parcel, lot or
street lines, as specified in Idaho Code § 50-1303.
   OPEN SPACE. An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity.
Streets, buildings or other covered structures are not included in computing
these areas.
   ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND. A lot or tract as recorded on any plat or record on
file in the office of the County Recorder, each one-sixteenth of a section (40
acres) or any unplatted contiguous parcel of land held in one ownership and of
record at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   OWNER. The individual firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided.
   PERFORMANCE BOND. An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by
the subdivider, or his or her surety, to the City Clerk and Recorder which
guarantees that the subdivider will perform all actions required by an approved
plat and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his or her surety will pay
damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   A use or a combination of residential, commercial and industrial
uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under single
ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of selling or renting
individual lots or estates, whether fronting on private or dedicated streets,
which may include two or more principal buildings as governed by the zoning
ordinance.
      (2)   The requirements of this chapter may be modified by the Council
upon recommendation by the Commission to achieve the best possible planned
development for the specific site under consideration.
   PLAT. The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite
or other tract of land, or a replatting of such, including certifications,
descriptions and approvals.
      (1)   FINAL PLAT. The final and formal presentation by maps or drawings
of an approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of which is
filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
      (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The first formal presentation by maps or drawings
of a proposed subdivision, as required in these regulations.
   RESERVE STRIP. A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial street
and adjacent property, in either case, reserved or held in public ownership for
future street extension or widening.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated or served for use as a public way of
which normally includes sidewalks and other public utilities or service areas.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street right-of-way outside the street pavement
which is improved for pedestrian use. (Also known as WALKWAY.)
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The specifications as may be specified in this
chapter or as officially adopted by the city.
   STATE. The State of Idaho.
   STREET. A right-of-way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term STREET also includes
the terms HIGHWAY, THOROUGHFARE, PARKWAY, ROAD, AVENUE, BOULEVARD, LANE, PLACE
and other such terms.
      (1)   ALLEY. A minor street providing secondary access at the back or
side of a property otherwise abutting a street.
      (2)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street designated for the purpose of carrying
fast and/or heavy traffic.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street designated for the purpose of carrying
traffic from minor streets to other COLLECTOR STREETS and/or arterial streets.
      (4)   COMMERCIAL STREET. A street designated for the purpose of providing
traffic movement in a commercial area.
      (5)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A street connected to another street at one end
only and provided with a turnaround space at its terminus.
      (6)   DEAD-END STREET. A street connecting to another street at one end
only and not having provisions for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
      (7)   FRONTAGE STREET. A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street, which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
      (8)   INDUSTRIAL STREET. A street designated for the purpose of providing
traffic movement in an industrial area.
      (9)   LOOP. A minor street with both terminal points on the same street
of origin.
      (10)   MINOR STREET. A street which has the primary purpose of providing
access to abutting properties.
      (11)   PARTIAL STREET. A dedicated right-of-way providing only a portion
of the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract
of land.
      (12)   PRIVATE STREET. A street which provides vehicular and pedestrian
access to one or more properties; however, not accepted for public dedication
or maintenance.
      (13)   SIDE STREET. A secondary street that provides access to a corner
lot of which the principal building is not oriented toward.
   SUBDIVIDER.
      (1)   The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The subdivider need not be the owner of the property, however, he
or she shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient proprietary rights in
the property to represent the owner.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of an original platted city lot, tract or parcel
of land, as recorded on county records, into more than two parts for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or development.
   SURVEYOR. Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor
to do professional surveying.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. Rental space for travel trailers on a limited basis.
   UTILITIES. Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, storm drains and similar facilities providing service to and used
by the public.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations
where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
   VICINITY MAP. A small-scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.020)
(Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975; Ord. 659, passed 5-15-2019)
§ 152.002 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known and cited as the City
Subdivision Regulations, hereinafter referred to as the subdivision ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.010)
   (B)   Authority. These regulations are authorized by Idaho Code Title 50,
Chapter 13, as amended or subsequently codified.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.020)
(Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of these regulations are to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to provide for:
   (A)   The harmonious development of the area;
   (B)   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with
other existing or planned streets and roads;
   (C)   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   (D)   The conservation of or provision of adequate transportation, water
drainage and sanitary facilities;
   (E)   The avoidance of population congestion and of scattered subdivisions
of land as would involve danger of injury to health, safety or general welfare
by reason of:
      (1)   The lack of water supply, drainage, transportation or other public
services; or
      (2)   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   (F)   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      (1)   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      (2)   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or
other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of
a plat.
   (G)   The manner and form of the making and filing of any plat; and
   (H)   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approval authorities including procedures for the equitable review
and approval of all plats of subdivisions covered by these provisions.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.030) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.004 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   These regulations shall apply to the subdividing and developing of all
land within the incorporated territory of the city, including the property
within one mile of the city limits of said incorporated city, under the
requirements of Idaho Code § 50-1306, as amended or subsequently codified.
   (B)   The corporate limits of any city, including the property within one
mile of the corporate limits of such city, under the requirements of Idaho Code
§ 50-1306, as amended or subsequently codified.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.040) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.005 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   All subdivisions, as defined in this chapter, shall be submitted for
approval of the Council and shall comply with the provisions of these
regulations.
   (B)   These regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and where at
variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to any subdivision created and forming a
part of any lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision created and recorded
prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except
for the further dividing of lots; nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of
other laws, ordinances or regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon
property by deed, covenant or other private agreements, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.050) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.006 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Council shall appoint a Planning and Zoning Commission to carry
out the provisions as specified in this chapter. The Commission shall receive
and make recommendations on all subdivision applications.
   (B)   In the event the Commission fails to act or carry out its
responsibilities according to the regulations contained in this chapter, the
Council shall assume all the duties of the Commission as specified in this
chapter in relation to the application concerned.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.060) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.007 COMBINING OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Commission is required to combine all permits which may be
required in this chapter and previously or subsequently adopted city ordinances
which are relative to land development into one permit application and
processing procedure.
   (B)   In conjunction with a combined permit, the Commission shall coordinate
methods of approval with the respective departments for the purpose of reducing
errors, misunderstanding, confusion and unnecessary delay for everyone
involved.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.070) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.008 VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS.
   (A)   Application procedure.
      (1)   Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing subdivision,
public right-of-way or easement, or desiring to dedicate a street right-of-way
or easement shall complete and file an application with the Commission and also
file such other applications as are otherwise required by law.
      (2)   These provisions shall not apply to the widening of any street
which is shown in the comprehensive development plan, or the dedication of
streets, rights-of-way or easements to be shown on a recorded plat of a
subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 16.28.010)
   (B)   Action.
      (1)   Commission recommendation. The Commission shall review the request
and all agency responses and make a recommendation to the Council for either
approval, conditional approval or denial.
      (2)   Council action.
         (a)   When considering an application for vacation procedures, the
Council shall establish a date for a public hearing and give such public notice
as required by law. The Council may approve, deny or modify the application.
Whenever public rights-of-way or lands are vacated, the Council shall provide
adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed for said vacated rights-of-way
in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
         (b)   When considering an application for dedication procedures, the
Council may approve, deny or modify the application.
         (c)   When a dedication is approved, the required street improvements
shall be constructed or a bond furnished assuring the construction prior to
acceptance of the dedication. To complete the acceptance of any dedication of
land, the owner shall furnish to the Council a deed describing and conveying
such lands to be recorded with the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 16.28.020)
(Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.009 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The Commission may recommend to the Council a variance from the
provisions of this chapter on a finding that undue hardship may result from
strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of this chapter or
that application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable. The
Commission shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to, or
desirable for, the public interest. In making its findings, the Commission
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity.
      (2)   No variance shall be recommended unless the Commission finds after
a public hearing that:
         (a)   1.   There are such special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable.
            2.   In such cases, the subdivider shall first state his or her
reasons in writing as to the specific provisions or requirement involved;
         (b)   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said
property is situated;
         (c)   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the state code;
and
         (d)   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the
interest and purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive development plan.
(Prior Code, § 16.32.010)
   (B)   Topographical-physical limitation variance. Where in the case of a
particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with
the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the
subdivider because of unusual topography, other physical conditions or other
such conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that these conditions would
result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, the
Commission may recommend to the Council that variance modification or a waiver
of these requirements be granted.
(Prior Code, § 16.32.020)
   (C)   Planned unit development variance.
      (1)   The developer may request a variance from specified portions of
this chapter in the case of a planned unit development. Upon considering the
requested variance, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of the land and existing use of land in the vicinity, the number
of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, the probable effect
of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity, adequate
open space, light, air and other needs.
      (2)   The Commission’s findings and report to the Council shall include
whether:
         (a)   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable
community development and be in compliance with the comprehensive development
plan;
         (b)   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas; and
         (c)   The proposed project will be served with adequate public
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 16.32.030)
(Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the state code shall be
admitted to the public land records of the county or recorded by the County
Recorder until such subdivision plat has received final approval by the
Council. No public board, agency, Commission, official or other authority shall
proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any of the
public improvements required by this chapter until the final plat has received
the approval by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.36.010) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975) Penalty, see §
152.999
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
§ 152.025 SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to create a subdivision as defined in this chapter shall
submit all necessary applications to the Commission. No final plat shall be
filed with the County Recorder until the plat has been acted upon by the
Commission and approved by the Council. No lots shall be sold from any plat
until it has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.010) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.026 SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Application. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of
a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit eight copies of a sketch plan
to the Commission. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental
scheme of the proposed subdivision, in schematic form and including the area
proposed for immediate development in such a form and content as required by
the Commission, and shall include the following:
         (a)   The general layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
         (b)   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
         (c)   Areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
      (2)   Fee. None required.
      (3)   Commission action.
         (a)   The subdivider shall submit the pre-application to the members
of the Planning and Zoning Commission ten days prior to the regular meeting.
         (b)   A mailing list can be obtained from the City Clerk. At the
regular meeting the subdivider shall present his or her pre-application and
intent to the Commission for review and comment. The Commission may, if it
deems necessary, request review of the pre-application by other agencies. The
Commission will review the pre-application by other agencies.
         (c)   The Commission will review the pre-application to determine its
compliance with this chapter as well as the following concerns:
            1.   The compliance of the proposed development with existing local
or state policies, goals and objectives or development plans;
            2.   Determination if additional special permits or ordinance
conflicts such as rezoning, special development permits or variances that may
be needed and the determination of the manner that such requirements can be
combined into one permit;
            3.   Advise the applicant of any unique environmental or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated by the state as areas of
critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
            4.   Provide the subdivider with all necessary forms and
checklists.
   (B)   Applications for lot splits.
      (1)   The city will allow for three lot splits.
      (2)   An application to the Planning and Zoning Commission from the lot
owner, showing the following requirements have all been met will be presented
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval:
         (a)   The application for lot split shall mandate an application fee
of $25;
         (b)   Said application fee may be changed at any time by resolution;
and
         (c)   The lot split application shall adhere to the requirements set
forth in the definition of lot split.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.020) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975; Ord. 659, passed 5-15-
2019)
§ 152.027 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Application. Upon completion of the pre-application procedures, the
subdivider may file with the Commission a completed subdivision application
form and preliminary plat data, as required in this chapter, in such form and
content as required by the Commission.
   (B)   Combining both preliminary and final plats. The applicant may also
request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and
final plat if the following exists:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten lots;
      (2)   No new streets or major street widenings are involved;
      (3)   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like; and
      (4)   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form. A request to combine both preliminary plat
and final plat into one application shall be acted upon by the Commission upon
recommendation by the Technical Review Committee.
   (C)   Contents of preliminary plat. The contents of the preliminary plat
shall be in such a form and information provided as stipulated by the
Commission; however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the
Commission may also be required. The subdivider shall submit to the Commission
at least the following:
      (1)   Eight copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated;
      (2)   Eight sets of preliminary engineering plans for streets, water,
sewers, sidewalks and other required public improvements; said engineering
plans shall contain sufficient information and detail to enable the Technical
Review Committee to make a preliminary determination as to conformance of the
proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances and standards, as
outlined in §§
152.080 through
152.088;
      (3)   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat
on a form prescribed by the Commission; and
      (4)   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large-scale development,
hazardous and unique areas of development.
   (D)   Requirement of preliminary plats. The following shall be shown on any
preliminary plat submitted or shall be submitted with the same:
      (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider or
subdividers and the surveyor who prepared the plat;
      (3)   The name and address of all adjoining property owners, whether or
not bisected by a public right-of-way, as shown on records in the County
Assessor’s office;
      (4)   The legal description of the subdivision;
      (5)   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such
as: Residential single-family; two-family and multiple housing; commercial;
industrial; recreational; or agricultural, and a showing of any sites proposed
for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
      (6)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
      (7)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area (one-half mile minimum radius, scale optional);
      (8)   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and
the adjacent land;
      (9)   Streets, street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths, including
adjoining streets or roadways;
      (10)   Lot lines, dimensions and numbers, and the total number of lots by
block;
      (11)   Contours, shown at five-foot intervals where land slope is greater
than 10% and at two-foot intervals where land slope is 10% or less, with an
established benchmark, including location and elevation;
      (12)   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
individual wells or septic tanks are proposed;
      (13)   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to,
storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages, bridges,
culverts, water mains, fire hydrants and their respective profiles or indicated
alternative methods;
      (14)   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed
restrictions or, if none, a statement that none are proposed;
      (15)   Any dedications to the public and/or easements, together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such;
      (16)   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in §§
152.065 through
152.068; and
      (17)   A statement as to whether or not a variance will be requested with
respect to any provision of this chapter describing the particular provision,
the variance requested and the reasons therefor.
   (E)   Fee. 
      (1)   At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary plat,
a nonrefundable fee of $300 plus $1 per lot shall be paid by the subdivider.
The subdivider shall also be responsible for all legal fees related to the
newspaper publication of the plat and any City Engineer review fees related to
the plat. There shall be no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary
and final plats.
      (2)    The City Council may adjust the fees specified in this section by
resolution in accordance with applicable law.
   (F)   Submission requirements. The subdivider shall submit eight copies of
the preliminary plat and required supplemental material and required fee to the
Commission at least ten days prior to the regular Commission meeting.
   (G)   Public notification.
      (1)   Posting of Commission meeting.
         (a)   The subdivider shall post a reasonable number of posters on or
near the subject property under consideration to be subdivided. Such poster and
stated information shall be of such size and content as may be approved by the
Commission.
         (b)   The location of the posters shall be on the closest public roads
in visible locations surrounding the subject property and erected at least ten
days prior to the Commission’s meeting.
      (2)   Failure to notify. The failure of the subdivider to comply with the
exact provisions of these procedures shall invalidate the Commission’s action.
   (H)   Commission action.
      (1)   At the next regular Commission meeting, the subdivider shall
present the preliminary plat for action. The Commission may approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove or table the preliminary plat for additional
information. Such action shall occur within 30 days of the date of the regular
meeting at which the plat is first considered. The action and the reasons for
such action shall be stated in writing by the Commission and forwarded to the
applicant. The Commission shall also forward a statement of the action taken
and the reasons for such action, together with a copy of the preliminary plat
to the Council for its information and record.
      (2)   Action on combined preliminary and final plat. If the Commission’s
conclusion is favorable to the subdivider’s request and recommendation from the
Technical Review Committee that the subdivision be considered as both a
preliminary plat and final subdivision, then a recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Council in the same manner as specified in this chapter for a
final plat. The Commission may recommend that the combined application be
approved, approved conditionally or disapproved.
   (I)   Appeals. Any person who appeared in person or writing before the
Commission or the subdivider may appeal in writing the decision of the
Commission relative to any action taken by the Commission. The appeal must be
submitted to the Council within ten days from Commission action.
   (J)   Approval period.
      (1)   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of
the final plat application by the developer within one year after action by the
Commission shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and
void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Commission
prior to the expiration date.
      (2)   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made
in successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of one year, may be considered for final
approval without resubmission for preliminary plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.030) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975; Ord. 682, passed 4-23-
2025)
§ 152.028 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Application. After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the Commission the
following:
      (1)   Three copies and the original of the final plat; and
      (2)   Three copies and the original of the final engineering construction
drawings for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other public improvements.
   (B)   Content of final plat. The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter 13 and
shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable
the same to be placed on one sheet of 18-inch by 24-inch drawing paper, with no
part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one inch. The reverse of said sheet
shall not be used for any portion of the drawing, but may contain written
matter as to dedications, certifications and other information. The final plat
shall include at least the following:
      (1)   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the Commission;
      (2)   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat;
      (3)   Such other and further information as the Commission may deem
necessary to establish, whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat;
      (4)   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof;
      (5)   Conform to all requirements and provisions of this chapter; and
      (6)   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards.
   (C)   Commission review.
      (1)   Submittal of final plat. The Commission shall review the final plat
for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat. If
the Commission determines that there is substantial difference in the final
plat than that which was considered as a preliminary plat, or conditions which
have not been met, the Commission may require that the final plat be
resubmitted to the Technical Review Committee and Commission in the same manner
as required in the preliminary plat process.
      (2)   Public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a
public hearing to gather comments from the public and interested parties
regarding the final plat. This public hearing shall be noticed in accordance
with the requirements of state law.
      (3)   Submission to the Council. Upon the determination that the final
plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the Commission shall place the final plat on the
Council agenda within 45 days from the date that an acceptable final plat
application was received and acknowledged by the Commission.
   (D)   Agency review. The Commission may transmit one copy of the final plat,
or other document submitted, for review and recommendation to the same
departments and agencies, or others as it may deem necessary, to ensure
compliance with the preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary
approval. The agency review shall also include construction standards of
improvements, compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all
improvements and the legal review of the performance bond.
   (E)   Council action. After the Planning and Zoning Commission’s public
hearing and recommendation, the proposal will proceed to the City Council for
an additional public hearing. The City Council, at its next regular meeting
following receipt of the Commission’s report, shall consider the Commission’s
findings, comments from concerned persons and agencies, and all relevant
information to arrive at a decision on the final plat. If the final plat
conforms to the requirements of this chapter applicable at the time of approval
of the preliminary plat, all rulings made by the Commission on the preliminary
plat, and the requirements of state law, the Council shall approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove, or table the final plat for additional information
within 30 days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first
considered.
   (F)   Approval period. Final plat and covenants, if any, shall be filed with
the County Recorder within one year after written approval by the Council,
otherwise such approval shall become null and void, unless prior to said
expiration date an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Commission.
   (G)   Method of recording. Upon approval of the final plat by the Council,
the subdivider’s prepayment of recording fees and the inclusion of the
following signatures on the final plat, the Commission shall submit the final
plat to the County Recorder for recording:
      (1)   Certification and signature of the Council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      (2)   Certification and signature of the City Engineer verifying that the
subdivision meets the city requirements and has been approved by the Council;
and
      (3)   Certification and signature of the local or state health agency
that all health requirements have been complied with.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.040) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975; Ord. 682, passed 4-23-
2025)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.040 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All places submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and
all subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions, shall fully comply with the minimum design
standards set forth hereinafter in this chapter.
   (B)   Provided, however, that any higher standards adopted by any highway
district, state highway department or health agency shall prevail over those
set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.010) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.041 DEDICATION.
   Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all
cases; in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to public use.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.020) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.042 LOCATION.
   Street and road location shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Street location and arrangements. When a major street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans.
   (B)   Local or minor streets. Local or minor streets shall be so arranged as
to discourage their use by through traffic.
   (C)   Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new
subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the Council and the highway district
or department having jurisdiction over such streets.
   (D)   Stub streets.
      (1)   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
streets into adjacent areas.
      (2)   A reserve strip may be required and held in public ownership.
   (E)   Relation to topography. Streets shall be arranged in proper relation
to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   (F)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in multiple-dwelling or commercial
subdivisions, unless other provisions are made for service access and off-
street loading and parking. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
   (G)   Frontage roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial
street, it shall be required that there be frontage roads approximately
parallel to and on each side of such arterial street, and that there be such
other treatment as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential
properties, and to separate through traffic from local traffic.
   (H)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than 500 feet
in length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround having a minimum
radius of 50 feet for the right-of-way.
   (I)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this chapter and where satisfactory assurance for dedication
of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be
subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the
street shall be dedicated within such tract.
   (J)   Private streets. Private streets and roads shall be prohibited except
within planned unit developments.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.030) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.043 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Street right-of-way widths. Street and road right-of-way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive development plan and
the rules of the State Department of Highways and the highway district or
department having jurisdiction; minimum right-of-way standards are as follows:
 
Street Types                           Widths   Widths of Pavement
Collector street                       60 feet  32 feet
Local street                           50 feet  24 feet
   Does not allow on-street parking
Major arterial                         100 feet 48 feet divided
Minor arterial                         80 feet  32 feet
 
   (B)   Street grades. Street grades shall not exceed 9% on either local or
collector streets, and no street grade shall be less than 0.50%.
   (C)   Street alignment. Street alignment shall be as follows.
      (1)   Horizontal alignment. When street lines deflect from each other by
more than ten degrees in alignment, the centerlines shall be connected by a
curve having a minimum radius of 500 feet for arterial streets, 300 feet for
collector streets and 150 feet for minor streets. Between reverse curves on
minor streets there shall be a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet, and on
collector and arterial streets, 200 feet.
      (2)   Vertical alignment. Minimum sight distances shall be 200 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for collector and other streets.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.040) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.044 STREET NAMES.
   The naming of streets shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name except where
a new street is a continuation of an existing street.
   (B)   Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as
existing streets shall not be used.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.050) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.045 INTERSECTIONS.
   Intersections shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Angle of intersection. Streets shall intersect at 90 degrees or as
closely thereto as possible, and in no case shall streets intersect at less
than 80 degrees.
   (B)   Sight triangles. Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is 125 feet from the center of the intersection.
   (C)   Number of streets. Not more than two streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   (D)   “T” intersections. “T” intersections may be used wherever such design
will not unduly restrict the free movement of traffic.
   (E)   Vertical alignment of intersections. A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall extend 50 feet to 100 feet each way from the intersection. An
allowance of 2% maximum intersection grade in rolling terrain, and 4% in hilly
terrain, will be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.060) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.046 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   A right-of-way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long blocks shall be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
schools, parks or shopping areas. The right-of-way shall be at least ten feet
wide and shall extend entirely through the block.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.070) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.047 EASEMENTS.
   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines, rear
lot lines and side lot lines when necessary; total easement width shall be not
less than 12 feet where lots adjoin. Unobstructed drainageway easements shall
be provided as required by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.080) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.048 BLOCKS.
   Every block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots, except
where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature or subdivision
boundary. Blocks shall not be less than 500 feet long in all cases.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.090) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.049 LOTS.
   Lots shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Zoning. The lot width, depth and total area shall not be less than the
requirements of any applicable zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to
straight streets and shall conform to the radius of curved streets.
   (C)   Width related to length. Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided.
   (D)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets.
   (E)   Uninhabitable areas. Land subject to flooding or which shall otherwise
be deemed to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential purposes or
for any other uses that may increase or create a danger to health, life or
property or which may increase or create a flood hazard. Such land within a
subdivision shall be set aside for other uses such as parks or other open
space.
   (F)   Backup lots. Lots shall back into such features as freeways, arterial
streets, shopping centers or industrial properties, except where there is a
marginal access street, unless a secondary access is provided. Such lots shall
contain a landscaped easement along the rear at least 20 feet wide in addition
to the utility easement; the restricted access to the arterial street will
minimize noise and protect outdoor living areas. Lots extending through a block
and having frontage on two local streets shall be prohibited.
   (G)   Lot frontage. All rectangular lots shall have at least 75 feet of
frontage upon a publicly dedicated street. Variances may be permitted for an
approved planned unit development.
   (H)   Future arrangements.
      (1)   Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots
(such as when large lots are approved for septic tank operations) the parcels
shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future re-subdividing into
smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the ultimate extension of
adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
      (2)   Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated,
the plan thereof shall be approved by the Commission prior to the taking of
such action.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.100) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.050 PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS.
   Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Planting strips. Planting strips shall be required to be placed next
to incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial
uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screens shall be a
minimum of 20 feet wide and shall not be a part of the normal roadway right-of-
way or utility easement.
   (B)   Reserve strips.
      (1)   Reserve strips; private. Privately held reserve strips controlling
access to streets shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Reserve strips; public. A one-foot reserve may be required to be
placed at the end or along stub, dead-end or half streets which terminate at
subdivision boundaries. These reserves shall be deeded in fee simple to the
city for future street purposes.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.110) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.051 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Public uses. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public
use shown on the comprehensive development plan is located in whole or part
within a subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose shall be dedicated to
the public or reserved for public purchase. If within two years of plat
recording the purchase is not agreed on, the reservation shall be canceled or
shall automatically cease to exist.
   (B)   Natural features. Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.120) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.052 LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS.
   Large-scale developments shall be governed by the following provisions.
   (A)   Modification. This subchapter may be modified in accordance with the
variance provisions of this chapter in the case of a subdivision large enough
to constitute a complete community or neighborhood, consistent with the
comprehensive development plan which provides and dedicates adequate public
open space and improvements for circulation, recreation, education, light, air
and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated.
   (B)   Neighborhood characteristics. A community or neighborhood under this
provision shall be consistent with the comprehensive development plan, bounded
by major streets or natural physical barriers, and shall contain public areas
of sufficient size for schools, playgrounds, parks and other public facilities
to serve its population.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.130) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 152.065 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider as
conditions for final plat approval, and also to outline the procedures and
responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and
agencies concerned with the administration, planning design, construction and
financing of public facilities, and to further establish procedures for
assuring compliance with these requirements.
(Prior Code, § 16.20.010) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.066 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed
subdivision to have prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of
construction plans, including profiles, cross-sections, specifications and
other supporting data, for all required public streets, utilities and other
facilities. Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which
have been approved with the preliminary plat and shall be prepared in
conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by
the responsible public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the public agencies’ standards or specifications.
(Prior Code, § 16.20.020) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.067 REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows.
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments shall be set in accordance with the Idaho Code §
50-1303.
   (B)   Street and alleys. All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Council.
Vertical curbs and gutters shall be constructed on collector and arterial
streets.
   (C)   Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be required on minor
streets and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Council.
   (D)   Installation of public utilities. Underground utilities are
recommended and may be required by the Council in areas where overhead
facilities would not be compatible with the surrounding properties.
   (E)   Driveways. All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the
Public Works Department, highway district or the State Highway Department.
   (F)   Water supply system. When a proposed subdivision is to be serviced by
a public water supply system, fire hydrants and other required water system
appurtenances shall be provided by the subdivider. If there is no existing or
accessible public water supply system, the subdivider shall be required to
install a water supply system for the common use of the lots within the
subdivision as approved by the State Department of Environmental Community
Services. Individual wells may be permitted in accordance with the requirements
of the appropriate health district.
   (G)   Underground utilities; sanitary sewer system.
      (1)   When a proposed subdivision is to be served by a public sanitary
sewage system, sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall
be provided by the subdivider as approved by the State Department of
Environmental and Community Services.
      (2)   Where is it determined, in the judgment of the Commission, based
upon the advice of the appropriate health district, that a subdivision cannot
be feasibly connected with an existing public or private sewer system, or that
a public or private sewer system is not provided for the subdivision, then an
approved disposal system may be authorized which shall comply with the
requirements of the appropriate health district.
   (H)   Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways.
      (1)   Sidewalks may be required on both sides of the street. Where the
average width of lots, as measured at the frontage line or at the building
setback line, is over 100 feet, sidewalks on one side may be required by the
Council.
      (2)   Pedestrian walkways, when required, shall have easements at least
ten feet in width and include a paved walk at least five feet in width, located
generally along the centerline of the easement, dedicated as a public
pedestrian walkway.
      (3)   Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications as adopted by the Council.
   (I)   Greenbelts. Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for
the protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial streets,
waterways, railroad rights-of-way or other features. Subdivision plats shall
show the location of any greenbelt areas.
   (J)   Street lighting. Streetlights may be required to be installed at
intersections throughout the subdivision. In these cases, a subdivider shall
conform to the requirements of the city and the public utility providing such
lighting.
   (K)   Bicycle paths. Bicycle paths should be considered in all developments
and may be required by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 16.20.030) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.068 GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Financial guarantee arrangements. In lieu of the actual installation
of required public improvements before filing of the final plat, the Council
may permit the subdivider to provide a financial guarantee of performance in
one or a combination of the following arrangements for those requirements which
are over and beyond the requirements of any other agency responsible for the
administration, operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement.
   (B)   Surety bond.
      (1)   Accrual. The bond shall accrue to the city covering construction,
operation and maintenance of the specific public improvement.
      (2)   Amount. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the total
estimated cost for completing construction of the specific public improvement,
as estimated by the City Engineer and approved by the Council.
      (3)   Term length. The term length in which the bond is in force shall be
for a period to be specified by the Council for the specific public
improvement.
      (4)   Bonding for surety company. The bond shall be with a surety company
authorized to do business in the state which is acceptable to the Council.
      (5)   Escrow agreement. The escrow agreement shall be drawn and furnished
by the Council.
   (C)   Cash deposit certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank
letter of credit.
      (1)   Treasurer, escrow agent or trust company. A cash deposit certified
check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, such surety
acceptable by the Council, shall be deposited with an escrow agent or trust
company.
      (2)   Dollar value. The dollar value of the cash deposit certified check,
negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to 110%
of the total estimated cost of construction of the specific public improvement
as estimated by the City Engineer and approved by the Council.
      (3)   Escrow time. The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check,
negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be for a period to
be specified by the Council.
      (4)   Progressive payment. In the case of cash deposits or certified
checks, an agreement between the Council and the subdivider may provide for
progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the certified
check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the extent of
the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in accordance with
a previously entered into agreement.
   (D)   Condition approval of final plat. With respect to financial
guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be conditioned on
the accomplishment of one of the following:
      (1)   The construction of improvements required by this chapter shall
have been completed by the subdivider and approved by the Council; or
      (2)   Surety acceptable to the Council shall have been filed in the form
of a cash deposit, certified check, a negotiable bond, irrevocable bank letter
of credit or surety bond.
   (E)   Special agreements. A special agreement may be entered into between
the subdivider and the Council where streetlights have been required.
   (F)   Inspection of public improvements under construction. Before approving
a final plat and construction plans and specifications for public improvements,
an agreement between the subdivider and the Council shall be made to provide
for checking or inspecting the construction and its conformity to the submitted
plans.
   (G)   Failure to complete the construction of a public improvement. In the
event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within the
period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the
completion of public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the
Council to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this,
the Council shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by
appropriating the cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of
credit or negotiable bond which the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a
surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance
by the bonding or surety company, and as included in a written agreement
between the Council and the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 16.20.040) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENTS
§ 152.080 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to identify the various types of
special developments that normally pose special concerns to the Commission and
elected officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests.
Therefore, this subchapter outlines the general plan submittal requirements and
design standards that shall be taken into consideration when acting on special
developments.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter are in addition to the plan
requirements and design standards that are required by §§
152.025 through
152.028 and
152.040 through
152.052. The required information shall be submitted to the Commission with the
preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.010) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.081 HILLSIDES.
   (A)   Appearance and preservation. In order to preserve, enhance and promote
the existing and future appearance and resources of hillsides for the maximum
retention of natural topographic features and qualities, the Council shall
encourage the maximum retention of the following:
      (1)   Skyline and ridge tops;
      (2)   Rolling grassy landforms, including knolls, ridges and meadows;
      (3)   Tree and shrub masses, grass, wildflowers and topsoil;
      (4)   Rock outcropping;
      (5)   Stream beds, draws and drainage swales, especially where tree and
plant formations occur; and
      (6)   Characteristic vistas and scenic panoramas.
   (B)   Hillside development evaluation. All development proposals shall take
into account and shall be judged by the application of current understanding of
land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering geology, hydrology, civil
engineering, environmental and civic design architecture and landscape
architecture in hill areas. Such current understanding includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Planning and development to fit the topography, soils, geology,
hydrology and other conditions existing on the proposed site;
      (2)   Orienting development to the site so that grading and other site
preparation is kept to an absolute minimum;
      (3)   Shaping of essential grading to complement the natural landforms
and prohibiting all successive padding and/or terracing of building sites;
      (4)   Developing large tracts in workable units on which construction can
be completed within one construction season so that large areas are not left
bare and exposed during the winter-spring runoff period;
      (5)   Accomplishing all paving as rapidly as possible after grading;
      (6)   Allocation to open space and recreation uses for those areas not
well suited to development, as evidenced by competent soils geology and
hydrology investigations and reports;
      (7)   Landscaping of areas around structures to blend with the natural
landscape;
      (8)   Placement, grouping and shaping of human-made structures to
complement one another and the natural landscape, providing visual interest and
creating a sense of place within the development;
      (9)   Demonstrating a concern for the view of the hills as well as the
view from the hills;
      (10)   Use of a variety of housing types in residential areas, rather
than exclusive use of single-family detached dwellings, to permit steep slopes,
wooded areas and areas of special scenic beauty to be preserved as scenic
easements, through the use of density transfers; such alternatives may include
attached dwellings, apartments and condominiums, residential clusters and
groups of various housing types;
      (11)   Special consideration in the design of such visual elements as
street lighting, fences, sidewalks, pathways and other street furniture to
enable maximum identity and uniqueness of character to be built into each
development; and
      (12)   Minimizing disruption of existing plant and animal life.
   (C)   Engineering plans. The developer shall retain a professional engineer
to obtain the following information.
      (1)   Soils report.
         (a)   Any area proposed for development shall be investigated to
determine the soil characteristics, and a soils engineering report shall be
submitted with every application for approval of a preliminary plat. This
report shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of
existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, design
criteria for corrective measures and opinions and recommendations covering the
adequacy of sites to be developed.
         (b)   Any area in which the investigation indicates soil hazards shall
not be subjected to development unless through design the engineer can
demonstrate conclusively to the Commission that these limitations can be
overcome in such a manner as to prevent hazard to life, hazard to property,
adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage
channel and adverse impact on the natural environment.
      (2)   Geology report.
         (a)   Any area proposed for development shall be investigated to
determine its geological characteristics and a geology report shall be
submitted with every application for a preliminary plat. This report shall
include an adequate description, as defined by the Commission, of the geology
of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development and opinions and recommendations
covering the adequacy of sites to be developed.
         (b)   The investigation and subsequent report shall be completed by a
professional geologist registered in the state and experienced and
knowledgeable in the practice of engineering geology and presented to the
Commission by either the geologist or the applicant’s engineer.
         (c)   Any area in which the investigation indicates geological hazards
shall not be subjected to development unless through design the geologist can
demonstrate conclusively to the Commission that these hazards can be overcome
in such a manner as to prevent hazard to life or limb, hazard to property,
adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage
channel and adverse impact on the natural environment.
      (3)   Hydrology report.
         (a)   Any area proposed for development shall be investigated to
determine its hydrological characteristics, and a hydrology report shall be
submitted with every application for approval of a preliminary plat. This
report shall include an adequate description, as defined by the Commission, of
the hydrology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect
of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development and opinions and
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed.
         (b)   The investigation and subsequent report shall be completed and
presented to the Commission by a qualified engineer who is experienced and
knowledgeable in the sciences of hydrology and in the techniques of hydrologic
investigation.
         (c)   Any area in which the investigation indicates hydrological
hazards shall not be subjected to development unless the developer can
demonstrate conclusively to the Commission that these hazards can be overcome
through design in such a manner as to prevent hazard to life or limb, hazard to
property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or
drainage channel and adverse impact on the natural environment.
         (d)   Flood frequency curves shall be provided for the area proposed
for development.
   (D)   Grading plan.
      (1)   A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted with each preliminary
plat proposal and shall include the following information:
         (a)   Details of terrain and area drainage;
         (b)   Location of any existing buildings or structures on the property
where the work is to be performed, the location of any existing buildings or
structures on the land of adjacent owners which are within 100 feet of the
property, or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations, and
proposed or approximate locations of structures relative to adjoining
topography;
         (c)   The direction of drainage flow and the approximate grade of all
streets, not to be construed as a requirement for final street design;
         (d)   Approximate limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours
to be achieved by the grading, including all cut and fill slopes, proposed
drainage channels and related construction; and
         (e)   Preliminary plans and approximate locations of all surface and
subsurface drainage devices, wells, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs
and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the
proposed work, together with a map showing drainage area, the complete drainage
network, including outfall lines and natural drainageways which may be affected
by the proposed development and the estimated runoff of the area served by the
drains.
      (2)   A final grading plan shall be submitted with each final plat and
shall include the following information:
         (a)   Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be
achieved by the grading, including all proposed cut and fill slopes, and
proposed drainage channels and related construction;
         (b)   Detailed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface
drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs and other
protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work,
together with a map showing drainage area, the complete drainage network and
natural drainageways which may be affected by the proposed development and the
estimated runoff of the area served by the drains;
         (c)   A description of methods to be employed disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from the grading site, including the location of
the disposal site; and
         (d)   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be
completed, including the total area of soil surface which is to be distributed
during each stage, estimated starting and completion dates, hours of operation
and days of week of operation; the schedule shall be drawn up to limit to the
shortest possible period the time that soil is exposed and unprotected. In no
event shall the existing (natural) vegetative groundcover be destroyed, removed
or disturbed more than 15 days prior to grading.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Soils.
         (a)   Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material, such
as vegetation and rubbish, and any other material which is determined by the
soils engineer to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not
conducive to stability; no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum
dimension greater than eight inches shall be used as fill material. Materials
larger than eight inches may be selectively placed within the project limits.
         (b)   Fills shall be compacted to at least 95% of maximum density, as
determined by AASHO T99.
         (c)   Cut slopes shall be not steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical; subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
         (d)   Fill slopes shall be not steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical; fill slopes shall not be located on natural slopes 2:1 or steeper or
where fill slope toes out within 12 feet horizontally of the top of an existing
or planned cut slope.
         (e)   Tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from
property boundaries a distance of three feet plus one-fifth of the height of
the cut or fill, but need not exceed a horizontal distance of ten feet; tops
and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures a distance of
six feet plus one-fifth the height of the cut or fill, but not to exceed ten
feet.
      (2)   Roadways.
         (a)   Roads shall be designed to create the minimum feasible amounts
of land coverage and the minimum feasible disturbance to the soil.
         (b)   Existing vegetation of the deep-rooted perennial variety shall
be preserved to the greatest extent possible in the location of roads. Road
alignment should follow natural terrain, and no unnecessary cuts or fills shall
be allowed in order to create additional lots or building sites.
         (c)   Variations in rights-of-way standards shall be permitted to
prevent the dedication of unnecessarily large parcels of land.
         (d)   Variations in road design and road construction shall be
permitted in order to keep grading and cut/fill slopes to a minimum.
         (e)   One-way streets shall be permitted and encouraged where
appropriate for the terrain and where public safety would not be jeopardized.
Maximum width shall be 17 feet between the backs of curbs.
         (f)   The widths of the graded section shall extend three feet beyond
the curb back or edge of pavement on both the cut and fill sides of the
roadway. If sidewalk is to be installed parallel to the roadway, the graded
section shall be increased by the width of the sidewalk plus one foot beyond
the curb back.
         (g)   Standard vertical curb (six inches) and gutter shall be
installed along both sides of all paved roadways.
         (h)   A pedestrian way plan shall be required in all developments. The
location and design shall require the approval of the Commission.
      (3)   Driveway and parking.
         (a)   Combinations of collective private driveways, cluster parking
areas and on-street parallel parking bays shall be used to attempt to optimize
the objectives of minimum soil disturbance, minimum impervious cover,
excellence of design and aesthetic sensitivity.
         (b)   Collective private driveways shall be encouraged where their use
will result in better building sites and lesser amounts of land coverage than
would result if a public road were required.
         (c)   Cluster parking areas shall be encouraged where they will not
result in drastic increases in the amount of impervious cover and/or where they
might eliminate private individual parking.
         (d)   On-street parallel parking bays shall be encouraged where
considerations of terrain or aesthetic quality would reduce the desirability of
collective driveways or cluster parking.
         (e)   In no case shall the total number of parking spaces exceed three
spaces per dwelling unit.
   (F)   Vegetation and revegetation.
      (1)   (a)   The developer shall submit a slope stabilization and
revegetation plan which shall include a complete description of the existing
vegetation, the vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal, the
vegetation to be planted and slope stabilization measures to be installed.
         (b)   The plan shall include an analysis of the environmental effects
of such operations, including the effects on slope stability, soil erosion,
water quality and fish and wildlife.
      (2)   The revegetation and slope stabilization plan shall be submitted
with the grading plan.
      (3)   Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary, e.g.,
buildings, filled areas or roads.
      (4)   Every effort shall be made to conserve topsoil which is removed
during construction for later use on areas requiring revegetation or
landscaping, e.g., cut and fill slopes.
      (5)   Vegetation sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on
all disturbed areas as each stage of grading is completed. Areas not contained
within lot boundaries shall be protected with adapted, fire-resistant species
of perennial vegetal cover after all construction is completed.
      (6)   New plantings shall be protected with organic cover.
      (7)   All disturbed soil surfaces shall be covered prior to December 1.
If the planned impervious surfaces (e.g., roads, driveways and the like) cannot
be established prior to December 1, a temporary cover adequate to prevent
erosion shall be installed on those surfaces.
      (8)   Construction shall be scheduled to minimize soil disturbance
between December 1 and April 15.
      (9)   The developer shall be fully responsible for any destruction of
native vegetation proposed for retention. He or she shall carry the
responsibility for both his or her own employees and for all subcontractors
from the first day of construction until the notice of completion is filed. The
developer shall be responsible for replacing such destroyed vegetation.
      (10)   The use of qualified personnel experienced and knowledgeable in
the practice of revegetation shall be required.
   (G)   Maintenance. The owner of any private property on which grading or
other work has been done, formed pursuant to a grading plan approved, or a
building permit granted, under the provisions of this subchapter, shall
continuously maintain and repair all graded surfaces and erosion prevention
devices, retaining walls, drainage structures or means and protective devices,
plantings and groundcover installed or completed.
   (H)   Utilities. All new service utilities, both on-site and off-site, shall
be placed underground.
   (I)   Objects of antiquity.
      (1)   No grading, filling, clearing of vegetation, operation of equipment
or disturbance of the soil shall take place in areas where any historic or
prehistoric ruins or monuments, objects of antiquity or geological landmarks or
monuments are present. The grading plan shall indicate the measures that will
be taken to protect such areas. The State Historical Society shall approve the
proposed protection measures before the grading plan is approved.
      (2)   Whenever during excavation there are uncovered or become apparent
any historic or prehistoric ruins or monuments, or objects of antiquity, or
geological landmarks, or monuments not previously accounted for in the grading
plan, all work in the immediate area shall cease until the State Historical
Society shall determine what precautions should be taken to preserve the
historic artifacts.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.020) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.082 PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Site development plan. The developer shall provide the Commission with
a colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that
will include at least the following:
      (1)   Architect style and building design;
      (2)   Building materials and color;
      (3)   Landscaping;
      (4)   Screening;
      (5)   Garbage areas;
      (6)   Parking; and
      (7)   Open space.
   (B)   Private streets.
      (1)   Private street construction standards shall be based upon
recommendations from the City Engineer and Commission.
      (2)   Adequate construction standards may vary depending on the size of
the development and the demands placed on such improvements.
   (C)   Homeowner’s association.
      (1)   Homeowner’s association bylaws and other similar deed restrictions,
which provide for the control and maintenance of all common areas, recreation
facilities or open space shall meet with the approval of the Council.
      (2)   Any and all powers as specified in such agreements may be required
to also be assigned to the jurisdictional agency to ensure continued and
adequate maintenance of all such common areas, recreational facilities and open
spaces, ability to assess property for delinquencies and enforcement of motor
vehicle speed to the best interests of the owners involved and of the general
public.
   (D)   Storage areas. Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and trailers. For typical residential development, one
adequate space shall be provided for every three living units. This may be
reduced by the Council if there is a showing that the needs of a particular
development are less.
   (E)   Parking space. One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by the zoning ordinance may be required for every three dwelling units
to accommodate visitor parking.
   (F)   Maintenance buildings. A maintenance building shall be provided, the
size and location to be determined by the type and service needed for the
necessary repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   (G)   Open space. The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development.
   (H)   Control during development. Single ownership or control during
development shall be required, and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the
development is built and constructed as planned.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.030) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.083 FLOODPLAINS.
   (A)   Flood areas. For any proposed subdivision that is located within a
floodplain, the developer shall provide the Commission with a development plan
of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will show and explain at
least the following:
      (1)   Location of all planned improvements;
      (2)   The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per
engineering practices as specified by the Army Corps of Engineers;
      (3)   The location of the present water channel;
      (4)   Any planned rerouting of waterways;
      (5)   All major drainageways;
      (6)   Areas of frequent flooding;
      (7)   Means of floodproofing buildings; and
      (8)   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
   (B)   Justification for development. Upon the determination that buildings
are planned with the floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated
within the floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer
shall through design demonstrate conclusively to the Commission that such
development will not present a hazard to life or limb, hazard to property,
adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage
channel and not have an adverse impact on the natural environment.
   (C)   Commission’s findings.
      (1)   In determining the appropriateness of subdivision for land located
within a floodplain, the Commission shall consider the objectives of this
subchapter and at least the following:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to the increased flood
heights or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads and intended uses;
         (b)   The danger that intended uses may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
         (c)   The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and
the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions under flood conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (f)   The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location;
         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed subdivision and land use;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in
times of flood;
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
         (l)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
      (2)   No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills,
structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually
or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If only
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the Council shall limit
development to that part and shall require the development proceed consistent
with that determination.
   (D)   Floodproofing plans. Floodproofing plans must be individually approved
by the Council upon recommendation from the Commission before such uses are
constructed. Floodproofing may include but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;
      (2)   Installation of watertight doors, bulk-heads and shutters or
similar methods of closure;
      (3)   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;
      (4)   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls;
      (5)   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
      (6)   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures;
      (7)   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of floodwaters;
      (8)   Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface
drainage systems to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood
pressures;
      (9)   Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris;
      (10)   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and
stormwaters into buildings or structures;
      (11)   Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits
and electrical appliances so that they are protected from inundation by the
regulatory flood; and
      (12)   Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids or other toxic materials which could be hazardous
to public health, safety and welfare at elevations above the height associated
with the regulatory protection elevation or design of such facilities to
prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage containers which
could result in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.040) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.084 CEMETERIES.
   (A)   Function. The developer shall provide the Commission with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery will be
used for either human or animal remains and the functions that are anticipated
on the property.
   (B)   Compliance with state code. The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural platting requirements
that are outlined in Idaho Code Title 27.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.050) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.085 MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. Mobile home subdivisions shall in general be treated the same
as any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth
in the zoning ordinance and also subject to the special requirements in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Special requirements. Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
      (1)   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
the planned development of ten acres;
      (2)   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided;
      (3)   The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be
subject to hazards such as insect or rodent infection, objectionable smoke,
noxious odors, unusual noise or the probability of flooding or erosion;
      (4)   Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal;
      (5)   Protection of existing groundcover;
      (6)   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas and
existing natural or human-made barriers;
      (7)   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development; and
      (8)   Creation of a homeowner’s association to assure that all common
open areas are adequately maintained.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.060) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.086 MOBILE HOME.
   Mobile home parks shall in general be treated the same as any residential
subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth in the zoning
ordinance and also subject to the following special requirements:
   (A)   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
planned development of five acres;
   (B)   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided;
   (C)   The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be
subject to hazards such as insect or rodent infection, objectionable smoke,
noxious odors, unusual noise or the probability of flooding or erosion;
   (D)   Adequacy of provisions for the drainage of surface waters and for
waste disposal;
   (E)   Protection of existing groundcover;
   (F)   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living planting areas and
existing natural or human-made barriers; and
   (G)   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for the
vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.070) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.087 TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
   (A)   General. Travel trailer parks shall in general be treated the same as
any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth in
the zoning ordinance and also subject to the special requirements in division
(B) below.
   (B)   Special requirements. Travel trailer parks shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
      (1)   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
the planned development of five acres;
      (2)   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided;
      (3)   Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal;
      (4)   Protection of existing groundcover;
      (5)   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas and
existing natural or human-made barriers; and
      (6)   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.080) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.088 LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION.
   Due to the impact that a large-scale development would have on public
utilities and services, the developer shall submit the following information
along with the preliminary plat:
   (A)   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development that will occur as a result of the subdivision (e.g., fire
protection, police protection, central water, central sewer, road construction,
recreation, maintenance, schools and others);
   (B)   Estimate the public service costs to provide adequate service to the
development;
   (C)   Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the development;
and
   (D)   Public means of financing the services for the development if any
public services would not be offset by tax revenue received from the
development.
(Prior Code, § 16.24.090) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
§ 152.089 TINY HOMES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide
clarification and guidelines for the development and placement of tiny homes
within the city limits of Montpelier, Idaho. These guidelines are intended to
support housing diversity, promote affordable housing options, ensure public
safety, and align with existing state and city building codes.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A secondary, self-contained dwelling unit
located on the same lot as a primary single-family residence. ADUs may be
detached, attached, or interior (e.g., basement or above-garage unit), and must
contain independent living facilities including a kitchen, sleeping area, and
bathroom. ADUs are intended for long-term habitation and must meet local
building, fire, and utility standards.
      PARK MODEL. A recreational vehicle with a vehicle identification number
(VIN), typically built on a trailer chassis and designed for seasonal or
temporary use. Under Idaho law, PARK MODELS are considered recreational
vehicles and are not to be used as permanent dwellings. They are not to be
confused with “manufactured homes,” which are regulated under Idaho Code § 67-
6509.
      TINY HOME. A residential dwelling unit with a maximum floor area of 400
square feet, excluding lofts. For purposes of construction and inspection, tiny
homes are treated as site-built dwellings subject to the International Building
Code (IBC).
   (C)   Applicability. This section applies to any structure intended for use
as a small or tiny home within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Montpelier, Idaho.
   (D)   General requirements.
      (1)   Building standards.
         (a)   All residential dwellings must comply with the currently adopted
edition of the International Building Code (IBC).
         (b)   Room size and ceiling height requirements shall comply with IBC.
      (2)   Foundation and utilities.
         (a)   All tiny homes shall be constructed on a permanent, code-
compliant foundation.
         (b)   Full utility connections are required, including water, sewer,
electrical and HVAC systems.
      (3)   Tiny homes on wheels (THOWs) and park models. The placement of
manufactured homes within the city limits is governed by Idaho Code § 67-6509
and any ordinance adopted by the City of Montpelier to implement its
provisions. Manufactured homes are not considered tiny homes and must meet all
HUD and foundation requirements, zoning standards and any applicable local
county and state laws. Tiny homes on wheels and park models are not approved
dwellings and are unfit for occupancy unless converted to meet all
International Building Code, International Fire Code, all HUD standards and any
and all applicable local county and state laws.
         (a)   THOWs and park models are considered recreational vehicles and
may not be used as permanent residences outside of licensed RV or trailer
parks.
         (b)   To be considered a permanent dwelling, park models must meet all
requirements for manufactured homes under Idaho law, including:
            1.   Minimum floor area of 1,000 square feet;
            2.   Installation on a backfilled permanent foundation;
            3.   HUD certification and compliance with Idaho Division of
Building Safety rules.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling unit requirements. Accessory dwelling units, as
defined above are subject to the following:
         (a)   Only one ADU is permitted per lot.
         (b)   ADUs may be detached, attached, or internal to the principal
residence.
         (c)   Maximum size: 800 square feet or 75% of the primary dwelling's
footprint, whichever is less.
         (d)   ADUs must meet building, electrical, plumbing, and energy codes
in effect at the time of construction.
         (e)   One additional off-street parking space is required unless
waived by the City Council.
         (f)   ADUs may not be used as short-term rentals unless specifically
allowed by city ordinance.
         (g)   A permanent foundation is required for all detached ADUs,
including tiny homes.
   (E)   Zoning and placement.
      (1)   Zoning compliance. Tiny homes must comply with applicable zoning
district regulations, including minimum lot sizes and residential density
limitations. For example, R-2 zoning allows two residential units per acre.
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). Tiny homes may be used as ADUs
provided they comply with all applicable ADU regulations and are located on
lots zoned to allow additional units.
      (3)   Tiny home communities. Proposed tiny home communities must proceed
through the planned unit development (PUD) process and conform to zoning,
density, and infrastructure requirements. A zoning amendment may be required.
   (F)   Design and appearance standards and emergency access and egress.
      (1)   Architectural compatibility.
         (a)   Tiny homes and ADU's shall be constructed using exterior
materials, roof-lines, and design elements that are architecturally compatible
with surrounding neighborhood structures.
         (b)   Parking and access. Each tiny home or ADU shall have a minimum
of one off-street parking space per unit unless waived by City Council.
      (2)   Each structure shall comply with all laws and regulations related
to safety requirements. This shall include the International Fire Code and the
International Building Code. At the minimum all units shall:
         (a)   Ensure each sleeping area in a tiny home or ADU shall have an
egress window that meets IBC.
         (b)   Maintain a minimum ten-foot separation from other nearby
structures, unless fire-rated construction is used.
         (c)   Have emergency vehicle access routes that comply with IFC § 503
(20-foot minimum clear width).
         (d)   Have addresses which are clearly visible from the street and are
posted in accordance with IFC § 505.
   (G)   Permitting and enforcement.
      (1)   Permits. A valid building permit must be obtained from the City of
Montpelier prior to the commencement of construction, placement, or
installation of any tiny home.
      (2)   Inspections. All new dwelling units are subject to inspection under
the city’s standard building code enforcement and compliance procedures.
      (3)   Non-compliance. Structures found to be in violation of this section
are subject to removal, fines, and other enforcement actions in accordance with
Montpelier's general code enforcement policies.
(Ord. 687, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense.
   (B)   The land owner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council or any other public
official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter or of the state code.
(Prior Code, § 16.36.020) (Ord. 462, passed 6-9-1975)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Definitions
   
153.002   Title and authority
   
153.003   Purpose
   
153.004   Interpretation; application; conflicts
   
153.005   Jurisdiction
   
153.006   Administration
Zoning Districts
   
153.020   Zoning districts established
   
153.021   District regulations and matrix
   
153.022   Official height and area regulations
   
153.023   City impact area
   
153.024   Large animal and animal-free areas
Performance Standards
   
153.035   Purpose
   
153.036   Supplemental yard and height regulations
   
153.037   Supplemental general provisions
   
153.038   Commercial and industrial uses
   
153.039   Unique land uses
   
153.040   Unauthorized uses
   
153.041   Fences
Conditional Uses
   
153.055   General provisions
   
153.056   Administrative procedures
   
153.057   Conditional use permit application
   
153.058   Conditional use standards
   
153.059   Public hearing
   
153.060   Action by the Council
   
153.061   Resubmission of application
   
153.062   Railroad car/cargo containers as storage
Planned Unit Developments
   
153.075   Purpose
   
153.076   Conflict of provisions
   
153.077   Minimum area
   
153.078   Uses permitted
   
153.079   Ownership requirements
   
153.080   Common open space
   
153.081   Utility requirements
   
153.082   Increased residential density
   
153.083   Arrangement of commercial uses
   
153.084   Arrangement of industrial uses
   
153.085   Procedure for approval of a PUD
   
153.086   Pre-application meeting
   
153.087   Application for approval of preliminary development plan
   
153.088   Public notice
   
153.089   Approval in principle by the Commission
   
153.090   Application for approval of final development plan
   
153.091   Recommendation by Commission
   
153.092   Action by the Council
   
153.093   Expiration and extension of approval period
Nonconforming Uses
   
153.105   Intent
   
153.106   Incompatibility of nonconforming uses
   
153.107   Avoidance of undue hardship
   
153.108   Single nonconforming lots of record
   
153.109   Nonconforming lots of record in combination
   
153.110   Nonconforming uses of structures or structures and land in
combination
   
153.111   Repairs and maintenance
   
153.112   Uses under conditional use provisions
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
153.125   General provisions
   
153.126   Standards
   
153.127   Off-street parking designs and dimensions
   
153.128   Parking space requirements
   
153.129   General interpretations
Signs
   
153.140   Purpose
   
153.141   Exemptions
   
153.142   Sign standards and table
   
153.143   Rooftop signs
   
153.144   Setbacks
   
153.145   Sign fees
Appeals and Variances
   
153.160   General provisions
   
153.161   Administrative appeals
   
153.162   Stay of proceedings
   
153.163   Variances
   
153.164   Application and standards for variances
   
153.165   Supplementary conditions and safeguards
   
153.166   Public hearing
   
153.167   Action by the Commission
   
153.168   Notification to applicant
   
153.169   Action by the Council
   
153.170   Request for hearing
Enforcement
   
153.185   Permits required
   
153.186   Permit application contents
   
153.187   Approval of building permits
   
153.188   Building and use permits; records; failure to obtain
   
153.189   Violations
   
153.190   Schedule of fees, charges and expenses
Amendments to Zoning Code
   
153.205   General provisions
   
153.206   Initiation of zoning amendments
   
153.207   Contents of application
   
153.208   Transmittal to Commission
   
153.209   Commission public hearing
   
153.210   Recommendation by Commission
   
153.211   Action by the Council
   
153.212   Resubmission of application
   
153.213   Zoning upon annexation
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
PERSON includes a firm, association, trust, organization, partnership, company
or corporation, as well as an individual. The present tense includes the future
tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes
the singular. The word SHALL is a mandatory requirement and the word MAY is a
permissive requirement. The words USED or OCCUPIED include the words INTENDED,
DESIGNED or ARRANGED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED. The word LOT includes the words
PLOT, PARCEL and TRACT.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.010)
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A use or detached building which is subordinate
to the primary use or structure on the same parcel of land.
   ADMINISTRATOR. An official having knowledge in the principles and practices
of zoning who is appointed by the Council to administer this chapter.
   ADULT MATERIAL. Any material considered obscene as defined by Idaho Code
Title 18, Chapter 41.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A structure designed and constructed to house farm
equipment and implements, crops, poultry and livestock.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land which is primarily devoted to horticulture,
pasturage and/or to the production of livestock, dairy animals, dairy products,
fur-bearing animals, fish, big game, crops, nursery stock, fruit vegetables,
forage, grains, bees or apiary products.
   AIRPORT. Any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either
publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking off of aircraft,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars
and other necessary buildings.
   ASSISTED LIVING CENTER. Housing for people needing assisted care such as the
mentally or physically disabled and the elderly. Such housing does provide
individual apartments with or without kitchens for residents.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. The use of a dwelling as an inn where the residence
remains the primary use.
   BUILDING. Any structure, permanent or temporary, designed or intended for
the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property
of any kind.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance as measured from the highest point
of the roof or building, not including chimney or vane, down to the point
representative of the average finished grade of the land around the perimeter
of the building.
   CLINIC. Single or multiple offices for state-licensed physicians, surgeons,
dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths and other members of the healing arts. A
CLINIC may also include a dispensary primarily to handle merchandise
customarily prescribed by the occupant in connection with his, her or their
practice.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission appointed by the Council.
   CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION or CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION
(CAFO). A lot or facility where the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Animals have been, are or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of 90 consecutive days or more in any 12-month period;
      (2)   Crops, vegetation, forage growth or post-harvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility;
and
      (3)   The lot or facility is designed to confine or actually does confine
as many or more than the numbers of animals specified in any of the following
categories: 700 mature dairy cows; whether milked or dry; 1,000 cattle other
than mature dairy cows or veal calves; 2,500 swine each weighing 55 pounds or
more; 10,000 swine each weighing less than 55 pounds; 500 horses; 10,000 sheep
or lambs; 82,000 chickens.
      (4)   Two or more CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS under common
ownership are considered, for purposes of this definition, to be a single
animal feeding operation if they adjoin each other or if they use a common area
or system for the disposal of wastes.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that may be allowed within a district with a permit,
public hearing process and approval of both the Commission and, in some cases,
the Council, and generally based upon meeting additional conditions imposed by
the foregoing entity/entities.
   CONVENIENCE ESTABLISHMENTS. Businesses which are designed and intended to
serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of the surrounding
population. Such establishments include grocery stores, gas stations for the
sale of motor fuels only, variety stores, drug stores, coin-operated laundry,
beauty shops, barber shops or combination thereof, but do not include repair
garages, automobile sales yards or clothing stores.
   COUNCIL. The City Council.
   DAIRY. A use of land where one or more bovines, sheep or goats are milked
and the operation is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to sell
milk for human consumption.
   DAY CARE/NURSERY SCHOOL. The use of a building, home or similar structure to
provide care, with or without instruction, for more than six children,
excluding children who live on the premises, on a continuing basis, whether for
profit or not. The care of six or fewer children so described shall be
considered a home-based occupation.
   DENSITY. A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
      (1)   GROSS DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of total land
to be developed, including land dedicated to public use.
      (2)   NET DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land devoted
to residential uses only and excluding land dedicated to public use.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof containing two or more rooms
and used for independent living quarters by one family only, with bath and
kitchen facilities permanently installed.
   EASEMENT. Authorization by the property owner for the use by another for a
specified purpose of any designated part of his or her property.
   FAMILY. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or custody
living together in a dwelling unit.
   HOME OCCUPATION OR BUSINESS. A business or occupation that generates no
additional traffic to the home than would be expected by residential use. A
HOME BUSINESS is an occupation that has grown to include additional impacts
such as traffic and employees.
   HOTEL. A building providing visitor or overnight accommodations, including
sleeping rooms, guest registration and lobby areas and all other areas within
the building devoted to the housing of local personnel or hotel equipment and
supplies. The word HOTEL shall also include motels, inns, lodges and
dormitories.
   JUNKYARD. Any land used for a salvaging operation, including, but not
limited to, the storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, discarded
materials and used auto parts. A JUNKYARD includes the collection,
dismantlement, storage or salvage of four or more unlicensed or inoperative
vehicles. This definition excludes uses established entirely within enclosed
buildings and farm machinery in agricultural zoning districts.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats more than
four months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold or
otherwise maintained.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for and
specific to bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking
spaces are filled.
   LOT. The contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any
public road right-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two roads.
   LOT DEPTH. The distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along
the median between the side lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered FRONTAGE.
   LOT LINE. The lines bounding a lot.
   LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF. The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion
of the right-of-way of any public or private street.
   LOT, REVERSE. A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general
pattern in the area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be a CORNER LOT.
   LOT, SUBSTANDARD. A lot or tract of record by deed or plat that does not
comply with minimum area, width or depth requirements currently applicable to
the district in which it is located, but which complied with applicable
requirements when it was placed on record.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot with frontage on more than one street, other than a
corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two
points where the building line or setback line intersects the side lot lines.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSE. A structure transportable in one or more modules which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with
a permanent foundation and footing when connected to required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein. MANUFACTURED HOUSE units shall be designed and constructed
to satisfy the provisions of HUD and other mandated related codes by state and
federal authority and shall not have been manufactured prior to June 1976.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. Processing, manufacturing, assembling, storing,
testing and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and
extensive in character, require large sites, open storage and service areas,
extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and
normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare,
air pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are
usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of
objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust;
operating and storing within enclosed structures and generating little
industrial traffic and no nuisances.
   MOBILE HOME or TRAILER HOME. A vehicle, with or without motive power,
designed to be used for human habitation. Also, a vehicular portable structure
built on a chassis and designed to be used without a permanent foundation for
human habitation not taxed as real property by the county and state.
   MOBILE HOME PARK or CAMPGROUND PARK. A parcel of land under single or
unified ownership or control, within which spaces are rented or used for
occupancy by two or more mobile homes and/or recreational vehicles, subject to
the provisions set forth in this chapter and
Chapter 152.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land existing at the time
of the enactment of this chapter, which conformed to the requirements of the
ordinance in effect at the time such use or structure was initiated and which
does not conform to the current regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
   OPEN SPACE. An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same
lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and any other recreational
facilities that the Commission deems permissive. Streets, parking areas,
structures for habitation and the like shall not be included.
   PERFORMANCE BOND or SURETY BOND. A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the city in the amount of the estimated construction cost
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A development of land which is under unified
control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development
operation or programmed series of stages of development. Subdivision and zoning
regulations are applied to the project as a whole rather than to individual
lots with densities calculated for the entire development.
   PRIMARY USE. The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY. Structures essential to furnishing the public with
electric power, gas, water, water treatment and public services, including
power plants and substations, pumping stations, fire stations and police
stations.
   PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDERS.
      (1)   Any local, state or federal agency, including special districts,
which provide any public facility or service or are responsible for the
protection or management of natural resources that may be affected by a
proposed development.
      (2)   Included are public agencies and private firms responsible for the
provision or maintenance of domestic water, sewer, irrigation water, roads,
public transportation, schools, electricity, cable and natural gas services
within the area affected by the development or that may be expected to utilize
any of the above services.
      (3)   State law specifically states that school districts are potentially
affected PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   QUASI-PUBLIC USE. Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals, museums and other facilities of an educational, religious,
charitable, philanthropic or non-profit nature.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any site or tract of land whereupon two or more
travel trailers are placed, located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a
temporary basis. Skirting is not permitted, and wheels may be removed for
temporary repair only.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public
way.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of agricultural and related products, the majority of which have been
grown on adjacent land.
   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES. A structure containing separate individual
and private storage spaces of varying sizes and used exclusively for storage of
personal items belonging to each tenant.
   SETBACK. The shortest distance from a building on a lot to any property
line, lot line or public road right-of-way adjacent to said lot.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
   STREET. A right-of-way or easement providing for motor vehicular travel.
STREETS include, but are not limited to, highways, thoroughfares, parkways,
roads, avenues, boulevards, lanes and other such terms.
      (1)   ALLEY. Any thoroughfare at least 12 feet wide and not more than 30
feet wide which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and
which affords a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
      (2)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street which has the purpose of carrying fast
and/or heavy traffic.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which has the purpose of carrying
traffic from minor streets to other collector and/or arterial streets.
      (4)   FRONTAGE STREET. A road located parallel to an arterial street/
highway for service to abutting properties for the purpose of controlling
access to the arterial street/highway.
      (5)   MINOR STREET. A street which has the primary purpose of providing
access to abutting properties.
      (6)   PRIVATE STREET. A street that is not accepted for public use or
maintenance.
   STRIP/TOPLESS BAR. Any establishment allowing removal of clothing for
entertainment in a public place.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed which requires permanent location above or
below the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground.
   SUPPLY YARD. A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain and
similar goods.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the requirements of this chapter, based upon
site characteristics, as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, height of
structure, setbacks, parking space or other provisions affecting the size and
shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots or the size of
lots.
   VICINITY MAP. A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the
relationship of the proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
   YARD. The area between any lot line and the setback required thereon.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.020)
§ 153.002 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the zoning ordinance of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.010)
   (B)   Authority. The zoning ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted
pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 65, and Article
12, § 2 of the state Constitution, as amended or subsequently codified.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.030)
§ 153.003 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this zoning ordinance shall be to promote the health, safety,
comfort and general welfare of citizens of the city. It is the further intent
that this chapter shall be consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan and
with any other applicable provisions of state law.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.040)
§ 153.004 INTERPRETATION; APPLICATION; CONFLICTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
ordinances, rules, regulations or resolutions, the most recent shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.050)
§ 153.005 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the incorporated area of the
city and all land within the area of city impact defined by §
153.023. Further, this chapter shall be used in conjunction with the official
zoning map and all other adopted ordinances further defining the boundaries of
the incorporated area of the city and its zoning boundaries as well as the
zoning boundaries of the area of impact.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.060)
§ 153.006 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   General. For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter, an Administrator, staff and Commission are hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.010)
   (B)   Administrator. The Council shall appoint an Administrator to
administer this chapter. The Administrator may be provided with the assistance
of such other persons as the Council may direct. The Administrator shall have
the following duties:
      (1)   Advise interested persons of the zoning ordinance provisions;
      (2)   Investigate all alleged violations of this chapter and initiate
action necessary to correct such violations;
      (3)   Assist the Commission and the Council in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter; and
      (4)   Assist in enforcement of any building code adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.020)
   (C)   Staff.
      (1)   Staff has been historically defined to include the City Attorney,
Building Administrator, City Clerk and Deputy Clerk, with the Deputy Clerk
being principally assigned to assist the Planning and Zoning Commission. For
the purpose of this section, the Deputy Clerk shall have the following duties,
with the City Clerk providing backup when the Deputy Clerk is unavailable:
         (a)   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest,
i.e., public hearings;
         (b)   Aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
         (c)   Assist the Commission in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, taking minutes of the meetings,
organizing and sending out agendas and memos, assuring Commission members have
pertinent information available in a timely manner and any other duties deemed
necessary; and
         (d)   Ensure that all potentially affected public service providers
and property owners within 300 feet are notified of conditional use requests or
any other permit requiring a public hearing.
      (2)   The Building Administrator shall measure required setbacks and
issue building permits based upon applicants meeting setback requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.030)
   (D)   Commission appointed.
      (1)   Term of office.
         (a)   A Planning Commission of the city is created, which Commission
shall consist of seven members to be chosen and appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council. Such members of the Commission must be residents of
the city, providing that one member shall be a nonresident of the city but
residing in the impact area.
         (b)   Members shall have been county residents for two years as per
state law. The term of office for the first appointive members to such
Commission shall be two, four and six years, to be determined by lot, and
thereafter the terms of office for each appointive member shall be six years.
Vacancies occurring, other than expiration of terms, shall be filled by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
         (c)   Any member of the Commission may be removed for cause and is
entitled to an executive session if desired. Should a need for a vote arise, a
majority vote of the voting body shall be mandatory. Recommendations for new
members shall be sought from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Members of the
Commission shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall
serve without compensation.
      (2)   Organization, rules and meetings.
         (a)   The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson and fill such
other offices as it may determine it requires. Election of officers shall be
held annually.
         (b)   One regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than
nine months each year and all meetings shall be open to the public. Members of
the Commission shall be expected to attend approximately 75% of all meetings
and strive to keep absences from being consecutive in an effort to assure a
quorum is available.
         (c)   A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting.
         (d)   Written rules shall be consistent with this chapter and the
pertinent laws of the state for the transaction of business of the Commission
and a written record of meetings, resolutions, findings and determinations
shall be kept, which record shall be a public record.
      (3)   Employees and expenditures. Any expenditure shall be within the
amounts appropriated and set aside by the city for the purposes of the
Commission, with use being subject to the approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.040)
   (E)   Duties of the Commission. For the purpose of this chapter, the
Commission shall have the following duties:
      (1)   Initiate proposed amendments to this chapter and conduct reviews of
the complete zoning ordinance as needed;
      (2)   Review all proposed amendments to this chapter and make
recommendations to the Council;
      (3)   Review all planned unit developments and subdivisions and make
recommendations to the Council;
      (4)   Review conditional use permits as specified in the official
schedule of district regulations under the process outlined in this chapter and
under the conditions as specified, with additional safeguards as will uphold
the intent of this chapter, and make recommendations to the Council;
      (5)   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
Building Administrator;
      (6)   Make recommendations concerning such variances from the terms of
this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the
special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed
and substantial justice done;
      (7)   Seek constantly to cooperate with the County Planning and Zoning
Commission in an effort to develop a coordinated plan for the future
development of the city and the county; and
      (8)   Exercise its powers and duties as outlined in the current
subdivision ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.050)
   (F)   Conflict of interest.
      (1)   The Council appointing Commission members shall provide that the
area and interest within its jurisdiction are broadly represented on the
Commission. A member or employee of the Council or Commission shall not
participate in any proceeding or action when the member or employee or his or
her employer, business partner, business associate or any person related to him
or her by affinity or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic
interest in the procedure or action.
      (2)   Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be
disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or
considered. A knowing violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.060)
Penalty, see §
153.999
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.020 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Zoning districts designated.
      (1)   The following zoning districts are hereby established. For the
interpretation of this chapter, the zoning districts have been formulated to
realize the general purposes as set forth in this chapter. In addition, the
specific purpose of each zoning district shall be as stated.
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, no building or
structure shall be built or materially altered, nor shall land be used, except
in conformance with the zoning district in which it is located. These
designations have been made to implement policies of the city comprehensive
plan. The following names shall apply to zoning and overlay districts created
by this chapter:
District Name (Symbol)
District Name                                  (Symbol)
Agricultural District                          (A)
Area and Service Business District             (C-2)
Central Business District                      (CBD)
Heavy Manufacturing District                   (M-2)
High Density Multi-Family Residential District (R-20)
Light Manufacturing District                   (M-1)
Limited Office District                        (LO)
Low Density Residential District               (R-2)
Medium Density Residential District            (R-6)
Medium Density Residential District            (R-8)
Medium High Density Residential District       (R-12)
Medium Low Density Residential District        (R-4)
Neighborhood Business District                 (C-1)
 
(Prior Code, § 17.16.010)
   (B)    Official zoning map.
      ( 1)   In order to separate land uses and comply with the comprehensive
plan, the city is divided into zoning districts as shown on the official city
zoning map, which is adopted as part of this subchapter.
      ( 2)   The zones shown on the zoning map shall correspond to the zones
described in the text of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.020)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb2676b5f705914a9e21d8dc3cee07ff9e285e9a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-903.png]
   (C)    Purposes and density requirements.
      ( 1)   Agricultural (A) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the A District is to allow continuation of
agricultural areas for agricultural purposes.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: One dwelling unit per
two acres.
      (2)   Low Density Residential (R-2) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-2 District is to preserve areas for the
promotion of a rural appearance.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: Two dwelling units per
one acre.
      (3)   Medium Low Density Residential (R-4) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-4 District is to allow increased density
while maintaining a more rural appearance.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: Four dwelling units per
one acre.
      (4)   Medium Low Density Residential (R-6) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-6 District is to allow for a medium low
density residential district with additional allowances for dwelling units.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: Six dwelling units per
one acre.
      (5)   Medium Density Residential (R-8) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-8 District is to permit the establishment
of a higher density district.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: Eight dwelling units
per one acre.
      (6)   Medium High Density Residential (R-12) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-12 District is to encourage two-family and
multi-family dwellings, but not to the exclusion of single-family dwellings.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: 12 dwelling units per
one acre.
      (7)   High Density Multi-Family Residential (R-20) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the R-20 District is to permit the establishment
of high density multi-family dwellings. Direct access and egress to an arterial
or collector thoroughfare is required.
         (b)   Gross residential density is as follows: 20 dwelling units per
one acre.
      (8)   Limited Office (LO) District.
         (a)   1.   The purpose of the LO District is to permit the
establishment of groupings of professional, medical, administrative, executive,
accounting and similar uses.
            2.   The LO District is also designed to act as a buffer between
other more intense nonresidential uses and high density residential uses.
         (b)   Limited Office District performance standards are as follows:
Must have direct access and egress to an arterial or collector thoroughfare.
      (9)   Neighborhood Business (C-1) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the C-1 District is to permit the establishment
of general business uses for neighborhood convenience.
         (b)   Neighborhood Business District performance standards are as
follows: 30-foot buffers between C-1 and residential districts shall be
required.
      (10)   Area and Service Business (C-2) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the C-2 District is to allow general business and
civic uses that are larger space users and better suited to be located on
arterial thoroughfares such as shopping centers.
         (b)   Area and Service Business District performance standards are as
follows:
            1.   Thirty-foot buffers between C-2; and
            2.   Residential districts shall be required.
      (11)   Central Business (CBD) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the CBD District is to accommodate and encourage
further expansion and renewal in the historical core business area of the
community.
         (b)   Central Business District performance standards are as follows:
30-foot buffers between CBD and residential districts shall be required.
      (12)   Light Manufacturing (M-1) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the M-1 District is to encourage the development
of manufacturing and wholesale business establishments and is designed to act
as a transitional use between heavy manufacturing uses and other less intense
business and residential uses.
         (b)   Light Manufacturing District performance standards are as
follows.
               1.   Establishments shall be free of hazardous or objectionable
elements such as noise, dust, odor, smoke or glare.
               2.   Establishments shall generate little industrial traffic.
      (13)   Heavy Manufacturing (M-2) District.
         (a)   The purpose of the M-2 District is to encourage the development
of major manufacturing, processing and warehousing in areas distanced from
residential districts.
         (b)   Heavy Manufacturing District performance standards are as
follows.
               1.   Industrial permits shall be required.
               2.   Establishments shall have reasonable access to arterial
thoroughfares and/or rail.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.030)
   (D)   Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following shall apply.
      (1)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerline of street lines, highway right-of-way lines, streams, lakes or
other bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary.
      (2)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
      (3)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the
centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map.
      (4)   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said
railroad line.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.040)
§ 153.021 DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MATRIX.
   (A)   Compliance with regulations including permit requirements. The
regulations for each district set forth by this chapter shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, except as hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Building permits shall be required for all structures being
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and shall be in accordance
with city policy, setback requirements and permit fees adopted by city
resolution at any given time and shall be in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
      (2)   Residential permits may include any combination of accessory
buildings, patios, decks and other structures associated with a single-family
dwelling only if the same are included in the original permit application and
said construction or improvements are begun within 180 days from the date the
application is approved.
      (3)   Property uses shall be in compliance with general zoning district
descriptions unless allowed through conditional use and/or consent to variance
through the conditional use/variance process. Any change in use shall be
subject to the same processes and shall be in compliance with this chapter.
      (4)   A septic permit shall be required, subject to the regulations
herein, for any facility requiring pressurized water that does not have access
to the sewer system.
      (5)   Permit fees and/or violation penalties in addition to state law
shall be determined by city resolution.
      (6)   Buildings or other structures erected or altered must meet all
official height and area regulation requirements of this chapter.
      (7)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance
codified in this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the
effective date of said ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements
set forth herein.
      (8)   A change of use of any building structure or land must comply with
district regulations for the zone in which the use is located and may require a
conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.010)
   (B)   Official schedule description.
      (1)   The following matrix comprises the official schedule of district
regulations.
         (a)   “C” indicates a conditional use and requires following the
conditional use process described in this chapter.
         (b)   “P” indicates a permitted use.
         (c)   A blank indicates the use is not allowed under any circumstance.
      (2)   Any land use not specifically mentioned shall be determined by the
Administrator with the approval of the Commission. When several combined land
uses exist or are being proposed, the most extensive and/or intrusive land use
shall be considered as the primary use.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.020)
   (C)   Official schedule matrix.
Land Uses Districts
          A R- 2 R-4 R-6 R-8 R-12 R-20 L O C-1 C- 2 CB D M- 1 M-2
Land Uses               Districts
                        A R- 2 R-4 R-6 R-8 R-12 R-20 L O C-1 C- 2 CB D M- 1 M-2
Agricultural
Agricultural general    P C
Beekeeping              C
Breeding or raising
domestic animals for    C
sale, food or pleasure
CAFO (confined animal
feedlots)
Dairy                   C
Dude ranch              C
Poultry farm
Roadside stand          P                                    P
Commercial
Administration/                                      P       P    P
business offices
Adult material stores                                                       C
Airport
Animal clinic           C                                    C         P    P
Asphalt plant
Assisted living center                               P       P    P
Auto repair/ garage/                                     C   C    C    C    C
body
Auto sales                                               P   P    P    P    P
Auto/truck salvage yard                                                C    C
Bar*                                                         C    C
Bed and breakfast       C C    C   C   C   C    C
Billboards                                                   C
Cabinet shop                                                           P    P
Car wash                                                     P    P    P    P
Chemical storage/                                                      C    C
manufacturing
Concrete batch plant
Contractor, excavation
heavy equipment storage                                                     P
yard
Dance, music, voice                                          P         P    P
Day care center           P    P   C   C   C                 P    C
Drive-in theater        C
Equipment rent/ sales   C                                    P         P    P
yard
Food/beverage                                                          P    P
processing
Fuel yard                                                              C    C
Furniture refinishing                                                  P    P
Garden/greenho use      P C    C
Grain storage                                                               C
Helicopter landing port C                                              C    C
Hotel                                                        P    P
Industrial
Kennel
Laboratory, medical                                  P       P    P
Liquor sales                                                 C    C
Lumber mill                                                                 C
Manufacturing plant                                                    P    P
Meat packing plant                                                     C
Monument works                                                         C    P
Mortuary                C                                    C
Motel                                                        P    P
Outdoor rifle and       C
pistol range
Parking lot
Public utility yard                                          P         P    P
Quarry
Railroad car/cargo      C C    C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C    C    C    C
containers as storage
Railroad yard                                                               P
Recycling plant**                                            C    C    P    P
Rendering plant
Retail stores                                            P   P    P
Riding stables/ schools C
RV park                 C
Salvage/wrecking yard                                                       C
Sanitary landfill
Service station with                                         C    C
gasoline sales
Shop for building                                            P    P    P    P
contractor
Storage (mini)          C                                    P    P**  P    P
Storage (RV and the     C                                    C         P    P
like)
Strip/topless bar                                                           C
Terminal yard, trucking
Tire shop                                                    P    P    P    P
Trailer, manufactured
home, farm implement                                         P    P    P    P
sales
Truck stop              C                                              C    C
Truck/tractor repair                                                   P    P
Truck wash                                                   P         P    P
Warehousing, wholesale                                                 P    P
Institutional
Church                  P P    P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P    P
Hospital                                             P       P    P
Institution/            C                                              C    C
correctional facility
Public schools          C C    C   C   C   C    C
Trade/tech schools                                           P         P    P
Residential
Condos                    P    P   P   P   P    P            P    P
Home occupation         P P    P   P   P   P    P            P    P
Mobile home, double-    P P    P   P   P   P    P
wide
Mobile home park                           C    C            C
Mobile home, single-                            P
wide
Multi-family                   C   C   C   P    P            P    P
Planned unit            C C    C   C   C   C    C
development
Rooming/boarding                           C    C                 C
Single-family           P P    P   P   P   P    P            P    P
Two-family              P P    P   P   P   P    P            P    P
Notes to Table:
   *See strip/topless bar.
   **See performance standards.
 
(Prior Code, § 17.24.030)
(Ord. 620, passed 4-7-2010)
§ 153.022 OFFICIAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.
                        Minimum Yard Requirements              J Minimum Lot
District Maximum Height                                        Area Per
                        Front Rear Interior Side Street Side** Dwelling Unit
                 Minimum Yard Requirements                       J Minimum Lot
District Maximum                         Interior    Street      Area Per
         Height  Front       Rear        Side        Side**      Dwelling Unit

                 60 feet                             45 feet
A        45 feet (from road  30 feet     10 feet     (from road  2 acres
                 centerline)                         centerline
C-1      35 feet 15 feet     5 feet      5 feet      30 feet     2,000 square
                                                                 feet
                             5 foot flat 5 foot flat 5 foot flat
C-2      35 feet 30 feet     roof; 10    roof; 10    roof; 10    1,300 square
                             foot        foot        foot        feet
                             sloped***   sloped***   sloped***
CBD      35 feet 0           0           0           0           500 square
                                                                 feet
LO       35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     2,000 square
                                                                 feet
                             5 foot flat 5 foot flat 5 foot flat
M-1      60 feet 0           roof; 10    roof; 10    roof; 10    0
                             foot        foot        foot
                             sloped***   sloped***   sloped***
                             5 foot flat 5 foot flat 5 foot flat
M-2      60 feet 0           roof; 10    roof; 10    roof; 10    0
                             foot        foot        foot
                             sloped***   sloped***   sloped***
R-2      35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet      30 feet     20,000 square
                                                                 feet
R-4      35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     9,000 square
                                                                 feet
R-6      35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     7,000 square
                                                                 feet
R-8      35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     5,000 square
                                                                 feet
R-12     35 feet 30 feet     20 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     3,500 square
                                                                 feet
R-20     35 feet 20 feet     15 feet     5 feet*     30 feet     2,000 square
                                                                 feet
Notes to Table:
   *Plus 5 feet per story above single story.
   **Street side setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way
unless otherwise indicated.
   ***A sloped roof shall be any roof exceeding 2/12, or 2 feet of rise for 12
feet of run.
Height limitations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water
tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be
placed above the roof level not intended for human occupancy except where the
height of such structures will constitute a hazard to the safe landing and
takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.
If the requirement stated causes the front of the house to be out of line with
the houses on both sides, the house being built may be built to be in line
with the adjacent houses.
 
(Prior Code, § 17.28.010) (Ord. 646, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.023 CITY IMPACT AREA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of establishing as area of city impact is to
identify a logical urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban fringe area
is realizing development pressure that must be planned for in an orderly
manner. Idaho Code § 67-6526 requires cities and counties negotiate an area of
city impact.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.010)
   (B)   Consideration. The following factors were considered by the Planning
Commission and the Council in the establishment of an area of city impact:
      (1)   Trade area;
      (2)   Geographic factors; and
      (3)   Areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed in the future.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.020)
   (C)   Geographic area. The officially adopted geographic area of city impact
is shown on the map in the ordinance codified in this chapter entitled, “Area
of City Impact for the City of Montpelier.”
(Prior Code, § 17.32.030)
   (D)   Applications. The city’s comprehensive plan, zoning and subdivision
ordinances and respective, subsequent amendments as officially adopted by the
city and the county shall apply to the area of city impact within the
unincorporated area of the county. The city and the county will review the
impact agreement annually.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.040)
§ 153.024 LARGE ANIMAL AND ANIMAL-FREE AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to guide the keeping and the
introduction of large animals in the city and to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents.
      (2)   This section does not include dogs, cats, up to 25 hen chickens and
up to 25 rabbits.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.010)
   (B)   Large animal areas. Within the following mapped areas, large animals
may be kept under the following conditions.
      (1)   The property must have a minimum of 10,000 square feet. The square
footage shall not include any combination of the following: The footprint of
the house, the front yard and five feet of the side yards contiguous to the
house.
      (2)   Animals may be kept at a minimum ratio of not more than one animal
unit per 10,000 square feet of land and shall have access to that 10,000 square
feet of land.
      (3)   The following shall be considered one animal unit:
         (a)   One horse (donkey, mule);
         (b)   One cow;
         (c)   Three sheep;
         (d)   Twenty-six chickens (must be caged or confined and are not
required to have access to the 10,000 square feet of land);
         (e)   Twenty-six rabbits (must be caged or confined and are not
required to have access to the 10,000 square feet of land); and
         (f)   Twenty-five pigeons (must be caged or confined and are not
required to have access to the 10,000 square feet of land).
      (4)   Animals not specifically named in divisions (B)(3)(a) through (B)
(3)(f) above shall not be permitted.
      (5)   Any animal not specifically identified in this section is permitted
by conditional use only.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.020)
   (C)   Animal-free areas. Animal-free areas shall be those areas within the
city limits not allowing the keeping of any large animal units.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.030)
   (D)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Owners or managers of any large animal unit(s) shall maintain a
fence adequate to prevent animals from harming neighbors’ property, including
tree and bush foliage within the neighbors’ property but not including
overgrowth.
      (2)   Owners or managers of large animal units shall have a continuous
obligation to maintain adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation
of a nuisance.
      (3)   If the property does not meet the size requirements to house large
animal units, large animal units may not be maintained upon the sale of the
property.
   (E)   Map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb2676b5f705914a9e21d8dc3cee07ff9e285e9a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-905.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 17.36.040)
(Ord. 640, passed 7-3-2013)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 153.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of performance standards is to set specific conditions for
various uses, classification of uses or areas where problems are frequently
encountered and shall include, but are not limited to, the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.010)
§ 153.036 SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In addition to all yard regulations specified in the official schedule of
district regulations and in other sections of this chapter, the following
provisions shall be adhered to.
   (A)   Accessory buildings, detached.
      (1)   Accessory buildings, including portable car shelters, shall not be
located in any required front yard, shall be located ten feet from the
principal structure and shall adhere to side yard requirements.
      (2)   Rear yard setback requirements for detached accessory buildings
shall be reduced to five feet from the rear yard lot line.
   (B)   Architectural projections. Open structures such as porches, canopies,
balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar architectural
projections shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and
shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yard. (Also see
division (C) below.)
   (C)   Front yard projections; porches.
      (1)   Covered but unenclosed porches, when not more than one story high
and which do not extend more than six feet beyond the front walls of the
building (but in no case shall such projection come closer than ten feet from
the setback line), are exempt from the front yard setback provisions and need
not be included in determining front yard setback when requesting the addition
of a porch to an existing home.
      (2)   As of this subchapter date, such described porches shall not be
subject to a conditional use permit, but the owner shall be required to come
before the Planning and Zoning Commission with plans and setback measurements.
New structures will be subject to the architectural projections requirement
above.
   (D)   Front yard restrictions. In any required front yard, no fence or wall
shall be permitted to exceed four feet in height. There shall be no structure
of any kind or open storage of materials.
   (E)   Multi-family dwelling yard requirements. Multi-family dwellings or
complexes with eight or more units must include common areas for playgrounds,
recreation or group usage of at least 100 square feet per unit with a minimum
of 400 square feet.
   (F)   Side and rear yard requirements for nonresidential uses abutting
residential districts.
      (1)   Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located nor conducted
closer than 30 feet to any lot line of a residential district, except that the
minimum yard requirements may be reduced to 50% of the requirement if
acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the Commission is provided.
      (2)   Such screening shall be a masonry or solid fence between four and
eight feet in height, maintained in good condition and free of all advertising
or other signs.
      (3)   Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of
a strip of land not less than 15 feet in width planted with an evergreen hedge
or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet in height at the
time of planting.
   (G)   Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any district nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of three and ten feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets of such corner lots and a line
joining points along said street lines 50 feet from the point of centerline
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.020)
§ 153.037 SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   In addition to all other regulations as specified in this chapter, the
following provisions shall be adhered to.
   (A)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked
or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely
enclosed building or carport. Recreational vehicles may be parked on the lot of
the owner but may not be used as auxiliary housing longer than a period of five
consecutive days. Further, such vehicles and trailers are not allowed to park
within the city right-of-way, except for loading and unloading, which shall be
limited to a maximum of 72 hours.
   (B)   Storage of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers and the like. Any
storage of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, petroleum products or any
similar products (excepting for household use), regardless of zone, are subject
to the city’s wellhead protection plan and are prohibited in rental storage
units. Such storage, handling, manufacturing and disposal shall require
approval by the Fire Chief and must have adequate fire protection.
   (C)   Temporary buildings in conjunction with construction. Construction
site buildings to be used on a temporary basis may be permitted during the
period construction is in progress, but such facilities must be removed upon
completion of the construction and are expected to maintain the setback
requirements for their zoned area.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.030)
§ 153.038 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES.
   (A)   New commercial buildings will require approval from the Fire
Department.
   (B)   No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any
manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining
premises, except that any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and
maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and
objectionable conditions to acceptable limits are established by adhering to
the following performance requirements.
      (1)   Air pollution. Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
      (2)   Enforcement provisions. The Administrator, prior to the issuance of
a building permit, may require the submission of statements and plans
indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in
processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to
acceptable limits and tolerances.
      (3)   Erosion. No erosion by human, wind or water which will carry
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties shall be permitted.
      (4)   Fire hazards.
         (a)   Any activity involving the use or storage or sale or
manufacturing of noxious, flammable or explosive materials, including, but not
limited to, chemicals, pesticides, petroleum products or fertilizers, shall be
protected by adequate firefighting and fire prevention equipment and by such
safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material.
         (b)   Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a
distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved, as specified
in the International Fire Code and the National Safety Foundation, and not less
than 300 feet from a residential zone, a residence, except for an owner’s
residence, a motel or hotel, and shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Will be erected subject to the approval of the Fire Chief;
         (b)   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street
parking facilities subject to the approval of the Fire Chief; and
         (c)   Will comply with the city’s wellhead protection plan.
      (5)   Glare. No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property outside a commercial or manufacturing district or
from any street.
      (6)   Measurement procedures. Methods and procedures for the
determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements
shall conform to the standards set by the Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ).
      (7)   Noise. Objectionable noise, as determined by the Administrator,
which is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise
controlled. Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes are exempt from this requirement.
      (8)   Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activity shall emit
harmful radioactivity at any point or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the
creator of such disturbance.
      (9)   Twenty-four-hour businesses. Businesses operating for 24 hours must
provide buffers such as evergreen trees or walls sufficient to address noise
and light abatement if they abut residential areas.
      (10)   Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
      (11)   Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the
requirements and regulations established by the health authority and shall be
subject to the city’s wellhead protection provisions.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.040)
§ 153.039 UNIQUE LAND USES.
   Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this chapter, and more specifically §
153.038.
   (A)   Animal clinics, animal hospitals and veterinary offices will:
      (1)   Be located at least 300 feet from any residence, including motels
and hotels, excluding the owner’s residence. The Administrator may modify these
requirements if the animals are completely housed in soundproof structures
completely screening them from view of the abutting residential properties; and
      (2)   Comply with all state and local regulations relative to such an
operation and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and
odor.
   (B)   Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases, aboveground and for
resale, will:
      (1)   Be located at least 300 feet from a residential zone; and
      (2)   Be erected and provide suitable loading and unloading spaces and
off-street parking facilities subject to the approval of the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Contractor’s yards will:
      (1)   Be located a minimum distance of 50 feet from any residence, except
for an owner’s residence. Contractors continually storing heavy equipment will
be required to meet a minimum location distance of 150 feet;
      (2)   Have a screening fence around areas utilized for the storage of
equipment; and
      (3)   Be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
   (D)   Day care centers will provide a minimum outside play yard of 100
square feet per child.
   (E)   Drive-in restaurants will:
      (1)   Have a six-foot sight-obscuring fence along the property lines
adjoining a residence;
      (2)   Provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
      (3)   Avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
   (F)   Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging or other earth-moving activity
will:
      (1)   Result in the smallest exposure of bare ground for the shortest
time feasible;
      (2)   Provide temporary ground cover such as mulch;
      (3)   Use diversions, silting, basins, terraces and other methods to trap
sediment;
      (4)   Provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish
trap conditions;
      (5)   Not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainageway;
      (6)   Construct and stabilize sides and bottoms of cuts, fills, channels
and artificial water courses to prevent erosion or soil failure;
      (7)   Not have below-grade excavation, except for drainageways within 50
feet of any lot line or public right-of-way; and
      (8)   Restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than four inches.
   (G)   Helicopter landing sites will require:
      (1)   A minimum acreage of vacant land required will be two acres;
      (2)   Proof of general liability insurance;
      (3)   The approaches to the landing area and zone to be made in such a
manner as to avoid flying over residences in the general vicinity of the
landing zone;
      (4)   All FAA rules and regulations to be adhered to; and
      (5)   If fuel is to be stored on the site for more than 12 hours, it
shall be stored not less than 200 feet from any building. However, it is
recommended fuel not be stored on the site.
   (H)   Home occupations will require the following.
      (1)   Not more than one person other than members of the family residing
on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants.
      (3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one non-illuminated sign not exceeding four square feet in area may
be mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
      (4)   No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation,
and any need for parking shall be limited to the existing driveway.
      (5)   Home occupations shall adhere to the same restrictions existing in
§
153.038.
      (6)   A home occupation that has grown to the definition of a home
business shall be subject to authorized uses described in §
153.040 and may require a conditional use permit.
   (I)   Meat-packing, processing plant and slaughterhouse facilities will:
      (1)   Be located not less than 600 feet from any residence, except from
the owner’s residence. Such facilities shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet
from any property line;
      (2)   Be designed and located with full consideration to their proximity
to adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surround properties and to the
reduction of nuisance factors such as odor;
      (3)   Be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and shall also be subject to the health authority
requirements as to the elimination of waste materials and the maintenance of
water quality control;
      (4)   Be subject to the approval of the City Superintendent; and
      (5)   Conform to the standards set forth in the city’s wellhead
protection plan.
   (J)   Mobile home parks will require the following.
      (1)   Mobile home placement shall be limited to mobile home parks. Mobile
homes are not identified as manufactured or modular homes placed on permanent
foundations. Further mobile homes must be manufactured after 1976.
      (2)   Mobile home parks shall be developed according to standards and
requirements as set forth in the city’s current subdivision ordinance.
   (K)   Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges will:
      (1)   Be designed with a backstop;
      (2)   Be designed to avoid a line of fire directed toward any residence
or business within one mile;
      (3)   Incorporate landscaping compatible with the surrounding
landscaping; and
      (4)   Provide supervision and security measures during periods of use.
   (L)   Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial materials will be
enclosed with a six-foot fence adjoining a residence or residentially zoned
area, whether or not such property is separated by an alleyway or street.
   (M)   Portable shelters, including portable car ports, will be considered
accessory buildings.
   (N)   Recreational vehicle parks and travel trailer parks shall be developed
according to the city’s current subdivision ordinance.
   (O)   Mini-storage in the CBD must be located behind existing businesses
and/or vacant lots in line with existing businesses and not easily visible from
Highway 89.
   (P)   Recycling plants shall be completely enclosed by a solid six-foot high
obscuring fence, and no part of the operation except for customer/employee
parking shall be outside the fence.
   (Q)   Wrecking yards shall be completely enclosed by a solid six-foot high
obscuring fence.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.050)
§ 153.040 UNAUTHORIZED USES.
   (A)   Burial of human remains. Burial of human remains may not take place
outside of a city-recognized and maintained cemetery.
   (B)   CAFO. Confined animal feeding operations shall not be allowed within
city limits or within the city impact area.
   (C)   Kennels. Kennels shall not be allowed within city limits or within the
city impact area, with the exception of the City Animal Shelter.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.060)
§ 153.041 FENCES.
   (A)   Prior to the construction of any fence within the city limits, the
individual(s) seeking to construct said fence must obtain a permit for the
building of the same.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit to construct any fence, the
individual(s) seeking the permit shall pay a fee, if any, that may be adopted
by the action of the Council.
(Ord. 647, passed 5-7-2014)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 153.055 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is recognized all uses will not be addressed in this chapter. The
Planning and Zoning Commission reserves the right to require a conditional use
permit application for any use not addressed herein.
   (B)   The applicant for a conditional use permit shall carry the burden of
proof in showing the proposed use does not conflict with the spirit or purpose
of the comprehensive plan of the city and the standards for conditional use
permits set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Following a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
may recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of a conditional use
permit under the conditions specified in this chapter.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission retains the right to recommend
additional conditions which would mitigate or eliminate any adverse effects on
infrastructure or the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (D)   A conditional use shall not be considered as establishing a binding
precedent to granting other conditional use permits.
   (E)   A conditional use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land
to another.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.010)
§ 153.056 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Prior to submitting an application for a conditional use permit, the
applicant shall complete a pre-application conference with the Administrator
and/or staff to discuss the project and application requirements. Upon the
recommendation of the Administrator and/or staff, the applicant may be required
to present a conceptual plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission before
pursuing the request further. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to impose reasonable conditions as part of the completed application.
These conditions may include bond requirements, letters of approval from
applicable agencies, including, but not limited to, the Fire Department, Police
Department and City Superintendent, and pictures of the site and the like. The
Administrator and/or staff shall send copies of the application to interested
public agencies that may be affected by the proposal for review and comment.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.020)
§ 153.057 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the
Administrator and/or staff by at least one owner or lessee of the property for
which such conditional use is proposed.
   (B)   At minimum, the application shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Description of the existing use;
      (4)   The zoning district;
      (5)   Description of the proposed special use;
      (6)   A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use including the
location of all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and other information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and
requirements of this chapter;
      (7)   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property,
including the effects of noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration;
      (8)   A discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and
      (9)   A statement discussing the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan.
   (C)   If the application is incomplete or insufficiently addressed, the
Administrator and/or staff shall inform the applicant in writing of additional
items necessary to complete the application. The proposed plan shall be legible
and dimensionally accurate within reason. The application shall be complete and
the necessary fees paid prior to conducting a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.030)
§ 153.058 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Commission shall review the facts and circumstances of each
proposed conditional use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing such use at the proposed location:
      (1)   Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general and specific
objectives of the comprehensive plan and the land use ordinance;
      (2)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious with and appropriate to the existing character of the general
vicinity, and that such use will not change the essential character of the same
area;
      (3)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to the existing neighboring
uses;
      (4)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools, or that the persons
or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able
to provide adequately any such services;
      (5)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost
for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      (6)   Will meet with the approval of persons or agencies responsible for
the establishment, regulation and/or maintenance of services to the proposed
use;
      (7)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and/or conditions of operation that would be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare, including but not limited to, excessive
traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors; and
      (8)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property designed so as not
to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares.
   (B)   Depending upon the size of the project, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require studies from the applicant concerning the demographic,
social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed conditional
use.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.040)
§ 153.059 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Prior to granting a conditional use permit, at least one public
hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall
be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Notice shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place
and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice may also be made available
to other newspapers and radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction
for the requested use.
      (2)   Notice shall be provided to property owners and residents within
and 300 feet beyond the external boundaries of the land use being considered as
well as any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed
conditional use as determined by the Commission. When notice is required to 200
or more property owners or residents, three notices in the newspaper of general
circulation may replace mailing notification, provided the third notice appears
ten days prior to the public hearing.
      (3)   Property shall be posted as per state statutes.
      (4)   The Administrator and/or staff shall provide notification to
required public agencies.
      (5)   Any person may comment on the proposal and submit written comments
through the mail or in person. Such comments shall be kept in the case file and
presented at the public hearing.
   (C)   Following public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
deliberate and make its recommendation to the City Council not later than 30
days from the date of the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall outline:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons, facts and findings for its recommendation; and
      (3)   Comments from the public hearing and such conclusions as support
the recommendation for approval, approval with conditions or denial.
   (D)   A copy of the recommendation to the Council along with conditions,
facts and findings and standards used in evaluating the application shall be
sent to the applicant within ten days following deliberation and
recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.050)
§ 153.060 ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Council, following
receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, the Council shall take action or
may schedule its own public hearing on the application. If the application is
approved or approved with modifications, the Council shall direct the
Administrator to issue a conditional use permit listing the conditions
specified by the Council for approval.
   (B)   Prior to granting a conditional use permit, the Council may request
studies from the applicant concerning demographic, social, economic, fiscal and
environmental effects of the proposed special use.
   (C)   Upon granting or denying an application, the Council shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons, facts and findings for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   (D)   In granting any conditional use, the Council may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
will void the conditional use permit.
   (E)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.060) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.061 RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION.
   No application for a conditional use permit on any property which has been
denied by the Council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same
premises for the same purposes within a period of one year from the date of
such final action unless there is an amendment in the comprehensive plan which
resulted from a change in conditions as applying to the specific property under
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.070)
§ 153.062 RAILROAD CAR/CARGO CONTAINERS AS STORAGE.
   (A)   Railroad cars/cargo containers for storage. Railroad cars/cargo
containers may be allowed as a conditional use for use as modular storage
containers in all zones within the incorporated city limits.
   (B)   Conditional use permit required. Any individual or entity desiring to
place a railroad car/cargo container within the incorporated city limits must
first apply for and obtain a conditional use permit; said process of
application and approval of the conditional use permit shall be governed and
controlled by the procedures set forth in §§
153.055 through
153.061.
   (C)   Additional standards for conditional use permit.
      (1)   In addition to meeting the standards and requirements for a
conditional use permit as set forth in §§
153.055 through
153.061, an application to place a railroad car/cargo container must also be
aesthetically pleasing to the surrounding environment and must meet setback
requirements and all building code requirements.
      (2)   A conditional use permit to place a railroad car/cargo container
for storage may contain conditions requiring the painting of the container,
placing a roof or other roof structure over the container or impose other
landscaping requirements.
   (D)   Temporary use.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, railroad cars/
cargo containers may be placed in all zones for temporary use not to exceed 90
days. Prior to placement, any individual or entity desiring to use a railroad
car/cargo container for a temporary use shall first seek and obtain a permit
from the city. The permit shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed 90
days. If additional time is needed prior to the expiration of the initial
permit, the applicant may apply for an additional permit granting a 90-day
extension.
      (2)   Any structure placed for temporary use, pursuant to the terms of
this section, must be placed in a location such that it does not block the site
triangle and meets all reasonable requirements of the Building Inspector prior
to its placement and must not obstruct city streets or alleyways.
(Ord. 620, passed 4-7-2010)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 153.075 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the policy to guide a major development of land and construction
by encouraging planned unit developments (PUD) to achieve the following:
   (A)   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of
housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
   (B)   A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if
permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses, industrial uses and services;
   (C)   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography
and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and prevents
the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
   (D)   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
   (E)   A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation
and community facility objectives of the comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.010)
§ 153.076 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
   Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this
subchapter and those of the other sections of this chapter, the provisions of
this subchapter shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this subchapter shall be
governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.020)
§ 153.077 MINIMUM AREA.
   A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less
than:
   (A)   Three acres for residential development;
   (B)   Five acres for residential uses with subordinate commercial or
industrial uses;
   (C)   Ten acres for commercial uses; and
   (D)   Ten acres for industrial uses.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.030)
§ 153.078 USES PERMITTED.
   All uses that may be allowed within the land use district are permitted
within a PUD. Also, up to 10% of the gross land area may be directed to other
commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public uses that are not allowed
within the land use district; provided, that there is a favorable finding that:
   (A)   The uses are appropriate with the residential uses;
   (B)   The uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the PUD;
   (C)   The uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
   (D)   The uses are located and so designed as to provide direct access to a
collector or an arterial street without creating congestion or traffic hazards;
and
   (E)   A minimum of 50% of the residential development occurs prior to the
development of the related commercial or industrial land uses.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.040)
§ 153.079 OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner or a
person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUD.
The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner
or owners of property included in the development. However, the application may
be filed by the holders of an equitable interest in such property. Before
approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire project shall be
under single ownership or control and legal title must be presented with the
final development plan.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.050)
§ 153.080 COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   A minimum of 15% of the gross land area developed in any residential
PUD project shall be reserved for common open space and recreational facilities
for the residents or users of the area being developed. Sufficient park or open
space facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics suitable
for the proposed development may be required.
   (B)   Existing natural features which add value to residential development
and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees, watercourses,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved in the
design of the development.
   (C)   The required amount of common open space reserved under a PUD shall be
held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area for the use of each
owner who buys property within the development or be dedicated to the public
and retained as common open space for parks, recreation and related uses.
Public utility and similar easements and rights-of-way for watercourses and
other similar channels, wetlands and other non-buildable land are not
acceptable for common open space dedication unless such land or right-of-way is
usable as a trail or other purposes approved by the Commission.
   (D)   The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be
specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan.
   (E)   Every property developed under the PUD approach should be designed to
abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of dwellings is
encouraged. In areas where townhouses are used, there shall be not more than
eight townhouse units in any contiguous group.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.060)
§ 153.081 UTILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Underground utilities, including telephones and electrical systems, are
required within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems which
can be effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement if the
Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character
of the proposed PUD.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.070)
§ 153.082 INCREASED RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.
   (A)   To provide for an incentive for quality PUDs, the Commission may
authorize an increased residential density of up to 15% of the allowable number
of dwelling units.
   (B)   Character, identity and architectural and siting variation
incorporated in a development shall be considered cause for density increases;
provided, that these factors make a substantial contribution to the objectives
of the PUD, which are as follows:
      (1)   Landscaping (a maximum increase of 5%), streetscapes, open spaces
and plazas, use of existing landscaping, pedestrian way treatments and
recreational areas;
      (2)   Siting (a maximum increase of 5%), visual focal points, use of
existing physical features such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation,
circulation pattern, physical environment, variation in building setbacks and
building grouping (such as clustering); and
      (3)   Design features (a maximum increase of 5%), street sections,
architectural styles, harmonious use of materials, parking areas broken by
landscaping features and varied use of housing types.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.080)
§ 153.083 ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL USES.
   (A)   (1)   When PUDs include commercial uses, commercial buildings and
establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and
common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential
accident locations at intersections.
      (2)   Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of
the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
   (B)   The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and
harmonious design of buildings and for adequate and properly arranged
facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other
features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and
efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial
areas. All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a
neat and orderly manner.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.090)
§ 153.084 ARRANGEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL USES.
   (A)   PUDs may include industrial uses if it can be shown that the
development results in a more efficient and desirable use of land.
   (B)   Industrial uses and parcels shall be developed in park-like
surroundings utilizing landscaping and existing woodlands as buffers to screen
lighting, parking areas, loading areas or docks and/or outdoor storage of raw
materials or products. A planned industrial area shall provide for the harmony
of buildings and a compact grouping in order to economize in the provision of
such utility services as are required. Thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum
throughout a planned industrial area in order to reduce through traffic.
   (C)   Project side yards of 40 feet and a rear yard of 50 feet shall be
required if the project is located adjacent to any residential uses. All
intervening spaces between the right-of-way line and project building line and
intervening spaces between buildings, drives, parking areas and improved areas
shall be landscaped with trees and plantings and properly maintained at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.100)
§ 153.085 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A PUD.
   When the PUD also qualifies as a subdivision, the processing of the special
use PUD permit and subdivision application shall occur at the same time. The
granting of a special use permit for a PUD shall require a pre-application, the
submission of a preliminary development plan and approval by the Council of a
final development plan as specified within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.110)
§ 153.086 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   The developer shall meet with the Administrator prior to the submission of
the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss
early and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter, and the criteria
and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the developer with the
comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance and such other
plans and ordinances as deemed appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.120)
§ 153.087 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   An application for preliminary PUD shall be filed with the
Administrator by a property owner or person having existing interest in the
property for which the PUD is proposed.
      (2)   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information filed in triplicate:
         (a)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
         (b)   Name, address and phone number of the registered surveyor,
registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the
preliminary development plan;
         (c)   Legal description of the property;
         (d)   Description of the existing use;
         (e)   The zoning districts;
         (f)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Commission, showing
property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the Commission may require to show the relationship of the PUD to the
comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other community facilities and
services;
         (g)   A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the
Commission showing topography at two-foot intervals; the location and type of
residential, commercial and industrial land uses; layout, dimensions and names
of existing and proposed streets; rights-of-way; utility easements; parks and
community spaces; layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines;
preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage, electricity,
telephone and natural gas, school bus stop areas, solid waste pickup areas,
mail delivery boxes if a central location is to be used and such other
characteristics as the Commission deems necessary;
         (h)   Proposed schedule for the development of the site; and
         (i)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land
in question to initiate the proposed development plan within two years.
   (B)   The application for preliminary PUD shall be accompanied by a written
statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his or her
opinion, the PUD would be in the public interest.
   (C)   Once the Administrator has met with the developer and is satisfied the
applicant is ready to present the plan to the Commission, the developer shall
submit the plan to the Commission for review. If the Commission is in agreement
that basic preparation is in order, the applicant may proceed forward to a
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.130)
§ 153.088 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   The same provision for public hearing and legal notification as required for
conditional use permits shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.140)
§ 153.089 APPROVAL IN PRINCIPLE BY THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Commission shall review
the preliminary development plan to determine if it is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this chapter; whether the proposed development advances
the general welfare of the community and neighborhood and whether the benefits,
combination of various land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses
in the surrounding area justify the deviation from standard district
regulations.
   (B)   (1)   The Commission shall consider the general standards applicable
to conditional use permits and criteria for conditional uses before approving
in principle a preliminary development plan.
      (2)   The approval of a preliminary development plan does not create a
vested right.
   (C)   Based upon evidence presented at the public hearing and review of the
preliminary development plan, the Commission may require additional conditions,
including but the limited to, the following:
      (1)   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      (2)   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      (3)   Controlling the duration of the development;
      (4)   Assuring the development is maintained properly;
      (5)   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      (6)   Requiring provision for on-site public facilities or services;
      (7)   Requiring more restrictive standards than those required by
ordinance;
      (8)   Requiring park or open-space facilities;
      (9)   Requiring the preserving of natural features in the design of
development; and
      (10)   Requiring sign controls.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.150)
§ 153.090 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an
application for approval of the final development plan may be filed with the
Administrator by at least one property owner or person having a presently
existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed.
      (2)   Each application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting
to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application for
the final development plan.
   (B)   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions
and bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography, existing
features of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures,
streets, easements, utility lines and land uses;
      (2)   All the information required on the preliminary development plan,
the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
      (3)   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for:
         (a)   Buildings and streetscapes;
         (b)   Tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses;
         (c)   The number of housing units proposed by type;
         (d)   Estimated residential population by type of housing; and
         (e)   Estimated nonresidential population; anticipated timing for each
unit and standards for height, open space, building density, parking areas,
population density and public improvements proposed for each unit of the
development whenever the applicant proposes an exception from standard zoning
districts or other ordinances governing development.
      (4)   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary,
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations,
waste disposal facilities, street improvements and nature and the extent of
earth work required for site preparation and development;
      (5)   A site plan showing buildings, structures, various functional use
areas, circulation and their relationship;
      (6)   Preliminary building plans including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
      (7)   Landscaping plans; and
      (8)   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements
or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be
commonly owned and maintained.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.160)
§ 153.091 RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days after receipt of the final development plan, the
Commission shall recommend to the Council that the final development plan be
approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved.
      (2)   The Commission shall then transmit all papers constituting the
record and the recommendations to the Council.
   (B)   The Commission shall find that the facts submitted with the
application and presented to it establish the following:
      (1)   The proposed development can be initiated within two years of the
date of approval;
      (2)   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can:
         (a)   Exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment
of sustained desirability and stability; or
         (b)   Adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be
attained and the uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved
under standard district regulations.
      (3)   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD;
      (4)   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
locations proposed;
      (5)   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of the Council;
      (6)   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
      (7)   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan;
      (8)   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed; and
      (9)   Evidence of financial capacity exists and/or a surety bond is in
place to allow for completion of the project and is sufficient to cover
escalating costs.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.170)
§ 153.092 ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of the final recommendation of the
Commission, the Council shall either approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying
the application, the Council shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons, facts and findings for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit
   (B)   The Council may require the developer to provide “as-built” plans
fully implementing all conditions agreed upon in accordance with the final
development plan.
   (C)   If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the
Council shall direct the Administrator to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary
conditions attached thereto.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.180)
§ 153.093 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIOD.
   (A)   The approval of a final development plan for a PUD shall be for a
period not to exceed two years to allow for the preparation and recording of
the required subdivision plat and the development of the project.
   (B)   If no construction has begun within two years after approval is
granted, the approved final development plan shall be void.
   (C)   An extension of the time limit or modification of the approved final
development plan may be approved if the Commission finds that such extension or
modification is not in conflict with the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.190)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 153.105 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to permit nonconforming uses to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this subchapter that nonconforming uses
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as ground for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.010)
§ 153.106 INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts in which such uses are located.
   (B)   A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of
the ordinance codified in this subchapter by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in
the district in which such use is located.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.020)
§ 153.107 AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP.
   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this subchapter or amendment of this
subchapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on
diligently.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.030)
§ 153.108 SINGLE NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   (1)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter or amendment of this subchapter, notwithstanding
the limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous
frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
   (B)   This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those
applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which such lot is located.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.040)
§ 153.109 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN COMBINATION.
   If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage of
the ordinance codified in this subchapter, or amendment of this subchapter, and
if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area:
   (A)   The lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for
the purposes of this subchapter; and
   (B)   No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this
chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with
a width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.050)
§ 153.110 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.
   If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land
in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter, or amendment of this subchapter, that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any additional land
area.
   (C)   (1)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of
a structure, or structure and land, may, upon the issuance of a special use
permit by the Commission, be changed to another nonconforming use.
      (2)   (a)   Provided, that the Commission shall find that the proposed
use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the
existing nonconforming use.
         (b)   In permitting such change, the Commission may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with other provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
   (E)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than two years (except when
government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure
and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, the removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   (G)   When a nonconforming use structure is destroyed by natural disaster or
element out of the owner’s control (i.e., fire, flooding, earthquake and the
like), it may be reconstructed in the same location and with the same
dimensions after obtaining the necessary permits.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.060)
§ 153.111 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of:
      (1)   Walls;
      (2)   Fixtures;
      (3)   Wiring or plumbing; provided, that the cubic content existing when
it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon the order
of such official.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.070)
§ 153.112 USES UNDER CONDITIONAL USE PROVISIONS.
   Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under the
terms of this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district,
but shall, without further action, be considered a conforming use.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.080)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 153.125 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered or
added to unless permanently maintained off-street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any existing
building or structure except as addressed in division (A) above as pertaining
to additions and/or alterations.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.010)
§ 153.126 STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street
parking spaces and areas.
      (1)   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located
on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
      (2)   Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses
shall be located not more than 500 feet from the principal use.
      (3)   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than 300 feet from the principal use.
      (4)   In the Central Business District, parking spaces in front of the
commercial businesses on the street may be counted as off-street parking.
   (B)   Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street
parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. Off-street
loading spaces, if required, for commercial uses shall be provided in
accordance with the following table:
Gross Floor Area (square feet) Quantity and Type
Gross Floor Area (square feet) Quantity and Type
14,000 to 36,000               1-B Type
36,001 to 60,000               2-B Type
60,001 to 100,000              2-B Type plus 1 - A Type
Sizes:
Type A                         Type B
   Length: 65 feet             Length: 35 feet
   Width: 15 feet              Width: 12 feet
 
   (C)   Additional parking requirements shall include the following.
      (1)   Access.
         (a)   Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or alleys shall
be provided, and they shall not be less than 12 feet in width.
         (b)   Further, any parking area shall be designed in such a manner
that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or onto a public or
private street shall be traveling in a forward motion.
         (c)   Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be
located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be
clearly visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway
from a public or private street.
      (2)   ADA. Appropriate parking for handicap accessibility shall be
included in parking design.
      (3)   Location. Off-street loading facilities required for the uses
mentioned shall not project into the public right-of-way or setback area. In no
case shall the required off-street loading berths be part of the area used to
satisfy the off-street parking requirements.
      (4)   Design. Design and location of entrances and exits for required
off-street loading areas shall be subject to review of the Administrator.
      (5)   Maintenance. The owner of property used for parking and/or loading
shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of dust,
trash and other debris.
      (6)   Paving. Parking space requirements, together with driveways, aisles
and other circulation areas, shall be improved with such material to provide a
durable and dust-free surface.
      (7)   Drainage. All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways.
      (8)   Lighting. Any parking area which is intended to be used during non-
daylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any lights
used to illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
away from the adjoining property.
      (9)   Striping. All parking areas with a capacity over 12 vehicles shall
be striped.
      (10)   Screening and/or landscaping.
         (a)   Whenever a parking area is located in or adjacent to a
residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all sides which
adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes by an acceptably
designed wall, fence or planting screen. Such fence, wall or planting screen
shall be not less than four feet in height and shall be maintained in good
condition.
         (b)   The space between such fence, wall or planting screen and the
lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall be
landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen groundcover and maintained in
good condition. In the event that terrain or other natural features are such
that the erection of such fence, wall or planting screen will not serve the
intended purpose, then no such fence, wall or planting screen and landscaping
shall be required.
      (11)   Wheel blocks. Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line,
wheel blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part
of a parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
      (12)   Minimum distance and setbacks. No part of any parking area for
more than ten vehicles shall be closer than 20 feet to any dwelling unit,
school, hospital or other institution for human care located on an adjoining
lot, unless separated by an acceptably designed screen. In no case shall any
part of a parking area by closer than four feet to any established street or
alley right-of-way.
      (13)   Disabled vehicles. The on-street parking of a disabled vehicle
within a residential or commercial district for a period of more than two weeks
shall be prohibited.
      (14)   Joint use. Two or more nonresidential uses may jointly provide and
use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap;
provided, that a written agreement approved by the Administrator shall be filed
with the application for a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.0 20)
§ 153.127 OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGNS AND DIMENSIONS .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb2676b5f705914a9e21d8dc3cee07ff9e285e9a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-907.png]
 
 
                           45 Degrees 60 Degrees 90 Degrees Parallel
Driveway aisle width (feet) 15         19         27         14
Parking space length (feet) 17         20         22         25
Parking space width (feet)  14         11         10         10
 
(Prior Code, § 17.56.030)
§ 153.128 PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following parking space requirements
shall apply:
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required
Type of Use                            Parking Spaces Required
Commercial
Automotive service and repair garages  One for each two gasoline pumps and two
                                       for each service bay
Banks, financial institutions and      One for each 250 square feet of floor
similar uses                           area
Grocery stores, supermarkets           One for each 100 square feet of sales
                                       area
Hotels, motels                         One per each sleeping room plus one for
                                       each four employees
Offices, public or professional        One for each 400 square feet of floor
administration or service buildings    area
Retail stores                          One for each 300 square feet of floor
                                       area
All other types of business or
commercial uses permitted in any       One for each 350 square feet of floor
business district
Institutional
Churches and places of other religious One for each five seats
assembly
Libraries, museums, art galleries      One for each 400 square feet of floor
                                       area
                                       One for every 200 square feet of floor
Medical and dental clinics             area of examination, treating room
                                       office and waiting room
Manufacturing
                                       One for every two employees (on the
All types manufacturing, storage and   largest shift for which the building is
wholesale uses permitted in any        designed) and one for each motor vehicle
manufacturing district                 maintained on the premises or used in
                                       the business
Express, parcel delivery and freight   Same as the above
terminal
Recreational or entertainment
Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters   One for each four seats
and similar uses
                                       Four for each alley or lane plus one
Bowling alleys                         additional space for each 100 square
                                       feet of the area used for restaurant,
                                       cocktail lounge or similar use
Dance floors, skating rinks            One for each 100 square feet of floor
                                       area used for the activity
Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns and One for each 200 square feet of floor
the like                               area
                                       One for each five participants, capacity
Outdoor swimming pools, spas,          plus one for each four seats or one for
gymnasiums, fitness clubs              each 30 square feet of floor area used
                                       for seating purposes, whichever is
                                       greater
Residential
Apartments or multi-family dwellings   Two for each unit
Mobile home parks                      Two for each unit
Rooming/boarding houses                One for each sleeping room or one for
                                       each permanent occupant
Single-family or two-family dwellings  Two for each unit
 
(Prior Code, § 17.56.040)
§ 153.129 GENERAL INTERPRETATIONS.
   In the interpretation of this subchapter, the following shall govern.
   (A)   Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in
this subchapter shall be determined by the Administrator and the Commission.
   (B)   Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number.
   (C)   Where there is an adequate public transit system or where for any
other reason parking demand is unusually low, then the parking space provisions
in §
153.128 may be reduced proportionately by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.050)
SIGNS
§ 153.140 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health, welfare and
safety by regulating signs of all types.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.010)
§ 153.141 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Signs placed or erected by the federal, state, county and city, or
special agency thereof, which are used primarily for regulatory and directory
purposes shall be exempt for this subchapter.
   (B)   Signs painted on the outside walls of commercial buildings or
merchandise pictures, models, products or services which are incorporated as an
integral part of the window display shall be exempt from this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.020)
§ 153.142 SIGN STANDARDS AND TABLE.
   (A)   Adult material signs. Advertisements for businesses selling adult
materials shall be limited to non-illuminated, flat-face signs attached to the
building face, shall contain no further description other than “adult material”
and shall be not larger than six square feet. Any other signage shall be
limited to the store name, which shall contain no obscene, indecent or immoral
innuendo.
   (B)   Community service board for local advertisement. At some future date,
the community may designate a place/places and board/boards for local
advertisement to accommodate local advertisement of yard sales and other
personal sales, events, benefits and other related activities. The location
will be determined in compliance with minimum setback regulations.
   (C)   Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs shall be limited to real estate
and political signage on a general basis. Billboards and other off-premises
signs shall require a conditional use permit.
   (D)   Signs extending over sidewalks. Signs extending over sidewalks shall
be allowed in the CBD (Central Business District), shall not extend five feet
beyond the building face and shall be at least 12 feet above the sidewalk,
measuring from the bottom of the sign.
   (E)   Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs are not allowed in any zoning district
except on a permit basis. Performance standards for sidewalk signs shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Maximum size shall be 30 inches wide by 48 inches tall;
      (2)   Cannot block pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Can be placed not closer than 20 feet to a side street, corner or
any driveway; and
      (4)   Must be removed at the closure of the business day and for snow
removal.
   (F)   Rooftop signs. Rooftop signs which exceed the highest point of a roof
or parapet wall are prohibited.
   (G)   Other signs. All other signs not provided for herein shall be by
conditional use only.
Description Time Limit Maximum Size Maximum Height Number Allowed Permitted
                                                                  Zones
Description   Time Limit    Maximum Size  Maximum Number Allowed Permitted
                                          Height                 Zones
Commercial**  None          See formula   30 feet See formula    Commercial
                            below                 below          zones
Construction  During active 20 square     8 feet  1 per building All
              construction  feet                  site
Home          None          6 square feet 8 feet  1 per          Residential
occupation *                                      residence      zones
Institutional None          60 square     8 feet  1 per frontage C-1, C-2, CBD,
                            feet                                 LO
              60 days                             3 per building
Political     before and 14 9 square feet 8 feet  lot or         All
              days after                          building
              election
Portable      120 days per  30 square     8 feet  1 per site     Commercial
              calendar year feet                                 zones
Real estate   None          6 square feet 8 feet  1 per property All
Notes to Table:
   *Also see performance standards, home occupations.
   **Computation formula: The total square footage of all commercial signage
per site shall not exceed 2.5 times the lineal feet of the building frontage,
or 2 times the lineal feet of the building frontage plus 1.0 times the lot
frontage exclusive of the building frontage, whichever calculation is greater.
Frontage shall be the side of the building facing the street address for the
business.
 
(Prior Code, § 17.60.030) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.143 ROOFTOP SIGNS.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected or maintained which, by use of lights or
illumination, creates an unduly distracting or a hazardous condition to a
motorist, pedestrian or the general public.
   (B)   Further, any illuminated signage shall be directed away from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.040) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.144 SETBACKS.
   All signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet, measured from the inside
portion of the sidewalk and the portion of the sign nearest the sidewalk. In
the absence of a sidewalk, then the sign shall be set back a minimum of ten
feet from the property line measured from the portion of the sign nearest the
property line. Signs in CBD are exempt from this restriction.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.050) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.146 SIGN FEES.
   The fee for constructing, building or placing a sign up to 15 square feet is
$25, and the fee for constructing, building or placing a sign over 15 square
feet is $100.
(Ord. 611, passed 10-15-2008)
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
§ 153.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The Commission shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged
that an error has been made by the Administrator, variances from the terms of
this chapter and requests for hearings from affected persons.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.010)
§ 153.161 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals to the Commission concerning interpretation or administration
of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or
bureau of the legislative authority affected by any decision of the
Administrator.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the decision of the
Administrator by filing with the Administrator and with the Commission a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The
Administrator shall transmit to the Commission all the papers constituting the
record upon which the appeal is based.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.020)
§ 153.162 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless
the Administrator certifies to the Commission, after the notice of appeal is
filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the application, a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining
order, which may be granted by the Commission or by a court based upon an
application, with notice to the Administrator showing due cause.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.030)
§ 153.163 VARIANCES.
   The Commission may recommend in specific cases such variance from the terms
of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring
lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be
granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict
application of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but
may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of
characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the
public interest.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.040)
§ 153.164 APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be considered by
the Commission unless and until a written application for a variance is
submitted to the Administrator and the Commission containing:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Description of the nature of the variance requested; and
      (4)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards.
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
         (b)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter.
         (c)   Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
         (d)   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures
or buildings in the same district.
   (B)   A variance shall not be recommended unless the Commission makes
specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented
to it which support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and
conditions have been met by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.050)
§ 153.165 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   (A)   Under no circumstances shall the Commission recommend an appeal or
variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the
district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this chapter in said district.
   (B)   In recommending any appeal or variance, the Commission may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. A
violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.060) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.166 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Upon receipt of the application for an appeal or a variance, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing, publish notice in a newspaper and give written
notice to all parties as required for conditional use permits.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.070)
§ 153.167 ACTION BY THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing the Commission shall recommend
to either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the request for appeal
or variance.
   (B)   Upon recommendation of an application the Commission shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons, facts and findings for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.080)
§ 153.168 NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT.
   Within ten days after a decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the recommendation on the request.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.090)
§ 153.169 ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Commission, the Council shall
follow procedure as set forth under conditional uses in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.100)
§ 153.170 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   (A)   An AFFECTED PERSON means one having an interest in real property which
may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing a
development, subdivision, conditional use, variance or re-zone.
   (B)   An affected person aggrieved by a decision may within 28 days after
all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances seek judicial review
under the procedures provided by Idaho Code §§ 67-5270 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.110)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.185 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   For any application submitted, a permit shall be required. Additional permit
information is found under §
153.021.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.010) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.186 PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   Permit application forms and content, including expiration dates and
other explanations associated with the permit process, shall be determined by
current city policy. The application for any permit shall be signed by the
owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information
supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state that the
permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun within 180 days.
   (B)   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Existing use;
      (4)   Proposed use;
      (5)   Zoning district;
      (6)   Plan, draw to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of
the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on
the lot, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or
alteration;
      (7)   Building heights;
      (8)   Number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths;
      (9)   Number of dwelling units;
      (10)   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
      (11)   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.020)
§ 153.187 APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Within ten days after the receipt of an application, the
Administrator shall, in a timely manner, either approve or disapprove the
application in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. All building
permits shall, however, be conditional upon commencement of work within 180
days. A copy of the plans marked as approved or disapproved and attested to
same by the Administrator’s signature on such copy will be retained by the
Administrator and filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The Administrator shall issue the permit, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the fact that the
use or alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   If the work described in any building permit has not begun within
180 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall
be revoked by the Administrator, and written notice thereof shall be given to
the persons affected. An extension may be granted after applying to the
Administrator for an additional 180 days from the original expiration date, if
just cause is shown.
   (B)   (1)   No building permit will be issued without the contractor’s
registration number being presented by the contractor, except when the permit
applicant provides evidence to the satisfaction of the Building Official that
the applicant is exempt from the registration requirements, pursuant to Idaho
Code Title 54, Chapter 52, or other applicable law.
      (2)   The permit applicant may appeal the decision of the Building
Official to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 14 days from the decision
of the Building Official. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a
review hearing and shall affirm or deny the decision of the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.030) (Ord. 590, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 153.188 BUILDING AND USE PERMITS; RECORDS; FAILURE TO OBTAIN.
   (A)   The Administrator shall maintain a record of all building permit
applications and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. A year-
end report of all construction, including new, additions and alterations within
the city and city impact area, shall also be maintained and available.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.040)
   (B)   Failure to obtain a required permit shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.050)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.189 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have
occurred, any person, including the Administrator, may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be
filed with the Administrator.
   (B)   The Administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately
investigate and inform the violator by personal contact or by sending a
standard form letter. Such letter will contain causes of violation and a
deadline for the response from the violator. If there is no response, or if the
violation is not remedied by the set date determined by the Administrator, the
City Attorney shall:
      (1)   In addition to taking whatever criminal action is deemed necessary,
take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this chapter; and
      (2)   Report to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days
concerning such action.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.060) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.190 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a
collection procedure for building permits, amendments, appeals, variances,
conditional use permits, plan approvals and any other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this chapter requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the Administrator and/or City Clerk’s
office and may be altered or amended only by the Council. The Planning and
Zoning Commission reserves the right to recommend to the Council any of the
above. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.070)
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE
§ 153.205 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, the Council may, by ordinance after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the Commission and subject to procedures provided
by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries or classification of property.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.010)
§ 153.206 INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter may be initiated in one of the following ways:
   (A)   By adoption of a motion by the Commission;
   (B)   By adoption of a motion by the Council; or
   (C)   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has an existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.020)
§ 153.207 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for amendments to the official zoning map adopted as part of
this chapter shall contain at least the following information:
   (A)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   (B)   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the Council;
   (C)   Present land use;
   (D)   Proposed use;
   (E)   Proposed zoning district;
   (F)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the Administrator may require;
   (G)   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the land being considered;
   (H)   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the comprehensive
plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding
area; and
   (I)   A fee as established by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.030)
§ 153.208 TRANSMITTAL TO COMMISSION.
   Zoning districts shall be amended in the following manner.
   (A)   Requests for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be submitted
to the Commission, which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and
nature of the amendment requested.
   (B)   If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the Commission may recommend and the Council may adopt or reject the ordinance
amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided.
   (C)   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive
plan, the request shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission or,
in its absence, the Council, which shall recommend, and the Council may adopt
or reject, an amendment to the comprehensive plan under the notice and hearing
procedures provided in Idaho Code § 67-6509. After the comprehensive plan has
been amended, the zoning ordinance may then be amended as hereinafter provided
for.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.040)
§ 153.209 COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on
proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of test or map
revisions.
   (A)   Zoning ordinance text amendment. The Commission, prior to recommending
a zoning ordinance text amendment to the Council, shall conduct at least one
public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and
the amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction. Following the Commission’s hearing, if the
Commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public
hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the Commission
forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the Council.
   (B)   Zoning ordinance map amendment. The Commission, prior to recommending
a zoning ordinance map amendment that is in accordance with the comprehensive
plan to the Council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days
prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and the amendment shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. Additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners
and residents within the land being considered and within 300 feet of the
external boundaries of the land being considered; and any additional area that
may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the Commission. When
notice is required to 200 or more property owners or residents, in lieu of the
mail notification, three notices in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation is sufficient; provided, that the third notice appears ten days
prior to the public hearing. Following the Commission’s hearing, if the
Commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public
hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the Commission
forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.050)
§ 153.210 RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION.
   After adequate information has been acquired and the Commission has been
given sufficient time to consider the findings and deliberate, the Commission
shall transmit its recommendation to the Council. The Commission may recommend
that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification
of the amendment requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied.
The Commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for amendments
are in accordance with the comprehensive plan and established goals and
objectives.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.060)
§ 153.211 ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment to
the zoning ordinance as recommended by the Commission, shall conduct at least
one public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the
Commission. Following the Council hearing, if the Council makes a material
change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and
hearing shall be provided before the Council adopts the amendment.
   (B)   The Council shall accept the recommendation of the Commission’s report
unless rejected by a vote of one-half plus one of the members.
   (C)   Upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning ordinance,
the Council shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons, facts and findings for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   (D)   In the event the Council shall approve an amendment, such amendment
shall thereafter be made a part of this chapter upon the preparation and
passage of an ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.070)
§ 153.212 RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION.
   No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied
by the Council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or
with reference to substantially the same premises for the same purpose within a
period of one year from the date of such final action; unless there is an
amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions
as applying to the specific property under consideration.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.080)
§ 153.213 ZONING UPON ANNEXATION.
   (A)   Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the Council shall
request and receive a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission on
the proposed comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance changes for the
unincorporated area.
   (B)   The Commission and the City Council shall follow the notice and
hearing procedures provided in §§
153.055 through
153.061.
   (C)   Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an ordinance of
annexation, the Council shall amend the comprehensive plan and zoning
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 17.72.090)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (C)   The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council or any other public
official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter or the state code.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.060)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
      
IV.   EASEMENTS
      
V.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VI.   LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
506      8-5-1986    Granting 20-year extension to the Intermountain Gas
                     Company for its gas franchise.
560      4-6-1999    Granting cable franchise to Blackstone Cable, LLC.
593      8-2-2006    Granting 20-year extension to the Intermountain Gas
                     Company for its gas franchise.
                    
                    
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Annexing to the city property described as: Commencing at point 1,824.9 feet north from
     7-21-  the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 13 South, Range 44
511  1987   East, Boise Meridian and running thence west 419.76 feet, thence north 363 feet to the
            true point of beginning and running thence east 100 feet, thence south 100 feet, thence
            west 100 feet, thence north 100 feet to the true point of beginning.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Beginning at a point 102 feet west and 13
     11-16- feet north 9 degrees, 45’ west of the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
536  1993   Section 10, Township 13 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, running thence south 9
            degrees, 45’ east 92 feet, thence east 176.5 feet, thence north 109 feet, thence west 7
            degrees, south 192 feet to point of beginning.
535  11-19- Annexing to the city property described as: Certain real and personal property owned by
     1993   Legrand Rigby and Sarah Rigby.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Beginning at a point 104.99 feet north 82
            degrees, 59’ 25” west from the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 10,
     1-16-  Township 13 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, running thence south 9 degrees, 45’ 00”
547  1996   east 92 feet, thence east 176.50 feet, thence north 0 degrees, 49’ 07” west 26.32 feet,
            thence north 81 degrees, 30’ 00” east 13 feet, thence north 81.16 feet, thence south 88
            degrees 08, 55” west 12.49 feet, thence south 84 degrees 32’ 57” west 192.95 feet to
            point of beginning.
585  12-13- Annexing to the city property described as a cemetery, and further described as:
     2005
            (A)   Beginning at the NW corner off the southwest quarter of Section 35, Township 12,
            State Route 44, and running thence south 4 chains and 30 links, thence east 20 chains,
            thence north 4 chains and 30 links, thence west 20 chains to place of beginning.
            (B)   Commencing at the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township
            12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, United States Survey, thence east 20 chains,
            thence north 2 chains 41 links, thence west 22 chains 27 1/2, thence south 2 chains 41
            links, thence east 2 chains 27 1/2 links to the place of beginning.
            (C)   Commencing at a point 80 rods north and 64 rods east of the southwest corner of the
            southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 12, State Route 44, running thence north 80
            rods, thence east 16 rods, thence south 80 rods, thence west 16 rods to place of
            beginning, containing 8 acres more or less.
            (D)   Commencing at a point 4 chains and 30 links south from the northeast corner of the
            southeast quarter of Section 34 in Township 12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, and
            running thence south 25 links, thence west 20 chains, thence north 4 chains and 55 links,
            thence east 17 chains and 72 1/2 links, thence south 4 chains and 30 links, thence east 2
            chains and 27 1/2 links to the place of beginning.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Section 35, Township 12 South, Range 44 East,
            Boise Meridian, and running thence south 1,473 feet, thence east 104 feet to a point
586  12-13- which is 40 feet east of the center of the Irrigation Company Canal Floodway, thence
     2005   meandering in a northeasterly direction 40 feet east of the centerline of the Irrigation
            Company Canal Floodway approximately 1,773 feet to a point which is 869 feet east of the
            point of beginning, and thence 869 feet west to the point of beginning.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Township 12 South, Range 44 East of the Boise
587  12-13- Meridian: All the portion of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
     2005   35, Township 12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, that lies easterly of the city’s
            irrigation north canal.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Township 12 South, Range 44 East of the Boise
588  12-13- Meridian: Section 26, south half of southwest quarter. Except therefrom the north, 16.5
     2005   feet of said south half of southwest quarter. Section 35, north half of northwest
            quarter.
592  6-7-   Annexing to the city property described as: Property of Allen Stephens and Nora B.
     2006   Stephens.
            Annexing to the city property described as: North 8th Street, 11.55 acres legally
            described: Commencing at a point 1,108.5 feet south of the northwest corner of the
597  10-3-  southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 12 South, Range 44 East of the Boise Meridian,
     2007   and running thence south 144.78 feet, thence south 82 degrees 42’ east 1,164.45 feet,
            thence north 583.5 feet, thence west 870 feet, thence south 300 feet, thence west 285
            feet to beginning.
600  3-19-  Annexing to the city property described as: A parcel of land located in the southwest
     2008   quarter of Section 34, Township 12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian.
604  5-7-   Annexing to the city property described as: The Triad Resorts, located north of the
     2008   Industrial Park.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Real property located in the county, and more
     1-7-   particularly described as follows: Township 13 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian,
610  2009   Section 10: Beginning at a point which is 33.35 chains east and 6.82 chains south from
            the northwest corner of said Section 10, and running thence south 40 rods, thence west 20
            rods, thence north 40 rods, thence east 20 rods, to the point of beginning.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Part of southwest quarter of Section 34,
            Township 12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, described as:
            Beginning at point on the west line of said Section 34 point being north 0021’09” at
628  3-16-  1,391.92 feet along the section line from the southwest corner of said Section 34,
     2011   running thence along said west line of Section 34 north 0021’09” west 148.60 feet, thence
            south 8,933’01” east 284.55 feet, thence north 0017’46” west 300.11 feet, thence south
            8,929’ 46” east 849.50 feet, thence south 0002’25” west 581.32 feet, thence north
            8,249’44” west 1,140.05 feet to the point of beginning.
            Annexing to the city property described as: Commencing at the southwest corner of Section
            34, Township 12 South, Range 44 East of the Boise Baseline and Meridian and running
     8-1-   thence north 00’21’09” west 1,320.00 feet along the section line to the south 1/16th
636  2012   section corner common to Sections 33 and 34, said point being the true point of
            beginning, and running thence north 00’21’09” west 71.04 feet along the section line,
            thence south 82’49’44” east 569.10 feet to the 1/16th section line, thence west 564.21
            feet along said 1/16th section line to the point of beginning, containing .046 acres.
            Annexing to the city property described as: A parcel of land located in the northeast
663  10-7-  quarter of northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 13 South, Range 44 East, Boise
     2020   Meridian, and being a part of the parcel of land described in instrument number 230123,
            and containing approximately 4.93 acres.
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res.  Date Passed Description
No.
514        - -         Vacating a portion of an alley lying within the Knutti
                       Addition to the city.
R. 92      9-1-1992    Vacating a portion of an alley lying within Sneddon’s
                       Addition.
R. 94-2-15 2-15-1994   Vacating a portion of Ninth Street in the Gerber
                       Subdivision.
                       Dedicating the right- of-way at Third Street, as
554        9-2-1997    officially recorded beginning at the corner of Boise
                       Street and Third Street and continuing south to the
                       corner of Jefferson and Third Street.
                       Vacating a portion of Washington Street, more fully
                       described as: Commencing at a point 165 feet east from
                       the northwest corner of Lot 4 in Block 2, Original
                       Townsite Survey, as platted and on file in the county,
564        3-21-2000   and running thence east 180 feet, more or less, to a
                       point 15 feet east of the northeast corner of said Lot
                       4 in Block 2, thence north 99 feet, thence west 180
                       feet, more or less, and thence south 99 feet to the
                       place of beginning.
                       Vacating a portion of Fifth Avenue in the Hunter Park
599        11-28-2007  subdivision for the purpose of reducing the width of
                       the street.
                       Designation of Eighth Street from Washington Street
R. 091118  11-11-2009  North to the city limits, and designating Clay Street
                       from Highway 30 to Eighth Street as a major collector
                       highway.
644        9-18-2013   Vacating the alley on the sixth block between Williams
                       Street and Lincoln Street.
                       Vacating and abandoning the public right-of-way located
                       between parcels of property owned by the Church of
667        3-17-2021   Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, commonly known as
                       the alley behind the old City Hall, running east and
                       west, and the short alley east of the old City Hall,
                       running from the road to another alley.
                       Vacating and abandoning property located: Beginning 385
                       feet south of the intersection of the south line of
                       Jefferson Street, and the east line of Tenth Street, in
669        6-16-2021   the city and running south 182 feet, thence west 26.5
                       feet, thence northwesterly 187.5 feet to a point due
                       west of the point or beginning, thence east to point of
                       beginning a distance of 84 feet. Except: All the
                       portion lying within 10th Street.
677        12-6-2023   Vacating the alley between Bear Lake Ice, LLC, and
                       Leonhardt Beverages, LLC.
                      
 
TABLE IV: EASEMENTS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Releasing the recreational easement on the state lands described as:
            Beginning at the SW corner of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township
            12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, thence north along the west line of
            the southeast quarter, 34,550 feet, thence east 556 feet, thence north 755.5
520  4-4-   feet, more or less, to the north line of the southwest quarter said
     1990   southeast quarter of Section 34, thence north 89 degrees, 45’ east along
            said north line 549 feet, thence south 954 feet, more or less, the south
            line of the aforesaid southeast quarter of Section 34, thence west along the
            said south line 820 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning,
            containing 17.24 acres, more or less.
565  10-3-  Creating an encroachment easement on south Third Street for the south half
     2000   of Lot 1, Block 14, original townsite.
 
TABLE V: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     12-14- Rezoning Lot 2 and the south 1/3 of Lot 3, Block 26 of the original Townsite
559  1999   Survey of the city, as platted and of record in the county from Residential 8 (R-
            8) and Limited Office (L-O), to Central Business District (CBD).
     10- -  Rezoning the following described property from Agricultural to Manufacturing-2: A
596  2006   parcel of land located in the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 12 South,
            Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, and further described as follows:
            (A)   Beginning at a point which is south 42 degrees 16’ 21” east 3,572.47 feet
            from the northwest corner of Section 34, said point being on the west right-of-way
            line of State Highway 30 North and marked by a 1/2-inch steel rod, 285.00 feet
            west of the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of Section 34, thence south
            0 degrees 43’ 38” west, 726.83 feet along the west right-of-way line to a 1/2-inch
            steel rod, thence south 89 degrees 58’ 38” west 1,234.41 feet along the north line
            of the North Park Estates Subdivision Addition No. 1, as recorded in the official
            records of Bear Lake County, Idaho, thence north 0 degrees 13’ 06” west 726.65
            feet to a 1/2-inch steel rod set in a fence corner, thence north 89 degrees 56’
            18” east 1,246.40 feet to the point of beginning.
            (B)   Excepting therefrom the following described parcel of land: Beginning at a
            point which is south 42 degrees 16’ 21” east 3,572.47 feet and south 0 degrees,
            43’ 38” west 627.83 feet from the northwest corner of Section 34, thence south 89
            degrees 56’ 38” west 390 feet, thence south 0 degrees 43’ 38” west 99 feet, thence
            north 89 degrees 58’ 38” east 390 feet, thence north 0 degrees 43’ 38” east 90
            feet to the point of beginning.
            (C)   Together with a perpetual easement along the entire front of property
            excepted above, said easement being 60 feet in width along the entire front being
            99 feet in length parallel to U.S. Highway 30 North.
            (D)   Together with an easement over the front of the grantor’s property, which is
            parallel to U.S. Highway 30 North and adjacent to the south boundary of the above-
            described property, said easement shall be 60 feet wide along the entire front of
            said property. Said easement is granted in perpetuity and is intended to be a
            covenant running with the above-described property. Said easement shall be used
            for ingress and egress to said real property for pedestrian or motor vehicle
            traffic by the grantee, its successors and assigns and all agents, employees,
            customers and invitees of the grantee, its successors and assigns.
            Rezoning the Hunter Park subdivision from R-2 to R-4, further described as
            follows: Commencing at a point 1,108.5 feet south of the northwest corner of the
598  11-28- southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 12 South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian,
     2007   and running thence south 144.78 feet, thence south 82 degrees 42’ east 1,164.45
            feet, thence north 583.5, thence west 870 feet, thence south 300 feet, thence west
            285 feet to the point of the beginning.
603  3- -   Rezoning a certain tract of land from M-1 to R-6, further described as follows in
     2008   the appendix to this ordinance.
604  5-7-   Rezoning recently annexed land owned by the Triad Resorts, located north of the
     2008   Industrial Park.
613  4-15-  Rezoning a parcel of property located at 280 South Fourth Street from C-2 to R-2.
     2009
654  4-19-  Rezoning Block 10 of the original townsite (Wells C Stock Park) from R-4 to C-2.
     2017
            Zoning the following newly annexed property from AG to R-4 as: A parcel of land
663  10-7-  located in the northeast quarter of northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 13
     2020   South, Range 44 East, Boise Meridian, and being a part of the parcel of land
            described in instrument number 230123, and containing approximately 4.93 acres.
     6-4-   Rezoning parcel of land located at 276 N 4th in lots 3, 5 & 6 of block 11 of
685  2025   Montpelier Original Townsite (commonly known as the Montpelier Super 8 back
            parking lot) from R-4 to C-2.
           
 
TABLE VI: LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Establishing a Downtown Business Improvement District, the
575      3-4-2003    boundaries of which are described fully in Exhibit A of
                     this ordinance.
576      4-1-2003    Creating Local Improvement District No. 10, described
                     fully in Exhibit A of this ordinance.
                     Establishing a Local Improvement District for a portion of
591      6-7-2006    the 400 block of South Seventh Street, the boundaries of
                     which are described fully in Exhibit A of this ordinance.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Idaho Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IDAHO CODE
Idaho Code Cites Code Section
Idaho Code Cites     Code Section
Title 9, Chapter 3   32.01
9-335(2)             32.01
9-338(8)(a)          32.01
18-111               10.12;
                     50.99
18-113               111.99
Title 18, Chapter 41 153.001
Title 27             152.084
Title 44, Chapter 22 150.03
Title 44, Chapter 25 150.03
Title 49             70.01
49-658(2)            Ch. 73, Schd. I
Title 50, Chapter 9  10.03
Title 50, Chapter 13 152.002;
                     152.028
50-1303              152.001
50-1306              152.004
50-1303              152.067
Title 50, Chapter 27 31.03
50-2703(1)           31.03
54-1001              150.02
54-2601              150.02
Title 54, Chapter 52 153.187
Title 67, Chapter 52 10.12
67-5270 et seq.      153.170
Title 67, Chapter 65 153.002
67-6509              152.089;
                     153.208
67-6526              153.023
                     
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code 2023 Code
1.08.010   10.99
2.04.010   30.01
2.08.010   30.02
2.12.010   31.01
5.04.010   111.01
5.04.020   111.02
5.04.030   111.03
5.04.040   111.04
5.04.050   111.05
5.04.060   111.06
5.04.070   111.07
5.04.090   111.09
5.04.100   111.10
5.04.110   111.99
6.04.010   90.02
6.04.020   90.02
6.04.030   90.02
6.04.040   90.99
8.04.010   92.01
8.04.020   92.02;
           92.99
8.16.010   92.15
8.16.020   92.16
8.16.030   92.17
8.16.040   92.18
8.16.050   92.19
8.16.060   92.20
8.20.010   91.08
8.20.020   91.08
8.20.030   91.99
9.04.010   130.02
9.04.020   130.03
9.04.030   130.04
9.04.040   130.05
9.08.010   130.20
9.08.020   130.21
9.08.030   130.22
9.08.040   130.23
9.08.050   130.24
9.08.060   130.25;
           130.99
10.04.010  70.01
10.04.020  70.02;
           70.99
10.04.030  70.03;
           70.99
10.12.010  72.01
10.12.020  72.02
10.12.030  72.03
10.12.040  72.04
10.12.050  72.05
10.12.060  72.06
10.12.070  72.07
10.12.080  72.08
10.12.090  72.08
10.12.100  72.08
10.12.110  72.09
10.12.120  72.10
10.12.130  72.11
10.12.140  72.11
10.12.150  72.11
10.12.160  Ch. 73, Schd. III
10.12.170  72.99
10.16.010  70.04
10.16.020  70.04
10.16.030  70.99
12.04.010  151.15
12.04.020  151.16
12.04.030  151.16
12.04.040  151.17
12.04.050  151.18
12.04.060  151.19
12.08.010  151.01
12.08.020  151.01
12.08.030  151.99
12.12.010  151.02
12.12.020  151.02
12.12.030  151.99
12.16.010  151.30
12.16.020  151.31
12.16.030  151.32
12.16.040  151.32
12.16.050  151.33
12.16.060  151.34
12.20.010  93.01
12.20.020  93.02
12.20.030  93.99
13.08.010  53.001
13.08.020  53.002
13.08.030  53.015
13.08.040  53.016
13.08.050  53.017
13.08.060  53.018
13.08.070  53.019
13.08.080  53.020
13.08.090  53.021
13.08.100  53.021
13.08.110  53.022
13.08.120  53.023
13.08.130  53.023
13.08.140  53.035
13.08.150  53.036
13.08.160  53.036
13.08.170  53.037
13.08.180  53.038
13.08.190  53.039
13.08.200  53.040
13.08.210  53.041
13.08.220  53.042
13.08.230  53.043
13.08.240  53.044
13.08.250  53.044
13.08.260  53.044
13.08.270  53.045
13.08.280  53.090
13.08.290  53.091
13.08.300  53.092
13.08.310  53.093
13.08.320  53.094
13.08.330  53.095
13.08.340  53.096
13.08.350  53.097
13.08.360  53.098
13.08.370  53.099
13.08.380  53.100
13.08.390  53.101
13.08.400  53.060
13.08.410  53.061
13.08.420  53.062
13.08.430  53.063
13.08.440  53.063
13.08.450  53.075
13.08.460  53.076
13.08.470  53.999
15.04.010  150.20
15.04.020  150.21
15.04.030  150.22
15.04.040  150.23
15.04.050  150.24
15.04.060  150.25
15.04.070  150.26
15.04.080  150.99
16.04.010  152.002
16.04.020  152.002
16.04.030  152.003
16.04.040  152.004
16.04.050  152.005
16.04.060  152.006
16.04.070  152.007
16.08.010  152.001
16.08.020  152.001
16.12.010  152.025
16.12.020  152.026
16.12.030  152.027
16.12.040  152.028
16.16.010  152.040
16.16.020  152.041
16.16.030  152.042
16.16.040  152.043
16.16.050  152.044
16.16.060  152.045
16.16.070  152.046
16.16.080  152.047
16.16.090  152.048
16.16.100  152.049
16.16.110  152.050
16.16.120  152.051
16.16.130  152.052
16.20.010  152.065
16.20.020  152.066
16.20.030  152.067
16.20.040  152.068
16.24.010  152.080
16.24.020  152.081
16.24.030  152.082
16.24.040  152.083
16.24.050  152.084
16.24.060  152.085
16.24.070  152.086
16.24.080  152.087
16.24.090  152.088
16.28.010  152.008
16.28.020  152.008
16.32.010  152.009
16.32.020  152.009
16.32.030  152.009
16.36.010  152.010
16.36.020  152.999
17.04.010  153.002
17.04.030  153.002
17.04.040  153.003
17.04.050  153.004
17.04.060  153.005
17.08.010  153.001
17.08.020  153.001
17.12.010  153.006
17.12.020  153.006
17.12.030  153.006
17.12.040  153.006
17.12.050  153.006
17.12.060  153.006
17.16.010  153.020
17.16.020  153.020
17.16.030  153.020
17.16.040  153.020
17.24.010  153.021
17.24.020  153.021
17.24.030  153.021
17.28.010  153.022
17.32.010  153.023
17.32.020  153.023
17.32.030  153.023
17.32.040  153.023
17.36.010  153.024
17.36.020  153.024
17.36.030  153.024
17.36.040  153.024
17.40.010  153.035
17.40.020  153.036
17.40.030  153.037
17.40.040  153.038
17.40.050  153.039
17.40.060  153.040
17.44.010  153.055
17.44.020  153.056
17.44.030  153.057
17.44.040  153.058
17.44.050  153.059
17.44.060  153.060
17.44.070  153.061
17.48.010  153.075
17.48.020  153.076
17.48.030  153.077
17.48.040  153.078
17.48.050  153.079
17.48.060  153.080
17.48.070  153.081
17.48.080  153.082
17.48.090  153.083
17.48.100  153.084
17.48.110  153.085
17.48.120  153.086
17.48.130  153.087
17.48.140  153.088
17.48.150  153.089
17.48.160  153.090
17.48.170  153.091
17.48.180  153.092
17.48.190  153.093
17.52.010  153.105
17.52.020  153.106
17.52.030  153.107
17.52.040  153.108
17.52.050  153.109
17.52.060  153.110
17.52.070  153.111
17.52.080  153.112
17.56.010  153.125
17.56.020  153.126
17.56.030  153.127
17.56.040  153.128
17.56.050  153.129
17.60.010  153.140
17.60.020  153.141
17.60.030  153.142
17.60.040  153.143
17.60.050  153.144
17.64.010  153.160
17.64.020  153.161
17.64.030  153.162
17.64.040  153.163
17.64.050  153.164
17.64.060  153.165
17.64.070  153.166
17.64.080  153.167
17.64.090  153.168
17.64.100  153.169
17.64.110  153.170
17.68.010  153.185
17.68.020  153.186
17.68.030  153.187
17.68.040  153.188
17.68.050  153.188
17.68.060  153.189
17.68.070  153.190
17.72.010  153.205
17.72.020  153.206
17.72.030  153.207
17.72.040  153.208
17.72.050  153.209
17.72.060  153.210
17.72.070  153.211
17.72.080  153.212
17.72.090  153.213
           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
92       9-1-1992    TSO Table III
94-2-15  2-15-1994   TSO Table III
091118   11-11-2009  TSO Table III
110316   3-16-2011   94.07
140618   6-18-2014   94.07
250423   4-23-2025   51.50,
                     53.094
250716   7-16-2025   51.18;
                     51.99
250716-1 7-16-2025   51.50
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
514      - -         TSO Table III
                     94.01;
93       - -1906     94.02;
                     94.08
                     130.02-
89       12-6-1906   130.05;
                     130.20-
                     130.24
145      5-6-1914    130.25;
                     130.99
275      9-8-1936    92.15-
                     92.20
307      9- -1944    92.01
                     150.20-
312      12-5-1945   150.26;
                     150.99
359      - -1952     31.01
363      9-2-1953    91.03;
                     91.04
371      8-1-1956    151.15-
                     151.19
372      8-1-1956    151.30-
                     151.34
395      4-5-1961    151.02;
                     151.99
441      1-5-1971    70.01
                     72.01-
442      1-19-1971   72.11;
                     72.99;
                     Ch. 73, Schd. III
451      10-4-1972   70.02;
                     70.99
                     152.001-
                     152.010;
                     152.025-
                     152.028;
                     152.040-
462      6-9-1975    152.052;
                     152.065-
                     152.068;
                     152.080-
                     152.088;
                     152.999
474      7-11-1978   91.08;
                     91.99
                     93.01;
482      7-8-1980    93.02;
                     93.99
487      9-23-1980   90.02;
                     90.99
                     90.20;
                     90.21;
488      9-23-1980   90.23;
                     90.26-
                     90.28;
                     90.31
492      3-16-1982   30.01
496      6-21-1983   92.02;
                     92.99
500      1-17-1984   151.01;
                     151.99
501      2-7-1984    130.02
506      8-5-1986    TSO Table I
511      7-21-1987   TSO Table II
516      9-7-1989    30.02
518      12-5-1989   90.29
520      4-4-1990    TSO Table IV
526      9-3-1991    90.26
528      8-18-1992   31.02
530      1-5-1993    90.29
531      5-4-1993    70.03;
                     70.99
                     53.001;
                     53.002;
                     53.015-
                     53.023;
                     53.035-
                     53.045;
532      5-18-1993   53.060-
                     53.063;
                     53.075;
                     53.076;
                     53.090-
                     53.101;
                     53.999
536      11-16-1993  TSO Table II
535      11-19-1993  TSO Table II
537      7-20-1994   70.04;
                     70.99
538      7-20-1994   94.10;
                     94.99
                     111.01-
                     111.07;
542      4-18-1995   111.09;
                     111.10;
                     111.99
547      1-16-1996   TSO Table II
552      4-1-1997    53.064
554      9-2-1997    TSO Table III
                     70.05;
556      5-5-1998    70.99;
                     90.26
560      4-6-1999    TSO Table I
                     50.01-
561      4-20-1999   50.06;
                     50.99
                     71.01-
562      8-17-1999   71.08;
                     71.99
563      8-17-1999   30.02
559      12-14-1999  TSO Table V
564      3-21-2000   TSO Table III
565      10-3-2000   TSO Table IV
                     94.01-
567      4-3-2001    94.10;
                     94.99
                     52.20-
569      5-1-2001    52.24;
                     52.99
574      1-7-2003    Ch. 73, Schd. II
575      3-4-2003    TSO Table VI
576      4-1-2003    TSO Table VI
                     51.01-
                     51.17;
                     51.30-
577      12-9-2003   51.35;
                     51.50-
                     51.52;
                     51.99
579      1-4-2005    52.01-
                     52.07
                     90.21;
                     90.22;
582      3-15-2005   90.24;
                     90.29;
                     90.31
583      3-15-2005   Ch. 73, Schd. IV
585      12-13-2005  TSO Table II
586      12-13-2005  TSO Table II
587      12-13-2005  TSO Table II
588      12-13-2005  TSO Table II
589      1-17-2006   30.01
590      4-5-2006    153.187
591      6-7-2006    TSO Table VI
592      6-7-2006    TSO Table II
593      8-2-2006    TSO Table I
596      10- -2006   TSO Table V
597      10-3-2007   TSO Table II
605      11 - -2007  93.03
598      11-28-2007  TSO Table V
599      11-28-2007  TSO Table III
601      3- -2008    53.003;
                     53.999
603      3- -2008    TSO Table V
600      3-19-2008   TSO Table II
                     90.03-
                     90.07;
602      4-2-2008    90.30;
                     90.32;
                     90.99
604      5-7-2008    TSO Table II;
                     TSO Table V
                     110.01-
607      10-15-2008  110.04;
                     110.99
611      10-15-2008  153.146
610      1-7-2009    TSO Table II
613      4-15-2009   TSO Table V
614      5- -2009    31.03
619      4-7-2010    32.01
620      4-7-2010    153.021;
                     153.062
625      11-2-2010   130.01;
                     130.99
627      1-5-2011    Ch. 73, Schd. I
628      3-16-2011   TSO Table II
632      7-6-2011    111.08;
                     111.99
636      8-1-2012    TSO Table II
640      7-3-2013    153.024
644      9-18-2013   TSO Table III
646      5-7-2014    153.022
647      5-7-2014    153.041
645      6-4-2014    31.02
                     90.01;
                     90.03-
651      6-3-2015    90.08;
                     90.20-
                     90.32;
                     90.99
654      4-19-2017   TSO Table V
659      5-15-2019   152.001;
                     152.026
                     91.01-
660      8-7-2019    91.07;
                     91.99
663      10-7-2020   TSO Table II;
                     TSO Table V
664      10-20-2020  130.40-
                     130.42
667      3-17-2021   TSO Table III
                     150.01-
668      5-5-2021    150.05;
                     150.99
669      6-16-2021   TSO Table III
671      11-17-2021  151.03;
                     151.99
672      3-9-2022    151.03;
                     151.99
675      10-4-2023   51.50;
                     53.094
676      10-4-2023   51.50;
                     53.094
562      11-1-2023   71.03
677      12-6-2023   TSO Table III
678      3-6-2024    Adopting Ordinance
679      6-5-2024    95.01-
                     95.07
680      6-18-2024   53.102
682      4-23-2025   152.027,
                     152.028
683      4-23-2025   93.03
684      5-21-2025   51.52
685      6-4-2025    TSO Table V
687      10-15-2025  152.089
                    
 
 
