CITY CODE
of
PARMA, IDAHO
1990
Code current through:
Ord. 633-2025, passed June 10, 2025; and
Res. 2023-5, passed July 11, 2023
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Parma, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 633-2025, passed June 10, 2025; and resolution 2023-5,
passed July 11, 2023. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that they are in conflict
or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain
whether any particular provision of the code has been amended, superseded or
repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
Ord 635
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PARMA IDAHO, AMENDING PARMA MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE 7,
CHAPTER 3, DEFINING TERMS, SETTING PARK RESERVATION PROCESSES, AMENDING PARK
REGULATIONS, AMENDING CAMPING REGULATIONS, SETTING FEES, RENUMBERING VARIOUS
SECTIONS, PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY, REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES,
PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION AND AN PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, The City Council of the City of Parma finds the need to amend the Park
Use municipal code for the safety, general welfare, proper sanitation of the
parks and defining a reservation process so all may enjoy the Parma Municipal
Parks.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
PARMA, IDAHO, TITLE 7, CHAPTER 3 SHALL BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: That Section 1, Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and
the same hereby is, amended to read as follows:
7-3-1: Park Regulations:   DEFINITIONS:
A.   Hours Of Operation: All Municipal parks of the City, exclusive of the
swimming pool area, shall be opened daily to the public during the hours of
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., except for the park
adjacent to the City Hall, which shall be opened to the public during the hours
of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, and it shall be
unlawful for any person (other than City personnel conducting City business
therein) to occupy or to be present in said parks during any hours which said
parks are not opened to the public.
Park hours shall not apply to duly registered overnight campers who have paid
the necessary fees and who do not violate any of the laws of the State or the
City to camp overnight in the Old Fort Boise Park of the City. 
B.   Camp Regulations:
      1.   Definitions:
ADMINISTRATIVE PARK POLICY: A written policy adopted by resolutions of the
Parma City Council from time to time concerning the administration, regulation
or operation of park amenities.
AMERICA’S PARK: A park amenity located within the City of Parma located at 304
East Starcher Avenue.
CAMP: Temporary occupancy for sleeping or other residential purposes as allowed
by this Code, State and Federal laws, as long as done within an enclosed tent
or recreational vehicle designed for occupancy on a temporary basis.
CITY PARK: A park amenity as a designated park or recreational land or
facilities which are open to or accessible by the public and are owned, leased,
or operated by the City of Parma.
CUBS PARK: A park amenity of playground equipment owned by the City of Parma
adjacent to Parma City Hall at 305 North 3 rd Street.
FLOWERS MEMORIAL COMMUNITY GARDEN: A community garden area located in the 200
block of North 4 th Street, owned by the City of Parma and allowed for
community members to cultivate and harvest garden crops.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Southwest District Health Department.
OLD FORT BOISE PARK: A park amenity located on the east side of Parma along
Highway 95 owned by the City of Parma.
OVERNIGHT CAMPING: the continuous parking of a vehicle from evening until
morning in a recreational vehicle, tent or other device used for the temporary
purposes of dwelling or occupying, residing, inhabiting for a short period of
time.
OVERNIGHT PARKING: the continuous parking of a vehicle from evening until
morning, which is distinct from Overnight Camping as the occupants stay in a
licensed and operable vehicle without setting up an outdoor camp or other
amenities and have only parked for immediate rest.
PARK AMENITY – NONRESERVABLE: A facility or location owned or operated by the
City of Parma which may not be reserved either by implication or omission.
PARK AMENITY: A facility or location owned or operated by the City of Parma and
may be reserved for public or private use by reservation.
PARK FEES: A fee set by the Parma City Council adopted by resolution from time
to time.
PARK IMPACT FEES: A fee as referenced I Title 5A of the City of Parma.
PARK RESERVATION: The process of reserving a park for solely private or public
use by an individual or entity.
PARK SHELTER: An amenity of certain parks available for use by the public.
PARK SPONSOR: An adult person or entity who has applied to reserve a City of
Parma Park facility or amenity.
PARKING AREAS: An area designated for motor vehicles off or on street parking,
whether marked or not.
RAILROAD PARK: A park amenity located on East Main Street primarily between
North 1 st Street and North 3 rd Street, owned by the City of Parma.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit primarily designated as temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping or travel which either has its own power or is
mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper and motor home.
SENIOR CITIZEN: One individual fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
2.   Old Fort Boise Park: Old Fort Boise Park is the only park available for
overnight stays up to the number of parking spaces so designated.
      3.   Fees: The fees to be assessed and collected in advance for each tent
or recreational vehicle shall be as set by resolution of the Council.
      4.   Maximum Stay: No person, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or
tent may camp in Old Fort Boise Park more than seven (7) days, whether
consecutive or not, in any twenty eight (28) day period.
      5.   Failure To Pay Fee: Fees must be paid in advance. Should a tent or
recreational vehicle remain in said park forty eight (48) hours without payment
of fees in advance, the City shall post on said tent or trailer a notice to
remove within twenty four (24) hours. Should said tent or trailer remain in
said park in excess of twenty four (24) hours, the City is given permission and
is authorized to remove said tent or recreational vehicle to a storage facility
of the City's choosing at the sole expense of the owner thereof.
      6.   Additional Rules: The City Council may set other rules and
regulations pertaining to said occupancy by resolution.
SECTION 2: That Section 2, Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and
the same hereby is, amended to read as follows:
7-3-2: LIQUOR PROHIBITED PARK RESERVATIONS:
Except when otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the City Clerk, it shall
be unlawful for any person to have in said person's possession, custody or
control any alcoholic beverage whether beer, wine or liquor in whole or in part
of any kind whatsoever. Permits to be issued pursuant to this section shall be
made on a form and under the conditions, including payment of fees, prescribed
by resolution of the City Council.
A.   Parma City Parks may be reserved private individuals, entities and other
groups for time periods allowed by city code.
B.   Parma city residents may be offered a reduced rate for reserving a park or
park amenity, as set by resolution of the council.
C.   Park Reservations must be applied for at least a week in advance on
prescribed forms supplied by the City Clerk’s Office.
1.   Information on the forms shall include the name of an adult individual who
is responsible for the use of the park which will have contact information
sufficient to identify and contact if there are issues with the, park or
amenity after the reservation.
2.   Individual or entity may be required to supply a bond in the amount set by
Parma City Council from time to time by resolution.
3.   The Parma City Clerk, Public Works Supervisor, Police Chief or Mayor
reserve the right to disallow or revoke a reservation for any purpose and shall
convey the information to the person reserving the park.
D.   Anyone using the parks at any time shall follow Park Regulations as set by
resolution of the City Council as indicated in the park rental agreement
offered by the City of Parma City Staff.
SECTION 3: That Section 3, Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and
the same hereby is, amended to read as follows:
7-3-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTY PARK REGULATIONS:
A.   Hours Of Operation: All Municipal parks of the City, exclusive of the
swimming pool area, shall be opened daily to the public during the hours of
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., and it shall be unlawful
for any person (other than City personnel conducting City business therein) to
occupy or to be present in said parks during any hours which said parks are not
opened to the public.
B.   Park hours shall not apply to duly registered overnight campers who have
paid the necessary fees and who do not violate any of the laws of the State or
the City to camp overnight in the Old Fort Boise Park of the City.
C.   Handheld Metal detecting is permitted within the City of Parma Park
systems, however, any individual disturbing the ground must immediately replace
the divot created. Disturbance can be no deeper than six (6”) inches and no
wider than six (6”) inches in any three-foot (3’) area on the same day. Any
item found of significant value shall be turned over to the City of Parma
Police Department, City Hall or other legal law enforcement offering services
within Canyon County. If after the prescribed time of being unclaimed, the
property will be disposed of in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State
of Idaho.
D.   It shall be unlawful to litter within the City of Parma Park systems any
material on the grounds at any time, with the exception of containers designed
for litter or refuse. Litter shall constitute garbage, organic or unorganic
materials or any other material deemed inappropriate.
SECTION 4: That Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and the same
hereby is, amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION 4, CAMP REGULATIONS, to
read as follows:
7-3-4: CAMP REGULATIONS:
A. Overnight Stays are only allowed at Old Fort Boise Park up to the number of
parking spaces so designated.
B. Fees: The fees to be assessed and collected in advance for each tent or
recreational vehicle. shall be as set by resolution of the Council.
C. Maximum Stay: No person, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or tent may
camp in Old Fort Boise Park more than seven (7) days, whether consecutive or
not, in any twenty-eight (28) day period.  The maximum stay may be extended by
the Parma City Clerk after approval from the Mayor and consultation from the
Public Works Supervisor and Police Chief.
D. Failure To Pay Fee: Fees must be paid in advance. Should a tent or
recreational vehicle remain in said park forty-eight (48) hours without payment
of fees in advance, the City shall post on said tent or trailer a notice to
remove within twenty-four (24) hours. Should said tent or trailer remain in
said park in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, the City is given permission and
is authorized to remove said tent or recreational vehicle to a storage facility
of the City's choosing at the sole expense of the owner thereof.
E. Additional Rules: The City Council may set other rules and regulations
pertaining to said occupancy by resolution.
SECTION 5: That Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and the same
hereby is, amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION 5, PARK AND AMENITY FEES,
to read as follows:
7-3-5: PARK & AMENITY FEES
A.   Use of Fees
Fees collected by the City of Parma shall be turned over to the City Treasury
and used for lawful purposes defined by the City of Parma City Council,
primarily for the maintenance, operation and capital projects for the Parma
Park Systems.
B.   Types of Fees
The following fees may be set by Parma City Council Resolution from time to
time.
A.   Park Use Fees – Varying fee structure for residents, non-residents,
entities, agencies, non-profits may be charged for the sole use of the
applicant.
B.   Clean-up Fees – A clean-up fee may be charged if the park or park amenity
is not left in a condition acceptable by the City of Parma. A clean-up fee may
also be negotiated for an event held in the Parma Park Systems.
C.   Deposit Fee – A deposit fee will be collected at the time of reservation
of park or park amenity, excluding the pool except for large groups. A bond may
be negotiated for an event held in the Parma Park System at the time of
approval.
D.   Pool Use Fees – Varying fee structure for residents, families, senior
citizens, swimming lessons, daily admission, summer passes, non-residents, and
pool rental fees, may be charged.
E.   Camping Fees – Varying fees for Recreational Vehicles, Tents and Shower
Fees
F.   Park Sheltered Area – A Park Shelter Fee may be charged for reservation of
a park sheltered area.
G.   Sewer Dump Fees shall be charged for deposit and disposal of sewage
discharged at the Old Fort Boise Park RV Dump Station. This fee shall be
applied to the Sewer Department for operations, maintenance or capital Sewer
projects identified or as the City of Parma City Council determines from time
to time.
The City Council of the City of Parma may charge fees as set by resolution from
time to time.
SECTION 6: That Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and the same
hereby is, amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION 6, LIQUOR PROHIBITED, to
read as follows:
 
 
7-3-6: LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
Except when otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the City Clerk, it shall
be unlawful for any person to have in said person's possession, custody or
control any alcoholic beverage whether beer, wine or liquor in whole or in part
of any kind whatsoever. Permits to be issued pursuant to this section shall be
made on a form and under the conditions, including payment of fees, prescribed
by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 7: That Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Parma City Code be, and the same
hereby is, amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION 7, VIOLATION AND PENALTY,
to read as follows:
7-3-7: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth
in Parma City Code Section 1-4-1-A.
SECTION 8: Repealing Clause: All ordinances, policies or partes thereof, which
are in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION 9: Severability: Should any part or provision of the ordinance be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a decision shall
not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared be unconstitutional or invalid.
 
Section 10: Effective Date: This ordinance shall be in full force and effective
form the date or passage, publication and signature of the mayor according to
law.
 
Section 11: Codification: The City Clerk is directed to forward the signed and
approved ordinance to the codifier for codification.
 
Approved by the City of Parma Mayor and City Council on this 11th  day of
November 2025 .
 
 
___________________________________   ATTEST: ________________________________
Angie Lee, Mayor                Melissa Klinge, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ord 636
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PARMA, CANYON COUNTY IDAHO AMENDING TITLE 7,
CHAPTER 6 BY ADDING DEFINTIONS IN SECTION 3; BY THE ADDITION OF A NEW SECTION
7-6-20 GOVERNING ABANDONED UTILITY CONNECTIONS FOR NON-PAYMENT; BY THE ADDITON
OF A NEW SECTION 7-6-21 GOVERNING WILL SERVE CONNECTIONS; BY THE ADDTION OF A
NEW SECTION 7-6-22 DESCRIBING REVENUE REQUIREMENT PARTICIPATION; STATING TITLE
AND PURPOSE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCE;
PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Parma finds that historic utility
connections which have gone unused for a certain period of time without payment
into the City’s water system and its revenue bonds have the potential to become
a financial burden on the city’s water and wastewater enterprise funds by
occupying available connection capacity without generating required revenue and
potentially depriving others of connections; and
WHEREAS, these connections are not reflected within the city’s list of serviced
connections for a period of time; and
WHEREAS, the city has determined these connections to be abandoned and may be
capped; and
WHEREAS, these connections, if desired, will require fees to be paid at the
current approved monthly billing rate for the time the connection had been
abandoned or a new connection fee whichever is less expensive; and
WHEREAS the City Council of the City of Parma finds this amendment will help
sustain, protect and help the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to ensure the City’s Water and Wastewater systems
remain financially solvent
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL FO THE CITY OF
PARMA, IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1: That Section 7-6-3 “Definitions” of the Parma city code be, and the
same is hereby amended by the addition of these NEW definitions to that
section:
Historic Abandoned Utility Connections – Water or Sewer utility connections
which are not currently serving a structure or current purpose but may have
water or sewer infrastructure.
No Service Tag – A tag identifying water or sewer infrastructure indicting the
connection is not serviceable without a new connection fee.
Revenue Requirement – a required amount of revenue to ensure the proper amount
of revenue to operate, maintain and fund the water and / or sewer utility
services of the City of Parma, including; Debt, Debt Service, Capital
Improvement Funds, Capacity Funds; Maintenance and Operations, Administrative
Operations, Short Lived Assets, Depreciation and other revenues necessary and
associated with the Parma Water and Sewer Utility.
Will Serve – A promise to a property owner, developer or development to serve
with water and sewer utility services.
Section 2: That Chapter 6, Title 7, Public Ways and Property, of the Parma City
Code be, and the same is hereby amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION 20,
Governing Abandoned Historic Connections, to read as follows:
7-6-20: Governing Abandoned Historic Utility Connections:
A.   Utility Connections Review: City staff shall periodically review the
entirety of the Water and Sewer System records for potential abandoned utility
connections.
B.   Utility Connection Located: When a potentially abandoned utility
connection has been located by city staff, or upon notification to the city of
such potentially abandoned connection by a party with interest in real property
where such connection was purportedly used, city staff will attempt to
determine the last time the connection was actually actively used to deliver
water to the premises.
C.   Property Owner Notification: When a potentially abandoned utility
connection has been located by city staff, city staff will notify the current
property owner of the abandoned connection. and give the property owner the
ability to pay the back amounts owed or if the city still has the ability to
serve the property the owner may pay the current connection costs.
D.   Staff Report: City staff will make an abandoned utility connection report
to the Parma City Council to allow the Parma City Council to decide if the
connection should be declared an Abandoned Utility Connection.
E.   City Council Determination: The City Council will consider the following
factors in determining if the connection is abandoned at a City Council
meeting:
i.   City’s ability to serve the property; for example, if the city has the
available connections
ii.   Property Owner’s desire to continue the service
iii.   Length of time since the property was serviced
iv.   Length of time since the utility monthly bill had been paid
v.   Other objective documented factors, expressed by the City Council at the
time of the meeting
F.   Declaration: If the council determines the connection is abandoned, the
Utility Connections shall be so declared.
G.   Removal: If it is determined by the City Council with concurrence of the
Parma Public Works Supervisor the connection is to be removed, the connection
(s) will be removed.
H.   Removal Costs to be reimbursed: The costs associated with the removal will
be reimbursed to the City Treasury by the property owner and if those costs go
unpaid after thirty days, the City Clerk or City Treasurer is required to file
a Special Assessment against the property to be collected in the same manner as
property taxes with Canyon County.
I.   Reconnection: If reconnection to the property is desired by the property
owner after the declaration, Section 7-6-18 shall apply.
Section 3:  That Chapter 6, Title 7, Public Ways and Property, of the Parma
City Code be, and the same is hereby amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION
21, Governing Will Serve Connections, to read as follows:
7-6-21: Governing Will Serve Connections:
A.   Will Serve Connections Assessment – Connections promised to a property
owner, developer or development will be charged accordingly a fee as set by the
Parma City Council from time to time. The fee will include the prorated annual
debt of the connections and any other associated fees the Parma City Council
chooses to assess after a legal public hearing and process.
B.   Will Serve Connection Assessments not paid – Any connection not paid by
the property owner, developer or development shall follow the process for
abandonment set forth in Title 7, Chapter 6, Section 20.
i.   Unpaid Will Serve Connection will not be allowed to reconnect into the
system until the assessment is paid in full.
ii.   Will Serve Connections if abandoned, may not be available in future and
will be absorbed back into the City’s declining balance of connections.
Section 4:  That Chapter 6, Title 7, Public Ways and Property, of the Parma
City Code, be, and the same is hereby amended by the addition of a NEW SECTION
22, Revenue Participation Requirement, to read as follows:
7-6-22: Revenue Participation Requirement:
A.   Revenue Participation – Each owner of a connection is required to
participate in funding the water and / or sewer utility systems of the City of
Parma to ensure its appropriate revenue requirements are met.
 
Section 5: Repealer: All ordinances, policies or parts thereof, which are in
conflict herewith, are hereby repealed.
Section 6: Severability: Should any part or provision of this ordinance be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a decision shall
not affect the validity of the ordinance as a hole or any part thereof other
than the part declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section 7: Effective Date: This ordinance shall be in full force and effective
from the date or passage, publication and signature of the mayor according to
law.
Section 8: Codification : The City Clerk is directed to forward the signed and
approved ordinances to the codifier for codification.
 
Approved by the City of Parma Mayor and City Council on this 11th day of
November 2025 .
 
___________________________________      ATTEST: ______________________________
Angie Lee, Mayor                   Melissa Klinge, City Clerk
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the CITY OF PARMA MUNICIPAL CODE and it
is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1990 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be offered
in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances
of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances
enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1990 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1990 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council.
(1990 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordi nances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1990 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1990 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. (1990 Code)
The repeal of ordinances as provided shall not affect the tenure of office of
any person holding office at the time when such ordinance takes effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance thereby have the effect of reviving any
ordinance therefor repealed or superseded. (1959 Code § 1-102)
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed and the
provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to
be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor
shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering
any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1990
Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, individually and
without reference to the other, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases
be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed
in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section", and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1990 Code)
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or
permit or authority from the City, shall be construed as giving the City power
to license or permit or authorize such thing being done. (1959 Code §1-103;
1990 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following terms are used in this Code, they shall have such
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY The City of Parma, County of Canyon, State of Idaho.
   CODE The Municipal Code of the City of Parma.
   DAY Any twenty four (24) hour period from midnight to midnight.
   EMPLOYEES Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Parma".
   ENFORCING OFFICER Whenever in this Code it is provided that anything must be
done, to the approval of or subject to the direction of the enforcing officer,
this shall be construed to give such officer only the power to determine
whether the rules and regulations established in this Code have been complied
with and shall not be construed as giving such officer discretionary powers.
   FEE A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   INFRACTION A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed. 1
   KNOWINGLY Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act
or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LAND, REAL ESTATE, and REAL PROPERTY Includes lands, tenements,
hereditaments, water rights, possessory rights and claims.
   LICENSE The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State
law. 2  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by the Idaho
Code or by this City Code, a misdemeanor is punishable by imprisonment in a
County jail not exceeding six (6) months or by a fine not exceeding three
hundred dollars ($300.00), or both. 3
   MONTH A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT and NEGLIGENTLY Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
   OATH Includes "affirmation", and the word "swear" includes the word
"affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in
the term "testify" and every written one in the term "depose".
   OCCUPANT As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICER Includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the
members of such boards and such references as use of the word "Municipality"
shall mean this City "Clerk" or "Treasurer" and others shall mean the City
Clerk or City Treasurer as the case may be applicable.
   OFFICERS Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Parma".
   OFFICIAL TIME Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use
within the Municipality.
   OPERATOR The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
   PROPERTY Includes both real and personal property.
   PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE Includes streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
   QUARTER Any three (3) month period, ending with the last day of March, June,
September and December.
   RETAILER Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities directly to the consumer.
   RIGHT OF WAY The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SHALL/MAY "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is discretionary.
   SIGNATURE Includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument of writing.
   STREET Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT As applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
   WHOLESALER The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or injure another or
to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the Written, in Writing (cont.) written signature
of any person is required by the law to any official or public writing or bond,
it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable
to write, by his proper mark.
   YEAR Any one calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1959 Code §1-103;
1990 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. §18-111.
2 2. I.C. §18-111.
3 3. I.C. §18-113.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalties
1-4-2: Application of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTIES: 1
   A.   Violations Deemed Misdemeanors Unless Otherwise Specified: It shall be
unlawful to violate any provision, requirement, duty or standard contained in
this Code. Any violation of this Code shall be deemed a misdemeanor unless
otherwise specified. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any person
convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Code deemed a
misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any offense and may be confined in the County jail for a period
of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may
be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such
costs as the court may assess.
   B.   License Revocation: When a person is convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code under which a license is required, any license previously
issued to him by the Municipality may be revoked by the court or by the
Municipal governing body. (1959 Code §1-805)
   C.   Violations Deemed Infractions: Except for parking violations, when the
offense is designated as an infraction by any section or provision of this Code
or by State law, it is punishable only by the penalties set forth below or as
provided in State Code and no incarceration may be imposed.
      1.   For a first offense of any provision designated an infraction of
this Code, a fixed penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus any
such costs as the court may assess.
      2.   For second and subsequent infraction violations of this Code, a
fixed penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus any such costs as the
court may assess.
   D.   Parking Violations Deemed Infractions:
      1.   Failure of the owner or operator to pay a parking fine within the
time allotted under Title 10, Chapter 4 of this code shall be an infraction,
the fixed penalty for which shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus any such
costs as the court may assess. (Ord. 597, 7-15-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. §50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this City Code
where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which
is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this City Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this City Code, the City Attorney may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this City Code and there shall be no fine
or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply. (1990 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Term of Office
1-5-2: Powers and Duties
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Mayor shall be elected and hold office for four (4) years and until his
successor is elected and qualified. (Ord. 280, 9-14-65; 1990 code.)
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of
the Municipality, shall:
      1.   Devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as an
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require.
      2.   Preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a vote when
the Council is equally divided, and call special meetings of the Council when
necessary.
      3.   Appoint all officers and employees of the Municipality, subject to
the approval of the Council, and have such other powers as the Council may
prescribe.
      4.   From time to time, provide for the Council such information and
recommend such measures as he may deem beneficial to the Municipality.
      5.   Require that every officer, on the expiration of his term of office
or resignation or removal, deliver to his successor all assets belonging to
such office.
      6.   Perform all other duties required and necessary for the efficient
operation of the business of the Municipality. (1959 Code §1-901; amd. 1990
Code)
   B.   Veto Power: The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any
ordinance passed by the Council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the
Mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of one- half (1/2) plus one of the
members of the full Council, notwithstanding the veto, and should the Mayor
neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance, the same shall become law without his
signature after the next regular meeting of the Council. (1959 Code §1-905;
amd. 1990 Code)
   C.   Signature Required: The Mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his
name officially for and in behalf of the Municipality on all contracts,
documents and papers to which the Municipality is a party, and to require that
the conditions in any instrument are faithfully performed. He may borrow money
on the credit of the Municipality when so authorized by the Council. (1959 Code
§1-902)
   D.   Accounts Of Officers: The Mayor shall have the power to require any
officer of the Municipality to exhibit his accounts or other papers and to make
reports to the Council in writing on any subject matter pertaining to the
office. (1959 Code §1-906)
   E.   Other Powers: The Mayor shall have all other powers provided by State
Statute or by specific provisions of this Code. (1959 Code §1-909)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Meetings Of The Council
1-6-2: Vacancies In Office
1-6-3: Duties
1-6-4: President Of The Council
1-6-1: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The City Council shall hold regular meetings in the
City Hall on the second Tuesday of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord.
588, 11-12-2018, amd. Ord. 605, 2-11-2020, Ord. 608, 10-13-2020)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council may be called by
one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council. (Ord. 337, 8-27-
1974; amd. 1990 Code)
1-6-2: VACANCIES IN OFFICE:
In the event an Office of Councilman shall become vacant, through death,
removal of residence or for any other cause, the Mayor shall appoint, with the
approval of a majority of the Council, a resident of the Municipality to fill
the unexpired portion of the term to serve until the next general election, at
which time the unexpired term shall be filled by regular election. (Ord. 337,
8-27-1974)
1-6-3: DUTIES:
Members of the City Council, the legislative and policy making branch of the
Municipal government, shall devote as much of their time to the duties of their
office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. They shall
attend all meetings of the Council, unless lawfully excused therefrom by the
Mayor or by a majority of the remaining members, and perform all duties by
which the nature of their office they should reasonably perform, such as the
passing of ordinances, resolutions and the investigation and study of work done
or to be done for the Municipality according to the committees upon which they
may be appointed by the Mayor. (Ord. 337, 8-27-74)
1-6-4: PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL:
At the time of taking office, the City Council shall elect one of its members
to be president of the Council and he shall preside at all meetings of the
Council and perform all other duties of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor.
In the absence of both the Mayor and the president, the Council shall elect one
of its members to be acting president of the Council, and the president and
acting president, when occupying the place of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as other members of the Council, and all actions of the president
and acting president, while so acting, shall be binding upon the Council and to
the same extent as if performed by the Mayor. (Ord. 337, 8-27-74)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment of Officers, Terms
1-7-2: Bonds of Officers
1-7-3: Salaries
1-7-4: Impersonating City Officers
1-7-5: Code of Ethics
1-7-5-1: Declaration of Policy
1-7-5-2: Definitions
1-7-5-3: Fair and Equal Treatment
1-7-5-4: Conflict of Interest
1-7-5-5: Enforcement
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, TERMS:
The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Council, appoint a Clerk, Treasurer,
Attorney, Chief of Police, City Engineer, Public Works Supervisor, Building
Inspector and other officers as may be deemed advisable for the efficient
operation of the City. (1959 Code §1-2201; 1990 Code)
1-7-2: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The following officers shall give bonds to the City with two (2) or more
sufficient sureties in the penal sum as follows; provided, surety bonds may be
furnished at the expense of the City in lieu of personal bonds:
City Clerk   $200,000.00
City Treasurer   200,000.00
(1959 Code §1-2203; 1990 Code)
1-7-3: SALARIES:
   A.   Commencing January 1,2024, the salaries of the Mayor and of the members
of the Parma City Council shall be as follows:
      1.   The Mayor shall receive an annual salary in the sum of eleven
thousand four hundred dollars;($11,400.00) paid in 12 equal installments of
$950.00.
      2.   Each member of the Council shall receive an annual salary in the sum
of 1800.dollars ($1800.00; paid in 12 equal installments of $150.00.
      Optional: The Mayor shall receive the same employee benefits as any full-
time employee city employee except for accrual of vacation or sick leave.
   B.   Appointive Officers: The appointive officers of the city shall receive
such compensation for their official duties as the mayor and council shall from
time to time prescribe. (Ord. 329, 8-31-1973; amd. 1990 Code; Ord. 543, 8-13-
2007)
1-7-4: IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer of the municipality; to attempt to impersonate any such officer; or to,
without authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer.
(1959 Code §6-102)
1-7-5: CODE OF ETHICS:
1-7-5-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees
conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed.
The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will
conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and
respect for the government he represents. Such confidence and respect can best
be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or unpaid, and
whether elected or appointed, will uniformly:
   A.   Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality
under the law; and
   B.   Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-
interest and the public interest.
To help public officials and employees achieve these goals is one of the
objectives of the code. The other objective is based on the proposition that no
man can serve two (2) masters, nor should he attempt to do so. Therefore, this
code proposes to relieve him of the impossible task of judging himself.
Instead, the code places judgment in the hands of an impartial board of ethics
1  which will review the facts and measure them by the yardstick of public
morality established by the code. (Ord. 365, 3-27-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 3 of this code.
1-7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this section are hereby defined as follows:
   FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly,
a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or
compensation for his services to the city) to the official or employee or to
any person employing or retaining services of the official or employee.
   OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE: Any person elected or appointed to, or employed or
retained by, any public office or public body of the city whether paid or
unpaid and whether part time or full time.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation, or
any combination thereof.
   PERSONAL INTEREST: Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships
or from close business or political association whether or not any financial
interest is involved.
   PUBLIC BODY: Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or
office of the city. (Ord. 365, 3-27-1978)
1-7-5-3: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
   A.   Impartiality: No official or employee shall grant or make available to
any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which
is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
   B.   Use Of Public Property: No official or employee shall request, use or
permit the use of any publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle,
equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private
advantage of himself or any other person. This rule shall not be deemed to
prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use
of publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, material,
labor or service which it is the general practice to make available to the
public at large or which are provided as a matter of stated public policy for
the use of public officials and employees in the conduct of official business.
(Ord. 365, 3-27-1978)
1-7-5-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Public Disclosure Of Financial Or Personal Interest:
      1.   No official or employee, either on his own behalf or any other
person, shall have any financial or public interest in any business or
transaction with any public body unless he shall first make full public
disclosures of the nature and extent of such interest.
      2.   Whenever the performance of his official duties shall require any
official or employee to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his
financial or personal interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and
extent of such interest and disqualify himself from participating in the
deliberation as well as in the voting.
      3.   No official or employee shall engage in private employment with, or
render services for, any private person who has business transactions with any
public body unless he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and
extent of such employment or services.
   B.   Representation Of Private Persons: No official or employee shall appear
on behalf of any private person, other than himself, before any public body in
the City.
   C.   Receiving Gifts: No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether
in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered
or given to him if he were not an official or employee.
   D.   Disclosing Confidential Information: No official or employee shall,
without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction,
disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or
employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the
City.
   E.   Nepotism: No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment any
person related to him by blood or marriage to any clerkship, office, position,
employment or duty when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid
out of public funds as provided in section 59-701, Idaho Code. (Ord. 365, 3-27-
1978)
1-7-5-5: ENFORCEMENT:
In the event that the Board of Ethics shall, under the provisions of
Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code, make a determination that the conduct of any
official or employee was improper, the governing body, based upon the written
findings, conclusions and determinations of the Board of Ethics, may institute
appropriate action for censure, suspension or removal from office of said
official or employee. (Ord. 365, 3-27-1978)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment; Term of Office
1-7A-2: Duties
1-7A-3: Claims
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
City Council. He shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless
sooner removed. (1959 Code §1-1101; 1990 Code)
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any
other department or office, the Clerk shall have supervision, control and
responsibility of all of the records of the Municipality. He shall serve as
Clerk of the governing body and perform such other duties of a like nature as
shall be required by that body. (1959 Code §1-1102)
   B.   Records of the Governing Body: The Clerk shall be responsible for the
recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the governing
body and shall have published all proceedings, legal notices, ordinances and
resolutions that are required to be published by this Code or by State statute.
(1959 Code §1-1103)
   C.   Recording of Ordinances: The Clerk shall record in full, uniformly and
permanently, all ordinances and shall authenticate the same. (1959 Code §1-
1104)
   D.   Maintain Election Records: The Clerk shall keep and maintain all
election records and have custody of all property used in connection with
elections. (1959 Code §1-1105)
   E.   Notify of Term Expirations: The Clerk shall notify the appointing
authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member of any
board or commission at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the
term. (1959 Code §1-1106)
   F.   Custodian of Official Seal: The Clerk shall be the custodian of the
Official Seal of the Municipality. 1  (1959 Code §1-1107)
   G.   Furnish Copies of Records: The Clerk shall furnish to any member of the
governing body a certified copy of any record or document in his custody and he
may furnish such a copy to any other person upon payment of a fee to be
determined by the governing body. (1959 Code §1-1108)
   H.   Collections to Treasurer: Within ten (10) days after the first day of
each month the Clerk shall turn over to the Treasurer all funds collected by
him during the preceding month. (1959 Code §1-1109)
   I.   Issue and Keep Record of Licenses: In all cases where the duty is not
expressly charged to any other department or office, the Clerk shall issue all
licenses in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A record of all
licenses issued, including the name of the person to whom issued, the amount of
the license fee, and the purpose of the license shall be kept by the Clerk.
(1959 Code §1-1110)
   J.   Record of Bonds: The Clerk shall keep a complete record of all
outstanding bonds of the Municipality and report such record regularly to the
governing body. (1959 Code §1-111)
   K.   Warrants Issued: The Clerk shall countersign all warrants and keep a
"Warrant Register and Abstract of Expenditures" showing the number and amount
of warrants issued and the person to whom issued, the date redeemed, the
interest paid and the several funds against which each of said warrants is
drawn. (1959 Code §1-1112)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-8-1C of this Title.
1-7A-3: CLAIMS:
All claims against the Municipality must be filed in writing with the Clerk.
(1959 Code §1-1113; 1990 Code)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment; Term of Office
1-7B-2: Duties
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Council. He shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner
removed. (1959 Code §1-1801; 1990 Code)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any
other department or office, the Treasurer shall act to promote, secure and
preserve the financial and property interests of the Municipality. (1959 Code
§1-1802; 1990 Code)
   B.   Account of Moneys: The Treasurer shall keep in proper books a full and
accurate account of all the moneys received and disbursed by him in behalf of
the Municipality, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom
received and to whom disbursed, on what account received and disbursed and how
paid. (1959 Code §1-1803)
   C.   Custody of Moneys: The Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all
moneys paid to the Municipality and shall disburse moneys upon the official
warrant of the Municipality when so ordered by the governing body. (1959 Code
§1-1804)
   D.   Collection of Moneys and Fees: The Treasurer shall demand and receive
all moneys and fees owing to the Municipality whenever any person is indebted
to the Municipality in any manner, and the means of collection of such debt is
not otherwise provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by
other methods, he shall report the same to the Attorney for prosecution. (1959
Code §1-1805)
   E.   Warrants:
      1.   Payment of Warrants: Warrants shall be paid by the Treasurer from
funds available in the order in which the warrants are presented for payment.
When a warrant is presented for payment and no funds are available, the
Treasurer shall plainly mark the warrant "Not Paid for Want of Funds" and enter
the same in a book maintained for such purpose which shall be known as the
"Warrant Register".
Warrants shall be called for payment in the order in which they were presented
whenever sufficient funds are available to the Treasurer to make such payment.
(1959 Code §1-1806)
      2.   Cancellation of Warrants: The Treasurer shall cancel all warrants
and other evidence of debt against the Municipality, whenever paid by him, by
writing or stamping across the face thereof the words "Paid by the Treasurer"
with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. These warrants and
evidences of debt, so cancelled, shall be delivered immediately to the Clerk.
(1959 Code §1-1807)
   F.   Reports:
      1.   Monthly Report: The Treasurer shall make a detailed report to the
governing body during the first meeting of each month showing the business of
his office during the month preceding, showing the balance on hand to the
credit of different funds, the amounts received during the month and on what
account, together with such information as may be required by the governing
body. (1959 Code §1-1808; 1990 Code)
      2.   Quarterly Report: The Treasurer shall cause to be published, for at
least one insertion in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality,
a full statement of the receipts and expenditures of the Municipality showing
sources of revenue and disposition of funds. This quarterly report shall be
published January 31, April 30, July 31 and for the final quarter, thirty (30)
days from completion of the annual audit. (1959 Code §1809; 1990 Code)
   G.   Delivery to Successor: The Treasurer shall deliver to his successor in
office all material, records and resources of the office. (1959 Code §1-1810)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment; Term of Office
1-7C-2: Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Council. He shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner
removed. (1959 Code §1-1201; 1990 Code)
1-7C-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Legal Advisor: The Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the
Municipality and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the
Municipality, whenever requested to do so by any Municipal official. Upon
request by the Mayor, or by the Council, he shall reduce any such opinion to
writing. (1959 Code §1-1204)
   B.   Special Assessments and Condemnation Proceedings: It shall be the duty
of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings
and condemnation proceedings. (1959 Code §1-1205)
   C.   Ordinance and Document Preparation: It shall be the duty of the
Attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other
documents or instruments to which the Municipality may be a party and upon
request of the Council, to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the
power of the Municipality. (1959 Code §1-1206)
   D.   Suits and Actions: The Attorney shall prosecute or defend all suits at
law or equity to which the Municipality may be a party, or in which it may be
interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the
Municipality on behalf of the Municipality, or in the capacity of such person
as an officer of the Municipality. The Attorney shall prosecute those
violations of County or City ordinances, State traffic infractions and State
misdemeanors committed within the Municipal limits. (1959 Code §1-1202; 1990
Code)
   E.   Enforcement of Judgments: It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see
to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in
favor of the Municipality and all similar interlocutory orders. (1959 Code §1-
1203)
ARTICLE D. PUBLIC WORKS SUPERVISOR
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment
1-7D-2: Duties
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor may appoint, with the consent of the Council, a Public Works
Supervisor who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment or until
such time as he shall be removed by the Mayor. (1959 Code **S**1-1601; 1990
Code)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
The Public Works Supervisor shall have charge of all City work as follows:
   A.   Streets and Alleys: He shall supervise the grading, surfacing repairs
and maintenance of all streets and alleys.
   B.   Sewer: He shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all sewer
lines in the City, except the installation of sewer projects which are
accomplished by contract.
   C.   Water: He shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all water
mains and water services, except the installation of water mains so
accomplished by contract.
   D.   Equipment: He shall have charge of and supervise the repair and up-keep
of all City equipment.
   E.   Employment and Supervision: He may employ, with the consent of the
Mayor and Council, such help as needed to carry on the work of the City, such
help to be directly under his supervision.
   F.   Reports Required: The Supervisor shall present to the Council at its
regular meeting each month, a written report of the work accomplished the
preceding month and also, as far as can be foreseen, the work planned for the
current month.
   G.   Other Duties: The Supervisor shall be responsible for the
accomplishment of such other work of the City as the Mayor and Council may from
time to time assign him. (1959 Code **S**1-1602; 1990 Code)
ARTICLE E. BUILDING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Appointment and Term
1-7E-2: Duties
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint a Building Inspector
who shall hold office during the term of and under the conditions prescribed
for appointive officers. (1959 Code)
1-7E-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect and pass upon all
applications for building permits, in accordance with all regulations and laws
now in force or that may hereafter be enacted by the City, governing the
erection of buildings, structures or the improvements and alterations of any
building or structure now existing or that may hereafter be erected. (1959
Code)
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Corporate Seal
1-8-2: Official Newspaper
1-8-3: City Depositories
1-8-4: Request For Public Hearing; Filing Fee
1-8-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Design: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with
inner and outer circles of rope design. The outer circle shall be one and
three-fourths inches (13/4") in diameter and the inner circle shall be one and
one-fourth inches (11/4") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper portion of
space between the two (2) circles the words "City of Parma" in Gothic style
type, and upon the lower portion of the space between the two (2) circles the
words "Canyon County, Idaho", in Gothic style type. Upon the space within the
inner circle and on the upper portion thereof shall be the word "Incorporated"
in Gothic style type, and upon the lower portion of the space within the inner
circle shall be the words "March 11, 1957", in Gothic style type. Upon and
across the center of the space within the inner circle shall be the word "Seal"
in Roman style type. (1959 Code §1-401; amd. 1990 Code)
   B.   Adoption Of Seal: The seal described in subsection A of this section is
hereby adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City. (1959 Code §1-402)
   C.   Custodian Of Seal: The City Clerk 1  shall be the custodian of the
Corporate Seal of the City and shall affix said seal imprint upon all official
City documents, records, licenses and warrants. (1959 Code §1-403)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-7A-2F of this title.
1-8-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 50-213 and Idaho Code section
60-106 the "Idaho Press-Tribune" is hereby appointed, designated, and
constituted the official newspaper of the City and such writings as are
required by law to be given publication in a newspaper shall be published
therein. (Ord. 592, 3-11-2019)
1-8-3: CITY DEPOSITORIES:
The Parma branch of U.S. Bank, Office of State Treasurer, and Idaho Central
Credit Union are hereby designated as the official depositories of City funds.
The City Treasurer is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies
belonging to, or in the care of, the City coming into his hands and into the
hands of the City in the above named depositories. (Ord. 556, 8-24-2009; amd.
Ord. 628, 3-11-2025)
1-8-4: REQUEST FOR PUBLIC HEARING; FILING FEE:
   A.   Any request for public hearing for any hearing not otherwise provided
for in this Code for any reason other than in response to City of Parma,
Council decision or preliminary order shall be required to pay a filing fee of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) and any additional costs to mail any required
notices, said fees to be paid at time of filing of written request for hearing.
   B.   No hearing shall be scheduled and no request or petition shall be valid
until said fee is so paid. (Ord. 451, 6-13-1994)
CHAPTER 9
INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Creation Of Right
1-9-2: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-9-3: Form Of Petition
1-9-4: Time For Filing Petitions
1-9-5: Printing Of Petition And Sheets For Signatures; Time Limits For
Perfecting Petition
1-9-6: Verification On Sheets For Signatures
1-9-7: Examination And Certification Of Signatures
1-9-8: Sufficiency Of Petition; Notification; Effect Of Control; Action;
Election
1-9-9: Form Of Ballot
1-9-10: Conduct Of Election
1-9-11: Canvass Of Returns
1-9-12: Prohibited Acts; Penalties
1-9-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the
initiative process and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process,
according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or referendum, there shall be attached or
appended to the petition the signatures of the legal voters of the city equal
to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number of voters who cast votes
at the last general election in the city. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-3: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
            WARNING
It is a felony for anyone to sign any initiative or referendum petition with
any name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for
the measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a legal voter.
            INITIATIVE PETITION
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Parma, Idaho:
We, the undersigned citizens and legal voters of the City of Parma,
respectfully demand that the following proposed ordinance, to-wit: (setting out
full text of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the legal voters of the
City of Parma, for their approval or rejection at an election to be called in
accordance with Idaho Code Section 50-501(3) and each for himself says: I have
personally signed this petition; I am a legal voter of the City of Parma; my
residence and post office are correctly written after my name.
 
Signature Printed Name Residence         City or
                       Street and Number Post Office
 
(Here follow numbered lines for signatures)
(The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the city council shall
be in substantially the same form with appropriate title and changes, setting
out in full the text of the ordinance to be referred to the people for their
approval or rejection.) (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-4: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be
filed with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days following the final
adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-5: PRINTING OF PETITION AND SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES; TIME LIMITS FOR
PERFECTING PETITION:
   A.   Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any petition for
initiative or referendum, the person or persons, organization or organizations
under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, shall send or deliver
to the city clerk a copy of such petition duly signed by at least twenty (20)
electors eligible to sign such petition. The clerk shall immediately examine
the petition and specify the form and kind and size of paper on which the
petition shall be printed and circulated for further signatures. All petitions
and sheets for signatures shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger
paper, on pages eight and one-half inches (81/2") in width by thirteen inches
(13") in length, with a margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4") at the
top of binding, and the sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon
from 1 to 20 for signatures; the petition shall be prepared in sections, with
each section numbered consecutively. Each section of a petition must have a
printed copy of the petition as the first page, and each section shall have
attached to it not more than ten (10) sheets for signatures.
   B.   The city clerk shall indicate in writing on the petition that he has
approved it as to form. The clerk shall inform the person or persons,
organization or organizations under whose authority the petition is to be
circulated, in writing, that the petition must be perfected with the required
number of certified signatures within sixty (60) days following the date of
approval as to form. Any petition that has not been perfected with the required
number of certified signatures within the sixty (60) days allowed shall be
declared null and void ab initio in its entirety. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be
verified on the face thereof in substantially the following form by the person
who circulated said sheet of the petition, by his or her affidavit thereon, as
a part thereof:
STATE OF IDAHO         )
               ) ss.
   COUNTY OF CANYON   )
I,                , swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who
signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in
my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that
the person was eligible to sign this petition.
Signature
Post Office Address
Subscribed and sworn to before me this          day of         , of the year
        .
(Notary Seal) Notary Public
Residing at
(Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
   A.   All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented on the
same day to the city clerk, who shall make a cursory examination of them to
determine whether the petitions apparently contain the necessary number of
signatures.
      1.   If the total number of signatures on the petitions is not sufficient
to satisfy the number required by section
1-9-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the city clerk, who shall notify in writing the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limits of section
1-9-5 of this chapter.
      2.   If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveals:
         a.   Erasures on any signature;
         b.   Illegible or undecipherable signatures;
         c.   Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
         d.   Duplicate signatures;
         e.   Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have their
names removed from the petition;
the city clerk shall summarily reject such signatures, and they shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed
by the clerk. If the total number of signatures not rejected is not sufficient
to satisfy the number required by section
1-9-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the clerk, who shall notify in writing the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limits of section
1-9-5 of this chapter.
   B.   All petitions presented to the city clerk found to apparently contain
the necessary number of signatures, after the cursory examination provided for
above, shall be filed with the city clerk and become public records of the city
not to be returned. The city clerk shall examine each such signature purposed
to be that of a registered elector of the city and compare each such signature
with the registration documents available to the city clerk. The city clerk
shall summarily reject all signatures which are not signatures of a registered
elector of the city, and such rejected signatures shall not be counted. Each
rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed by the city
clerk. The city clerk may take not to exceed ten (10) days after filing of the
petition to complete his/her examination. The city clerk shall certify each
signature found to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter by an
appropriate mark following each signature.
The city clerk shall total the number of certified signatures, and if found to
total the number of signatures required by section
1-9-2 of this chapter, shall proceed as provided in section
1-9-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; EFFECT OF CONTROL; ACTION;
ELECTION:
   A.   In the event that a petition filed with the city clerk does not contain
the required number of certified signatures, the city clerk shall inform the
person or organization under whose authority the petition was circulated that
the petition is defective for lack of certified signatures and specify the
number of additional signatures required to make the petition valid. The
petition must be perfected within thirty (30) days of the date that the city
clerk finds the petition defective for lack of certified signatures. If the
petition is not perfected within the thirty (30) day period, the clerk shall
declare the petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
   B.   In the event that a petition filed with the city clerk is found by the
city clerk to contain the required number of certified signatures, the city
clerk shall promptly, by certified mail, inform the petitioners and shall also
notify the city council at its next meeting that the initiative or referendum
petition is in proper form.
      1.   If the petition is for a referendum, the city council shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of certification of the petition to repeal the
ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the council repeals the
ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
      2.   If the petition is an initiative petition, the city council shall
have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance substantially as proposed by the
petition. In the event that the council passes such an ordinance, the
initiative petition shall be null and void.
      3.   In the event that the city council neither repeals the ordinance
which is the subject of a referendum petition, nor enacts an ordinance which is
the subject of an initiative petition, an election shall be ordered by the city
clerk to be conducted citywide. A special election for initiative or referendum
shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days following the certification of
the petition; provided that in the event a municipal election will occur within
the ninety (90) days, the initiative or referendum shall be submitted at the
time of the municipal election. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
The city council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
   A.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted
upon does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) words in length, it may be set out
in full on the election ballot; or
   B.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted
upon exceeds two hundred fifty (250) words in length, the council votes not to
have it printed in length on the election ballot, it shall, with the assistance
of the city attorney, prepare a short title and description of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance which shall clearly and impartially state its purpose and
effect, which short title and description shall be printed on the election
ballot. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as
near as practicable, in like manner as general elections, except as otherwise
provided. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-11: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The mayor and council shall meet within five (5) days after said election to
canvass the votes cast at such election, and the city clerk shall immediately
announce the results. Any initiative measure approved by a majority of the
votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less
than a majority of the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of
such announcement. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
1-9-12: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTIES:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   A.   Signs any name other than his own to any initiative or referendum
petition;
   B.   Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or
referendum petition;
   C.   Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or referendum petition if he
is not a registered city elector;
   D.   Wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or exhibits any false
statement or representation concerning the contents, purport or effect of any
initiative or referendum petition for the purpose of obtaining any signature to
any such petition, or for the purpose of persuading any person to sign any such
petition;
   E.   Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum
petition to which is attached, appended or subscribed any signature which the
person so filing such petition knows to be false or fraudulent, or not the
genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such petition or whose name
is attached, appended or subscribed thereto;
   F.   Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum petition
knowing the same to contain false, forged or fictitious names;
   G.   Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative or referendum
petition or the signatures appended thereto;
   H.   Offers, proposes or threatens for any pecuniary reward or
consideration:
      1.   To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any
initiative or referendum petition or any part thereof or any signatures
thereon;
      2.   To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning, promoting or
circulating any initiative or referendum petition;
      3.   To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use
any recall petition or any power of promotion or opposition in any manner or
form for extortion, blackmail or secret or private intimidation of any person
or business interest. (Ord. 548, 4-28-2008)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Definitions
2-1-2: Creation Of Commission
2-1-3: Qualifications; Terms Of Office; Vacancies And Removals
2-1-4: Rules, Organization And Meetings
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-6: Maps, Plats And Replats
2-1-7: Employees And Expenditures
2-1-8: Standby Status Of Commission
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   APPOINTIVE MEMBERS: All other members of the planning and zoning commission.
   COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission created by this chapter.
   EX OFFICIO MEMBERS: The members of the planning and zoning commission chosen
from among the officials or employees of the city.
   HEARING EXAMINER: An individual appointed by the council who shall, as
directed by council, perform the duties of the planning and zoning commission
regarding requests on special use permits, variances, subdivision plats and
annexations. (1959 Code §2-201; amd. Ord. 500, 4-9-2001)
2-1-2: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created an official planning and zoning commission to consist
of a total of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
the city council. The commission may consist entirely of appointive members or
of both appointive members and ex officio members. (1959 Code §2-202; amd. 1990
Code)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
Appointive members of the commission shall be resident taxpayers; provided,
that one such appointive member may be a nonresident taxpayer. The term of
office for the ex officio members shall correspond to their respective tenure
of office as an official or employee of the city. The term of office for the
first appointive members of the commission shall be two (2), four (4) and six
(6) years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms
shall be filled by the mayor and confirmed by the council. Members may be
removed after public hearing by a majority vote of the city council. Members
shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve
without compensation. (1959 Code §2-203)
2-1-4: RULES, ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect its own chairman and create and fill such other
offices as it may determine it requires for the proper conduct of the affairs
and business of the commission. One regular meeting shall be held each month
for not less than nine (9) months in each year. A majority of the appointive
members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at any
meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. Written rules consistent
with this chapter and the laws of the state of Idaho for the transaction of
business of the commission shall be adopted and a written record of meetings,
resolutions, findings and determination shall be kept, which record shall be
public. (1959 Code §2-204)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission
to:
      1.   Recommend and make suggestions to the city council for the adoption
of coordinated plans for the physical development of the municipality, for the
forming of zoning districts.
      2.   Make suggestions concerning the laying out, widening, extending and
location of streets, roads and highways for the relief of traffic.
      3.   Make suggestions concerning density of population and development of
land.
      4.   Make suggestions concerning the future growth, development and
beautification of the municipality in respect to its public buildings, streets,
parks, grounds and lands in order to promote the public health, morals, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality.
      5.   Give suggestions and advice to individual citizens concerning
landscaping and location of buildings, structures or works to be erected,
constructed or altered by or for such individual. (1959 Code §4-601)
   B.   Acquisition And Disposition Of Property: The planning and zoning
commission is authorized to acquire by gift, devise or bequest lands or other
property to carry out the purposes of this chapter and shall likewise have
power to sell or to otherwise dispose of property so acquired. (1959 Code §4-
604)
2-1-6: MAPS, PLATS AND REPLATS:
Any and all maps, plats and replats of lands which require the approval of the
city council or of any officer or employee shall first be submitted to the
planning and zoning commission for its suggestions, and the commission shall
have a reasonable time to be fixed by the council within which to examine such
maps, plats or replats before returning the same with its suggestions. (1959
Code §4-602)
2-1-7: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures of the planning and zoning commission, exclusive of gifts,
shall be within the amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council for
the purposes of the commission as set forth in this chapter. Within such
limits, the commission is authorized to employ such employees and technical
advisors as it deems necessary for the accomplishment of its authorized
purposes and work. (1959 Code §4-603)
2-1-8: STANDBY STATUS OF COMMISSION:
The planning and zoning commission is placed on a standby status until such a
time that zoning application demand cannot be handled at regular city council
meetings.
All the duties and powers of the planning and zoning commission shall be
carried through the city council and mayor at the regular city council meetings
for the city. References in this Code to the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be deemed to refer to the City Council.
During a standby hiatus, Commission meetings will not be held and commissioner
terms will lapse without new appointments. When the Mayor and Council determine
the need to resume the active status of the Planning Commission, new
Commissioner appointments shall be made to replace any lapsed terms pursuant to
Idaho Code and this Chapter. The Commission's return to active status shall be
made by Ordinance.
(Ord. 500, 4-9-2001; amd. Ord. 625, 9-10-2024)
CHAPTER 2
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Appointment; Term Of Office; Compensation
2-2-2: Organization And Powers
2-2-3: Damaging Or Retaining Library Property
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION:
For the governance of the Parma City Public Library, there shall be a board of
five (5) library trustees, appointed by the mayor and council pursuant to
section 50-210, Idaho Code, from among City residents. Appointments to the
board shall be made solely upon consideration of the ability of such appointees
to serve the interests of the people, without regard to sex, age, race,
nationality, religion, disability, or political affiliation. A member of the
City Council, the Mayor, or an appointed officer of the City shall not be one
(1) of the five (5) members of the library board, but each year the City
Council shall appoint one (1) of its members to be a liaison to the board,
without voting rights.
The initial appointment of trustees shall be for terms of one (1), two (2),
three (3), four (4), and five (5) years respectively. Subsequent appointments
shall be made for five (5) years from the date of appointment, and until their
successors are appointed.
Members of the board shall serve without salary but may receive their actual
and necessary budgeted expenses while engaged in authorized business of the
library.
(1959 Code § 2-301; amd. Ord. 629, 4-8-2025)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION AND POWERS:
   A.   The board of trustees shall meet at least once in each quarter unless
required by city ordinance to meet more frequently. One (1) of the meetings
shall be designated as the annual meeting. The purposes of the annual meeting
are to elect the officers of the board, to establish a regular meeting date,
and to review, amend, repeal or adopt bylaws, policies and procedures. Special
meetings may be held from time to time as the board may determine, but written
notice thereof shall be given to the members at least two (2) days prior to the
day of the meeting. A quorum shall consist of three (3) voting members, but a
smaller number may adjourn. All library board meetings are to be held pursuant
to the Idaho open meeting law, chapter 2, title 74, Idaho Code.
   B.   The board of trustees of the Parma Public Library shall have the
following powers and duties:
      1.   To establish bylaws for its own governance;
      2.   To establish policies and rules of use for the governance of the
library or libraries under its control; to exclude from the use of the library
any and all persons who violate such rules;
      3.   To establish, locate, maintain and have custody of libraries to
serve the city, and to provide suitable rooms, structures, facilities,
furniture, apparatus and appliances necessary for library service;
      4.   With the approval of the city:
         a.   To acquire real property by purchase, gift, devise, lease or
otherwise;
         b.   To own and hold real and personal property and to construct
buildings for the use and purposes of the library;
         c.   To sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of real or personal
property when no longer required by the library; and
         d.   To insure the real and personal property of the library;
      5.   To prepare and adopt a budget for review and approval by the city
council;
      6.   To control the expenditures of money budgeted for the library;
      7.   To accept or decline gifts of money or personal property, in
accordance with library policy, and under such terms as may be a condition of
the gift;
      8.   To hire, supervise and evaluate the library director;
      9.   To establish policies for the purchase and distribution of library
materials;
      10.   To attend all meetings of the board of trustees;
      11.   To maintain legal records of all board business;
      12.   To exercise such other powers, not inconsistent with law, necessary
for the orderly and efficient management of the library.
   C.   All other powers and duties enumerated in Chapter 26, Title 33, Idaho
Code.
(1959 Code § 2-302; amd. Ord. 629, 4-8-2025)
2-2-3: DAMAGING OR RETAINING LIBRARY PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall willfully or intentionally cut, tear, deface, break,
injure or destroy any book, map, chart or other property belonging to the
Public Library. Persons doing so are subject to misdemeanor charges of
malicious injury to property under Idaho Code and for restitution for the costs
of said damages.
   B.   Failure to return borrowed library materials or property by the agreed
upon date and time may result in the filing of misdemeanor theft charges after
the library director and board of trustees have followed the procedures set
forth in Idaho Code § 33-2620.
(1959 Code § 2-303; amd. Ord. 629, 4-8-2025)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF ETHICS
(Rep. by Ord. 632-2025, 5-13-2025)
CHAPTER 4
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Purpose
2-4-2: Definitions
2-4-3: Commission Created; Appointment and Terms
2-4-4: Qualifications
2-4-5: Organization
2-4-6: Powers, Duties and Responsibilities
2-4-7: Compensation
2-4-8: Technical Assistance
2-4-9: City Powers Regarding Historic Preservation
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the City through the identification,
evaluation, designation and protection of those buildings, sites, areas,
structures and objects which reflect significant elements of the City's,
State's and nation's historic, archeological and cultural heritage. (Ord. 409,
9-8-86)
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings:
   CITY The City of Parma.
   COMMISSION The Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Parma.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION The research, documentation, protection, restoration
and rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas and
sites significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, and culture of
this State, its communities or the nation.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY Any building, structure, area or site that is significant
in the history, architecture, archaeology, or culture of this community, the
State or the nation. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-3: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission which shall consist
of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
Initial appointments to the Commission shall be made as follows: one one-year
term, two (2) two-year terms, two (2) three-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) three-year terms. Commission members
may be reappointed to serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments and the appointee shall serve for the
remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
All members of the Commission shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or
knowledge in history or historic preservation. The Council shall endeavor to
appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in
the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, urban
planning, archaeology, engineering, law or other historic preservation- related
disciplines. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-5: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The Commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are
necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this Chapter. Rules
of procedure and bylaws adopted by the Commission shall be available for public
inspection.
   B.   The Commission shall elect officers from among the Commission members.
The chairman shall preside at meetings of the Commission. The vice chairman
shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman.
   C.   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and follow
the requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws. 1  The Commission shall keep
minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings
and actions. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. §67-2340 et seq.
2-4-6: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Commission shall be advisory to the Council and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interest in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchases, bequests or
donation.
   C.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
City.
   D.   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights or public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   Contract, with the approval of the Council, with the State or Federal
government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
   F.   Cooperate with the Federal, State and local governments in the pursuit
of the objectives of historic preservation.
   G.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
County, the City, the State or the Federal government and the agencies of these
entities.
   H.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes
of historic preservation in the City.
   I.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in the City.
   J.   Commission members, employees or agents of the Commission may enter
private property, buildings or structures in the performance of its official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   K.   Review nominations of properties to the National Register of Historic
Places for properties within the City's jurisdiction. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-7: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Commission may be reimbursed by the City for expenses
incurred in connection with their duties. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-8: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:
The Commission may recommend to the Council, within the limits of its funding,
the employment or the contracting with other parties for the services of
technical experts or other persons as it deems necessary to carry on the
functions of the Commission. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
2-4-9: CITY POWERS REGARDING HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
Under the provisions of the Idaho Code 67-4612, the City may provide by
ordinances, special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties. (Ord. 409, 9-8-86)
CHAPTER 5
AIRPORT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-5-1: Committee Created; Membership
2-5-2: Qualifications
2-5-3: Compensation
2-5-4: Duties
2-5-1: COMMITTEE CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Membership: There is hereby created an Airport Committee consisting of
five (5) members as follows:
      1.   Three (3) members shall be from the surrounding community at large;
provided, that at least one such member shall reside within the City limits.
      2.   Two (2) members shall be from the City Council.
   B.   Term: Term of office shall be for three (3) years for the noncouncil
members and one year for the Council members. (Ord. 391, 5-24-82)
2-5-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members of said Committee shall possess all qualifications required of
other officers of the City, except for residency, as provided herein. (Ord.
391, 5-24-82)
2-5-3: COMPENSATION:
All members shall serve on said Committee without compensation. (Ord. 391, 5-
24-82)
2-5-4: DUTIES:
The Committee shall have the following duties, to:
   A.   Prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan for the
use, maintenance, operation and further expansion of the City Airport.
   B.   Review the ongoing operations of the Airport and recommend to the City
Council modifications, changes and improvements in the best interest of the
City as to the Airport. (Ord. 391, 5-24-82)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR'S YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-6-1: Intent
2-6-2: Scope Of Youth Council Activity
2-6-3: Adult Advisors
2-6-4: Financial Responsibility
2-6-1: INTENT:
   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to provide a framework for an
organization through which youth of the Parma community can learn and develop
attitudes and skills of cooperative team involvement in civic affairs via
working relationships with a council of peers and community leaders.
   B.   It is not the intent of the City or its elected officials to create a
legal entity of any kind including without limitation, a corporation, non-
profit corporation, limited liability company, partnership nor any other
business, public or quasi-public entity. (Ord. 580, 4-10-2017)
2-6-2: SCOPE OF YOUTH COUNCIL ACTIVITY:
   A.   The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall be a community support and
service committee of the City of Parma. The Youth Council shall be comprised of
volunteer students of the Parma school district or home schooled students
living within the Parma school district boundaries. The focus of the Youth
Council will have considerable breadth allowing students to learn from a varied
exposure to community involvement. Some suggested areas of involvement may
potentially include aesthetic, cultural, educational, recreational, and social
activities, projects, or services. The Youth Council may also function as a
"think-tank" group bringing ideas and suggestions to the Parma City Council via
appropriate means. The Youth Council will also be encouraged to interact with
other City committees and contribute to the efforts and emphases of those
groups.
   B.   The Mayor's Youth Council shall be responsible for formulation and
adoption of its own by-laws, means and methods of election of officers, and
selection of projects, subject to the laws of the State of Idaho, this Code,
and with the ongoing supervision of the Mayor and other adult Youth Council
advisors. Note: These supervisory roles will be exercised as coach/mentor
helper roles in order to maximize the students' self-directed learning
experiences in the fullest degree possible.
   C.   The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council shall be accountable to the Mayor
and City Council of the City of Parma, and shall file regular monthly activity
reports as required for other City committees. The Youth Council or its
individual members shall not represent themselves to the public or to any
entity, whether governmental, public, or private, as having decision-making
authority for the City of Parma, authority to make contracts, or to obligate
any resource of the City, or to encumber any City monies. (Ord. 580, 4-10-2017)
2-6-3: ADULT ADVISORS:
   A.   The Youth Council, by nature comprised of youth not of legal voting
age, shall function under the guidance of the Mayor, and of at least one (2
preferred) adult advisor(s) from the community. Adult advisors will be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The role of the
advisors will be that of facilitating group functioning where necessary,
advising on matters where adult direction can benefit the group. Adult advisors
will not be managers of the Youth Council, but will provide adult monitoring
(or coordinate the same) of youth work or social activities, and work with the
Mayor to enrich the students' experiences.
   B.   The City Council may if it so chooses, appoint a Council liaison to the
Youth Council. (Ord. 580, 4-10-2017)
2-6-4: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The Youth Council will be responsible for care of its own financial
needs: including, approved means of raising funds for projects, methods of
contribution to other projects, funding of group team-building efforts or any
other activity adopted by the Youth Council.
   B.   It is recommended that the Youth Council by-laws provide for assignment
of financial tracking to a Youth Council Treasurer. All funds raised will be
accounted for and recorded by the Youth Council Treasurer (or as provided by
by-laws) and submitted to the Parma City Treasurer, who will hold all monies in
the name of the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council.
   C.   All expenditures shall be coordinated through the City Treasurer by a
system of Youth Council approved vouchers. Monthly financial reports will be
submitted to the City Council. (Ord. 580, 4-10-2017)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE A. POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
(Rep. by Ord. 632-2025, 5-13-2025)
ARTICLE B. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
(Rep. by Ord. 632-2025, 5-13-2025)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. BEER
SECTION:
3-2A-1: License Required; Term
3-2A-2: License Application
3-2A-3: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2A-4: License Fees
3-2A-5: Transfer Of License
3-2A-6: Contents Of License; Change Of Location
3-2A-7: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-8: Revocation Of License
3-2A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of beer without first obtaining
a proper license from the city. Such license shall be issued on a calendar year
basis and shall be valid for one year unless sooner revoked for cause. (Ord.
349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the city
clerk and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications required by this article. (Ord. 349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
   A.   Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the
United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a
period of thirty (30) days prior to the date of application; provided, that if
the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens and at
least one thereof, or the active manager therefor, shall have been such
resident; if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be
qualified to do business within the state of Idaho, and the manager of such
business shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident.
   B.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse
of which has, been convicted of the violation of any law of the state of Idaho
or of the United States or of the city of Parma, regulating, governing or
prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor or beer or
has, within two (2) years, forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for
his appearance to answer charges of any such violation.
   C.   Has, or any partner or actual active manager or officer of which has,
been convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or
completed any sentence of confinement thereof within five (5) years.
A retail licensee must continue, throughout the license period, to have all of
the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and
for failure therein, upon proof thereof to the city council, the city council
shall revoke the license issued. (Ord. 349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-4: LICENSE FEES:
The license fees for the sale of beer at retail shall be as follows:
   A.   Where the retailer sells only bottled or canned beer, none of which is
consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
   B.   Where the retailer sells only bottled, canned or draught beer to be
consumed upon the premises where it is sold, the license fee shall be one
hundred ten dollars ($110.00).
Each license issued upon payment of said fees shall expire December 31 of the
year in which issued. (Ord. 526, 1-24-2005)
3-2A-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The license shall be transferable by the licensee after approval by the city
council of such transfer and the payment of a fifteen dollar ($15.00) transfer
fee. Such transferee must possess the same qualifications as required of the
transferor when the license was issued. The word "transfer" shall refer to a
change of ownership of the license but not a change in the location of the
place of business for which the license was originally issued. At the time of
transfer, the license must be endorsed by the person to whom originally issued
and the name of the transferee placed on the license by the city clerk. (Ord.
349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-6: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Every license issued or transferred for the sale of beer shall designate the
building or place of business where the person receiving the license shall be
authorized to carry on such business. In the event any licensee shall desire to
change such place of business to another location, he shall first apply to the
city council for approval of such new location and if such approval be granted,
the city clerk shall endorse upon the license the designation of such new
location. No license shall be valid unless such proper location is designated
thereon and the license displayed in the place of business for which issued.
(Ord. 349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-7: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any place licensed to sell beer, or
where beer is sold or dispensed to be consumed on the premises, whether
conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell or permit to be consumed on the
premises beer, as the same is defined by law, between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
3-2A-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any
license for cause. When any license is revoked, the licensee shall have the
privilege of appearing before the city council to appeal such revocation. Any
conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient cause for
revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the city council.
(Ord. 349, 1-12-1976, eff. 2-1-1976)
ARTICLE B. WINE
SECTION:
3-2B-1: License Required; Term
3-2B-2: License Application
3-2B-3: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2B-4: License Fees
3-2B-5: Transfer Of License
3-2B-6: Contents Of License; Change Of Location
3-2B-7: Hours Of Sale
3-2B-8: Minors
3-2B-9: Revocation Of License
3-2B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of wine without first obtaining
a proper license from the city. Such license shall be issued on a calendar year
basis and shall be valid for one year unless sooner revoked for cause. (Ord.
308, 7-13-1971)
3-2B-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a retail wine license shall be made under oath to the city
clerk and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications required by this article. (Ord. 308, 7-13-1971; amd. 1990 Code)
3-2B-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No retail license to sell wine shall be issued to any applicant who:
   A.   Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the
United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a
period of thirty (30) days prior to the date of application; provided, that if
the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens and at
least one thereof, or the active manager therefor, shall have been such
resident; if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be
qualified to do business within the state of Idaho, and the manager of such
business shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident.
   B.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse
of which has, been convicted of the violation of any law of the state of Idaho
or of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of
alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor or has, within two (2) years,
forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer
charges of any such violation.
   C.   Has, or any partner or actual active manager or officer of which has,
been convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or
completed any sentence of confinement thereof within five (5) years.
A retail licensee must continue, throughout the license period, to have all of
the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and
for failure therein, upon proof thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer
shall revoke the license issued, and in writing sent by United States
registered mail, notify each of the other issuers of a retailer's license to
such licensee, stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee and
the grounds and date of such revocation. (Ord. 308, 7-13-1971)
3-2B-4: LICENSE FEES:
The license fees for the sale of wine at retail shall be as follows:
   A.   Where the retailer sells only canned or bottled wine, none of which is
consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 526, 1-24-2005)
   B.   Where the retailer sells wine to be consumed upon the premises where it
is sold, but the retailer does not hold a valid liquor by the drink license,
the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 531, 7-11-2005)
   C.   Where the retailer sells wine to be consumed upon the premises where it
is sold, and the retailer has a valid liquor by the drink license for the
premises, there is no additional license fee or requirement other than that
imposed by statutes and ordinances dealing with liquor by the drink licensing.
Each license issued upon payment of said fees shall expire December 31 of the
year in which issued. (Ord. 526, 1-24-2005)
3-2B-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The license shall be transferable by the licensee after approval by the council
of such transfer and the payment of a fifteen dollar ($15.00) transfer fee.
Such transferee must possess the same qualifications as required by section
3-2B-3 of this article and the word "transfer" shall refer to a change of
ownership of the license but not a change in location of place of business for
which the license was originally issued. At the time of transfer, the license
must be endorsed by the person to whom issued and the name of the transferee
placed on the license by the clerk. (Ord. 308, 7-13-1971)
3-2B-6: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Every license issued or transferred for the sale of wine shall designate the
building or place of business where the person receiving the license shall be
authorized to carry on such business. In the event any licensee shall desire to
change such place of business to another location, he shall first apply to the
city council for approval of such new location and if such approval be granted,
the city clerk shall endorse upon the license the designation of such new
location. No license shall be valid unless such proper location is designated
thereon and the license displayed in the place of business for which issued.
(Ord. 308, 7-13-1971)
3-2B-7: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 308, 7-13-1971)
3-2B-8: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer wine to any person under twenty
one (21) years of age and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any wine
dispensary, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any owner of such wine
dispensary or his employees to permit any person under nineteen (19) years of
age to be in or employed in such dispensary. (Ord. 308, 7-13-1971; amd. 1990
Code)
3-2B-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any
license for cause. When any license is revoked, the licensee shall have the
privilege of appearing before the city council to appeal such revocation. Any
conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient cause for
revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the city council.
(Ord. 308, 7-13-1971)
ARTICLE C. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Intent
3-2C-2: Definitions
3-2C-3: License Required
3-2C-4: License Application And Fee
3-2C-5: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2C-6: License Fee; Term And Renewals
3-2C-7: Transfer Of License
3-2C-8: Building, Location And Premises Requirements
3-2C-9: Conditions Of License
3-2C-10: Hours Of Operation
3-2C-11: Liquor Sales Restrictions
3-2C-12: Entry Powers
3-2C-13: Revocation Of License
3-2C-14: Penalty
3-2C-1: INTENT:
This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city, for
the protection, health, welfare and safety of the people of the city, and for
the purpose of promoting and encouraging temperance in the use of alcoholic
beverages within the city. (Ord. 298, 1-27-1970, eff. 7-1-1970)
3-2C-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise provided by this article, all words and phrases shall be
given the same interpretation as is provided by section 23-902, Idaho Code, as
amended.
When used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
   CAFE or RESTAURANT An establishment provided with special space and
accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food is habitually furnished
to the public, such cafe or restaurant having sufficient seating capacity for
fifty (50) persons at tables or booths, exclusive of bar stools, together with
an adequate and sanitary kitchen capable of preparing food for fifty (50)
patrons at one time; provided, that such establishment shall be approved by the
City Council and that the City Council shall be satisfied that such
establishment is maintained in a substantial manner as a place for preparing,
cooking and serving such meals. The service of only such food as sandwiches,
hamburgers or salads, or an establishment with only a counter and stools shall
not be deemed in compliance with this definition.
   PERSON Any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, un- incorporated
association and any other type of firm or organization. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70,
eff. 7-1-70)
3-2C-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be lawful for persons,
organizations or business establishments to sell liquor by the drink at retail
within the corporate limits of the City, after they have first procured a
license as hereinafter set forth; provided, that said persons, organizations or
business establishments are operating a cafe or restaurant where such liquor
will be sold.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any room or premises in
or upon which liquor is received or kept, whether owned by such person or by
another, or to which liquor is brought for consumption therein by the public or
by members of any club, incorporated or unincorporated, or a corporation or
association, unless such person and the premises are licensed under this
Article. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
3-2C-4: LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEE:
Before a license for the sale of liquor by the drink shall be issued by the
Mayor and City Council, applications therefor by the licensees must be filed
with the City Clerk, such applications to be verified by the affidavit of the
person making the same before a person authorized to administer oaths. The
applications shall provide the name of the applicant, the location of the
proposed business and such other information to show the qualifications of the
applicants as hereinafter provided. There shall be attached to and made a part
of said applications a true copy of the applications made for a current State
liquor license and also there shall be filed with the City Clerk the license
issued by the State of Idaho for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail, and
no license shall be issued until a license is first obtained by applicant for
the premises from the State of Idaho.
Every application, except a renewal application for the same premises, shall be
accompanied by an application fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which
fee shall be retained by the City for the investigation and expense of said
license and shall not be returned to applicant.
The applicant shall also pay to the City Clerk the license fee hereinafter
provided for at the time of filing the application. 1
In addition to the requirements herein contained, the application must show the
date of issuance and the license number of a retail beer license issued for
said premises by the City. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70; 1990 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  3-2C-6 of this Article.
3-2C-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   An individual who is not a citizen of the United States or who has not
been a bona fide resident of the County of Canyon, State of Idaho for at least
one month preceding the application for such license; or to a partnership
unless all members thereof are citizens of the United States and have been
residents of the County of Canyon, State of Idaho for at least one year
preceding the application for such license; or to a corporation or association
unless the same is organized under the laws of the State of Idaho or qualified
to do business in the State of Idaho unless the principal officers and members
of the governing board are citizens of the United States and residents of the
County of Canyon, State of Idaho for one year immediately preceding the
application for such license.
   B.   Any person who has, within three (3) years prior to the date of making
application for a license, been convicted of the violation of any law of the
United States, State of Idaho, any other state of the United States or any city
relating to the importation, transportation, manufacture or sale of liquor or
any person who has been convicted of any felony or has paid any fine or
completed any sentence or confinement for any felony within five (5) years
prior to making application for a license. No corporation or association shall
be issued a license if any of its members, officers or governing board members
fail to meet the requirements of this subsection.
   C.   Any person who is engaged in the operation of or interested in any
house or place for the purpose of prostitution or has been convicted of any
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   D.   Any person whose license, issued under this Article or under the laws
of the State or Idaho, has been revoked; any individual who is a member of a
partnership or association which was a licensee under this Article or the laws
of the State of Idaho and whose license has been revoked; any individual who
was an officer, member of the governing board or one of the ten (10) principal
stockholders of a corporation which was a licensee under this Article or the
laws of the State of Idaho and whose license has been revoked; a partnership or
association, one of whose members was a licensee under this Article or the laws
of the State of Idaho and whose license was revoked; a corporation, one of
whose officers, member of the governing board, or ten (10) principal
stockholders was a licensee under this Article or the laws of the State of
Idaho and whose license was revoked; an association or partnership, one of
whose members was a member of a partnership or association licensed under the
provisions of this Article or the laws of the State of Idaho and whose license
was revoked; a partnership or association, one of whose members was an officer,
member of the governing board, or one of the ten (10) principal stockholders of
a corporation licensed under the provisions of this Article or the laws of the
State of Idaho and whose license was revoked; a corporation, one of whose
officers, members of the governing board, or ten (10) principal stockholders
was a member of a partnership or association licensed under the provisions of
this Article or the laws of the State of Idaho and whose license was revoked; a
corporation, one of whose officers, members of the governing board, or ten (10)
principal stockholders was an officer, member of the governing board, or one of
the ten (10) principal stockholders of a corporation licensed under the
provisions of this Article or the laws of the State of Idaho and whose license
was revoked.
   E.   Any employee or officer of the United States of America, State of
Idaho, any county or a municipality of the State of Idaho; the husband or wife
or dependent of any employee or officer of the United States of America, the
State of Idaho, any county or a municipality of the State of Idaho.
   F.   Any officer, agent or employee of any distillery, winery, 1  brewery, 2
or any wholesaler or jobber of liquor or malt beverages.
   G.   Any person who does not hold a City retail beer license for said
premises.
No person shall be granted more than one license in the City for any one year
and no partnership, association or corporation holding a license shall have as
a member, officer or stockholder, any person who has financial interest of any
kind in, or is a member of, any partnership or association or is an officer of
another corporation holding a license in the City for the same year. (Ord. 298,
1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70; 1990 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Article B of this Chapter for wine regulations.
2 2. See Article A of this Chapter for beer regulations.
3-2C-6: LICENSE FEE; TERM AND RENEWALS:
The license fee hereby imposed and required to be paid to the City Clerk shall
be a sum equal to seventy five percent (75%) of the State license fee paid to
the State of Idaho. 1  All licenses shall expire at midnight of December 31 of
the calendar year for which they are issued. No refund of license fees shall be
allowed. Renewals may be granted upon application, if the record of the
applicant is satisfactory to the Mayor and City Council and has been in
accordance with all provisions hereof, upon payment of the license fee for the
ensuing year. Any operation under an expired license shall constitute a
violation hereof. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
 
Notes
1 3. I.C. §§23-904, 23-916.
3-2C-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be
nontransferable, and if the licensee named in said license shall cease to
personally supervise, control, conduct and operate said business described in
said license, the same shall terminate and no part of the fee shall be
refunded. The licensee may, however, with the consent of the mayor and city
council, remove from the place of business to some other place which meets the
requirements of this article; provided, that application therefor accompanied
by the application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), be made to the mayor and city
council and permitted by them, and if such transfer of the place of business
shall be approved and made, the license fee paid shall operate with like effect
as if not changed. (Ord. 298, 1-27-1970, eff. 7-1-1970)
3-2C-8: BUILDING, LOCATION AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A license shall be issued to an applicant only to conduct the business
of the retail sale of liquor by the drink on premises situated in the business
zone and in any lesser restricted zone as zoned under the ordinances of the
city 1 .
   B.   A license shall be issued only to an applicant for premises where the
business of retail sale of liquor by the drink to the general public shall be
conducted on the ground floor of any building or in the basement of any
building.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any applicant for a premises located
within three hundred feet (300') of any public or parochial school or any
church or any other place of worship, measured in a straight line to the
nearest entrance of said premises except by special permission of the mayor and
city council.
   D.   No license shall be issued to an applicant for a premises unless and
until the building inspector of the city shall have inspected said premises and
reported to the city council that said premises are in full compliance with all
requirements of the building regulations of the city.
   E.   All premises shall be subject to periodic sanitary inspection.
   F.   The general lighting of the interior of every premises shall be a
minimum of five (5) foot-candles. The principal entrance to every room within
which liquor by the drink is sold or served shall have an area of at least one
foot (1') square, with a minimum of twelve inches (12") in any direction, at
approximately eye level through which an unobstructed view of the interior may
be had. All entrances shall be located on the street side excepting for
emergency and service entrances. The licensee shall provide means to make it
possible for any law enforcement officer to observe at any and all times the
interior of the liquor licensed premises from the exterior thereof, without the
necessity of entering the same. (Ord. 298, 1-27-1970, eff. 7-1-1970)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5 of this code.
3-2C-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Every licensee must conform to all regulations and laws of the state of
Idaho and the provisions of this article relating to the sale of liquor by the
drink.
   B.   Liquor by the drink shall not be sold by any person except the one duly
licensed.
   C.   No gambling devices shall be maintained on the premises, but
nongambling card games may be permitted on the premises if partitioned off from
area where liquor is sold.
   D.   Every premises shall be maintained and controlled by the licensee so
that provisions of city ordinances shall not be violated. (Ord. 298, 1-27-1970,
eff. 7-1-1970)
3-2C-10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, consume, permit or
allow to be consumed any liquor upon any licensed premises during the following
days and hours:
   A.   Memorial Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas from one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day.
   B.   On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M.
   C.   On any day of a state or municipal general or special election until
after the time when the polls are closed. (Ord. 561, 9-27-2010)
3-2C-11: LIQUOR SALES RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and punishable as herein provided for any person
to sell, deliver, give away or cause or permit to be sold, delivered or given
away any liquor to:
      1.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
      2.   Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
      3.   An habitual drunkard.
      4.   An interdicted person as defined by the laws of the State of Idaho.
   B.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or any other person
who shall aid or abet such person to knowingly misrepresent his or her
qualifications for the purpose of obtaining liquor from any licensee shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, keep for sale, dispense,
give away or otherwise dispose of any liquor in the original container or
otherwise than by retail sale by the drink.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give away, vend or
deliver any liquor in any way or manner or device except upon the licensed
premises. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
3-2C-12: ENTRY POWERS:
The police officers, health officers and City officials of the City and their
duly appointed deputies or assistants shall have the right at any time to enter
in and upon any licensed premises for the purpose of police control, regulation
and inspection, and it shall be unlawful to refuse any such officer the right
of admittance or access to such premises. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
3-2C-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Mayor and City Council shall have the right to revoke the license of any
person for any violation by the licensee or any employee of said licensee of
any provision of this Article or for any violation of the laws of the State of
Idaho contained in title 23, Idaho Code and any amendments thereto or if said
licensee shall fail to maintain any of the qualifications for a license or
obtain any of the disqualifications herein provided at any time during the
license period, and upon any written or oral complaint, the Mayor and City
Council shall cause notice to be served personally or by mail upon said
licensee or by leaving said notice with an adult person employed or apparently
employed on the premises requiring said licensee to appear before the Mayor and
City Council to be heard upon said complaint, and if it shall appear at said
hearing that cause exists and there has been a violation by the licensee or any
employee of said licensee of any provision of this Article or any violation of
the laws of the State of Idaho contained in title 23, Idaho Code, and any
amendments thereto, or said licensee has failed to maintain any of the
qualifications for a license or has obtained any of the disqualifications, said
license shall be revoked without further process by law, and no refund of any
unused portion of said license fee shall be made. Any revocation by the State
of Idaho of the State license for retail sale of liquor by the drink shall
automatically revoke the City license. (Ord. 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
3-2C-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or thirty (30) days in jail or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 298, 1-27-70, eff. 7-1-70)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: License Required
3-3-4: Application; Term; Fees
3-3-5: Investigation
3-3-6: Bond Required
3-3-7: Issuance And Exhibition Of License
3-3-8: Denial Of License
3-3-9: Exemptions
3-3-10: Hours Of Operation
3-3-11: Unlawful Conduct
3-3-12: Suspension And Revocation
3-3-13: Appeals
3-3-14: Violations And Penalties
3-3-15: Severability
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter has three (3) purposes: a) to protect the citizens from fraud,
crime and unfair, deceptive or dishonest business practices by persons
temporarily engaged in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise and
services within the city; b) to protect the residents of the city from unwanted
intrusions on the privacy of their homes; and c) to protect the health, safety
and general welfare of the city and its residents. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in
this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   CANVASSER: Any person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident
at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the
resident, for the primary purpose of: a) attempting to enlist support for or
against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue,
candidate, or any person under eighteen (18) years of age who is engaged in
solicitation for a nonprofit charitable organization or school, even if
incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or
against such cause or person; or b) distributing a handbill or flier
advertising a noncommercial event or service.
   CHARITABLE: Means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or
fraternal, either actual or purported.
   CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of Parma.
   CONTRIBUTIONS: Means and includes the words alms, money, subscription,
property or any donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
   DEPARTMENT: The city of Parma police department.
   PEDDLER: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and
offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter. Peddler does not
include a person who distributes handbills or fliers for a commercial purpose,
advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to a resident
for purchase at a location away from his/her residence or at a time different
from the time of visit.
   PEDDLING: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a "peddler" as
defined herein.
   PERSON: A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club,
society, or other organization.
   SOLICITATION: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a "solicitor"
as defined herein.
   SOLICITOR: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale and future delivery of goods,
merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature, or for services
to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who,
without invitation, goes upon private property, primarily to request
contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for
political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purpose. (Ord. 573,
12-9-2014)
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent, employee, or
trainee, to act as a "peddler" or "solicitor", as the same are defined herein,
within the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-4: APPLICATION; TERM; FEES:
   A.   Every person seeking a license under this chapter shall file a written
application with the chief on the form provided by the city. The application
shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, description, driver's license number, social security number
or taxpayer identification number, state sales tax number, and date and place
of birth of the applicant;
      2.   Permanent home address, telephone number, and local address and
telephone number for the applicant;
      3.   A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to be
sold and/or services to be performed;
      4.   If employed by another, the current address, name, telephone number
and facsimile number of the employer;
      5.   The place of manufacture or production of goods being offered for
sale, the present location of such goods and the proposed method of delivery;
      6.   A sworn statement disclosing whether a permit or license issued to
the applicant has been revoked during the past five (5) years;
      7.   A photograph of each applicant seeking a license, taken within sixty
(60) days immediately prior to filing of the application. Said photograph shall
be approximately two inches by two inches (2" x 2") and shall show the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear manner;
      8.   A complete set of fingerprints of each applicant in a form approved
by the chief of police;
      9.   A sworn statement disclosing all convictions of crimes, including,
but not limited to, misdemeanors and violations of city ordinances; the date,
the nature of the offense and the penalty assessed therefor;
      10.   A statement that the license, if granted, shall not be used or
represented as an endorsement by the city for activities thereunder;
      11.   The application shall be sworn to by each applicant and shall be
accompanied by the fee for each person to be covered by such license.
   B.   The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued for a period
not to exceed one year. The license may be voluntarily surrendered by the
licensee prior to the end of the term for which it is issued.
   C.   At the time the application is filed with the chief, the applicant
shall pay a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the
application and investigating the facts stated therein, including the cost of
fingerprinting and background checks. The fees shall be in an amount
established by the city council from time to time by resolution. There shall
also be a fee in an amount established by the city council from time to time by
resolution for the issuance of a duplicate identification card if the licensee
has lost his or her license or identification card. In the event an applicant
makes application for a peddler's and solicitor's license within sixty (60)
days after the expiration of his or her such license for the preceding year,
and no complaints have been made against such applicant within the term of such
prior license and such prior license has not been revoked or suspended, no
investigation fee shall be charged at the time of application.
   D.   A license may be issued, denied or revoked by the chief pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-5: INVESTIGATION:
Before any license is issued under this chapter, the city shall complete an
investigation background check to determine the completeness and validity of
the information presented on the application. The background check shall
utilize fingerprints which shall be submitted by every applicant. Pursuant to
Idaho Code section 67-3008 and Public Law 92-544, the city may submit such
fingerprints and required fees to the Idaho state police, bureau of criminal
investigation, along with a request for a criminal records check of state and
national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by
this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state police. The chief
is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho state
police and from the federal bureau of investigation for the purpose of
evaluating the fitness of applicants for a peddler's and solicitor's license.
As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the
criminal history information is prohibited. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-6: BOND REQUIRED:
Before any peddler's and solicitor's license is issued, the applicant shall
file with the chief a surety bond in favor of the city or a cashier's check in
the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The bond shall be in a form
approved by the city attorney, be executed by the applicant as principal and be
issued by a surety licensed to engage in business in the state of Idaho. The
bond shall be issued for a term coterminous with the term of the license. If
the city council determines that the licensee has made a false statement on the
license application, or if the licensee or any employee or agent of the
licensee engages in any fraudulent, deceptive or unlawful business practice in
connection with the conduct of the licensee's business or otherwise violated
the provisions of this chapter, then the city council may order the entire
amount of the surety bond or cash bond forfeited. The city council may also
order that the proceeds from the bond be paid over to any person damaged by the
actions of the licensee. After the expiration or voluntary surrender of the
license, the chief, upon request of the licensee, shall return the surety bond
or cash bond within thirty (30) days after the request for return, unless the
chief has been notified of the pendency of any claim or cause of action against
the bond, in which case, the chief shall return the bond within thirty (30)
days after the final resolution of the claim or cause of action. (Ord. 573, 12-
9-2014)
3-3-7: ISSUANCE AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Subject to section
3-3-8 of this chapter and the satisfaction of all requirements by the
applicant, the chief shall endorse his approval on the application and forward
such approval to the city clerk, who shall deliver the required license and
identification card to the applicant.
   B.   Licensees shall not allow their license or identification card to be
used by any other person for any purpose. Licenses shall be nontransferable and
nonassignable.
   C.   The license or identification card shall show the name, business and
photograph of the licensee, the kind of goods or services to be sold or
delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the license shall
be in effect.
   D.   A record of all licenses issued shall be maintained by the city clerk
for a period of two (2) years.
   E.   The license and identification card required by this chapter shall be
carried at all times by the person to whom it is issued when such person is
peddling or soliciting in the city and shall be exhibited by said peddler or
solicitor when requested to do so by any prospective customer or law
enforcement officer. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-8: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon the review of the application by the chief, the city may refuse to
issue a license to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the
safety and welfare of the peddlers, solicitors or their customers;
      2.   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on
the application;
      3.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation involving trafficking in controlled substances, or any
violent acts against persons or property, such conviction being entered within
the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation involving a sex offense at any time prior to the
application for the license;
      5.   The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or
conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;
      6.   There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as
an agent of the principal;
      7.   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the
satisfaction of the city clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial no
longer exist; or
      8.   The applicant fails to submit the necessary information as requested
under section
3-3-4 of this chapter and/or the application is incomplete.
   B.   The chief's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted
on the application, and the applicant shall be notified by the chief that his
application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. The applicant
shall also be notified of the appeal rights set forth in section
 3-3-13 of this chapter. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address
shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address. (Ord.
573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   A "canvasser" as defined in section
3-3-2 of this chapter;
   B.   Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an
organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;
   C.   Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely
from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such
solicitation;
   D.   Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting,
assembly or service of a charitable organization.
   E.   The sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services by any student group
or religious, philanthropic or charitable organization exempt from taxation
under 26 USC section 501 and which has a local charter or sponsor located in
the city;
   F.   The sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services by any person or
organization appropriately licensed or permitted under any other provision of
this code;
   G.   Sales conducted pursuant to court order;
   H.   Newspaper carriers, whether subscriptions are taken or not;
   I.   Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age unless employed
by another person or organization. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person, while conducting the activities of canvasser or a peddler or
solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private
property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
local time. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-11: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No person issued a license and identification card hereunder shall:
   A.   Make physical contact with a person being peddled to or solicited
unless such person's prior permission is obtained;
   B.   Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those engaged in, the
solicitation;
   C.   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual
informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or buy anything
from that solicitor;
   D.   Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an
endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
   E.   Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No
Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or other words to such effect;
   F.   Engage in any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course
of carrying on the business for which the license is required hereunder;
   G.   Knowingly make any false statement on an application for license
hereunder. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-12: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by
the chief for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license;
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the licensee in
the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
      3.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the
provisions contained in the license or this chapter;
      4.   Conviction for any crime involving theft, possession of stolen
property or moral turpitude;
      5.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as
to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice of the revocation or suspension of the license by the chief
shall be in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the
revocation or suspension of the license. The notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown on the license application or at
the last known address of the licensee or delivered to the licensee personally.
The licensee whose license is being revoked or suspended shall have the right
to an informal hearing before the chief. The notice of the revocation or
suspension delivered or mailed to the licensee shall notify the licensee of
his, her or its right to an informal hearing before the chief. The request for
an informal hearing before the chief must be in writing and delivered to the
chief within ten (10) days of the mailing or delivery of the notice of
revocation or suspension to the licensee. If an informal hearing is requested
and held, the chief shall render a written decision within five (5) days of the
informal hearing, which written decision shall be delivered to the licensee in
the same manner as the original notice. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-13: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the chief to deny,
suspend or revoke a license applied for or issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city
council within fifteen (15) days after the notice of the action or decision has
been mailed to the person's address as shown on the license application form,
to his last known address, or delivered to him personally.
   B.   An appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written
statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal.
   C.   The city clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city council
within ten (10) days of its receipt and the city council shall set a time and
place for a hearing on the appeal.
   D.   A hearing shall be set no later than thirty (30) days from the date of
receipt of the appellant's written statement.
   E.   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for in the mailing or personal service
of notice of action or decision.
   F.   At the appeal hearing before the city council, the appellant shall be
entitled to appear in person and offer evidence pertinent to the denial,
suspension or revocation or may appear through legal counsel. The chief and/or
legal counsel for the city shall likewise be entitled to appear at the hearing
and offer evidence in support of the denial, order of suspension or revocation.
Failure by the appellant or their legal counsel to appear before the city
council at the time scheduled to hear such an appeal shall result in the
automatic denial of such appeal.
   G.   The city council shall determine whether the denial, suspension or
revocation shall be sustained and shall make a final reasoned statement in
writing within fifteen (15) business days following the close of the hearing.
The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final and binding on
all parties concerned. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to this code and
Idaho Code.
   B.   In addition to any criminal enforcement, the city or any individual may
pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord.
573, 12-9-2014)
3-3-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this chapter which shall remain in effect
notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 573, 12-9-2014)
CHAPTER 4
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Records
3-4-4: Minors and Intoxicated Persons
3-4-5: Sales
3-4-6: Forfeitures
3-4-7: Reports to Chief of Police
3-4-8: Notice from Police Department
3-4-9: Hours of Operation
3-4-10: Stolen Property; Return to True Owner
3-4-11: Violations and Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms
used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
Pawnbroker: Every person, firm, association or corporation who makes it a
business to loan money on deposit, or purchase personal property or other
valuables for the purpose of selling the same back again at a stipulated price,
or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or personal property, keeping
possession of the property on which any portion or part thereof is mortgaged,
for all intents and purposes under this Chapter shall be declared to be a
"pawnbroker" within the meaning of this Chapter. The pawnbroker must be at
least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker
unless a valid license therefor has been issued as provided for in this Chapter
and which is in full force and effect.
   A.   An application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk in such
form and manner as the City Clerk may prescribe.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall
cause a criminal history investigation to be made of the applicant. Conviction
of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the five (5)
years prior to the application date shall be grounds for denial of a license.
The City Clerk shall issue, subject to Council approval, and approval by the
Chief of Police, a license which shall expire at the end of the calendar year,
unless sooner revoked or surrendered. Licenses shall not be transferable either
as to person or place.
   C.   The City Clerk shall collect, before the issuance of any license or
renewal thereof, an annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   D.   No license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen (18) years
of age or older. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-3: RECORDS:
   A.   Every pawnbroker shall keep a record of every article pledged with him
or sold to him, and this record shall be open to inspection of any police
officer at any time during the hours of the pawnbroker's business. Such record
shall be upon the form as may be required by the Chief of Police and shall
provide the following information:
      1.   Name of pawnbroker.
      2.   Name, address, date of birth, sex, height, weight and social
security number of pledger or seller.
      3.   The date the transaction, the article pledged or sold together with
its description, including: make, model number, serial number, or if such
number does not exist, other type of identification such as color, size,
identifying marks as well as the amount of the loan. Any individual copy of
such record shall be made for each article pawned.
      4.   The pledger or seller's motor vehicle operator's license number of
Idaho I.D. or military I.D. and the state of issue.
      5.   Signatures by both pawnbroker and pledger or seller.
   B.   All forms must be filled out in legible manner, and shall be filled out
by the broker or his agent (employee).
   C.   Every record shall be executed by the pawnbroker and the pledger or
seller at the time the transaction occurs. The pawnbroker shall compare the
signature upon the transaction record with the signature on the seller's
identification.
   D.   All pawnbrokers reports shall be made in triplicate, one to be retained
by the pawnbroker and two (2) copies to be available to the Police Department
upon request. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-4: MINORS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS:
No pawnbroker shall:
   A.   Buy items of value from or loan money on property to any person under
eighteen (18) years of age. This provision shall not prevent sales to any
person regardless of age.
   B.   Have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a person who is so
obviously under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs so as to impair
his best judgment. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-5: SALES:
No personal property purchased by a pawnbroker at his place of business shall
be sold or removed from such place of business for a period of at least ten
(10) days after being so purchased without written consent of the Chief of
Police. Excluded from this restriction are transactions in gold or silver,
bullion or coins. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-6: FORFEITURES:
It shall be the duty of every "pawnbroker" as herein defined to allow any
person accepting a loan a period of thirty (30) days in which to repay the loan
and reclaim the pawned merchandise before the same becomes forfeitable if the
property pawned is in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less, and sixty
(60) days if more than fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-7: REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police may, at his discretion, require a written report of said
business transactions, and during the business hours of every day may conduct a
personal examination of any articles pledged or sold and inspect the books or
records of such pawnbroker showing the articles or things purchased or pawned.
(Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-8: NOTICE FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department shall
notify any pawnbroker in writing not to sell any property deposited or
purchased by him or permit the same to be redeemed, such property shall not be
sold or permitted to be redeemed for a period of sixty (60) days from the date
of such pawnbroker showing the articles of things purchased or pawned. (Ord.
440, 6-28-93)
3-4-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Legal hours for "pawnbrokers", as herein defined, may be between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day unless special
permission is obtained from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-10: STOLEN PROPERTY; RETURN TO TRUE OWNER:
   A.   Any article pledged or sold to a pawnbroker which is subsequently
determined by a law enforcement agency to have been stolen shall be transferred
to the custody of such agency upon the agency's written request, or, at the
direction of the agency, shall be returned by the pawnbroker to the true owner.
The true owner shall not be liable to the pawnbroker for any amounts expended
by the pawnbroker with respect to an article deemed stolen. The pawnbroker
shall not be required to return stolen property to the true owner until:
      1.   He receives written notice from the law enforcement agency
authorizing the release of the property to the true owner and specifying the
name, address and social security number of the true owner.
      2.   The true owner, in person, requests the return of the property,
executes a receipt therefor, and presents proper identification showing his
name, address, social security number and signature.
If a disagreement exits concerning the ownership of property, the item shall be
held by the Parma Police Department for thirty (30) days in order to allow the
pawnbroker to seek judicial determination of ownership. If such action is not
filed within thirty (30) days, the item will be returned by the Parma Police
Department to the recorded owner.
   B.   Upon the return of stolen property to the true owner either by the
pawnbroker or law enforcement agency, the pawnbroker shall complete such
documentation as may be necessary or required to effect the transfer of the
property, including such documents pertaining to the registration of firearms
as may be required by local, State or Federal authorities. Upon return of
article to a true owner, said owner shall agree in writing to pursue a course
of criminal prosecution which could result in restitution for any victimized
party. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
3-4-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false name, a fictitious
address, or any address other than the true address or to furnish any false,
untrue or misleading information or statement relating to the information
required by Section
3-4-3.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to pledge or sell any goods,
chattels or effects, or any personal property leased or let to him by any
instrument in writing under a contract or purchase agreement not yet fulfilled.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 440, 6-28-93)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Codes Adopted
4-1-2: Fire Code Adopted
4-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Codes: The approved editions of the following nationally recognized
codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board, are
hereby adopted as the official building codes of the city of Parma:
      1.   International building code, 2018 edition, prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho
building code board, together with any amendments or revisions to the
International Building Code made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the
negotiated rulemaking process, including all rules promulgated by the board to
provide equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities act
accessibility guidelines and the federal fair housing act accessibility
guidelines, but excluding appendix A.
      2.   The Idaho residential code, 2020 edition, as adopted by the state of
Idaho or the Idaho building code board, consisting of the 2018 International
Residential Code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc. and amended
by the Idaho building code board through the negotiated rulemaking process.
      3.   Idaho energy conservation code, 2020 edition, as adopted by the
state of Idaho Building Code Board, consisting of the 2018 International Energy
Conservation Code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc. and amended
by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process.
      4.   Uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition,
as published by the International Conference Of Building Officials.
      5.   The Idaho existing building code, 2018 edition, as adopted by the
state of Idaho building code board, consisting of the 2018 International
Existing Building Code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc. and
amended by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, is adopted. (Ord. 566, 5-14-2012; amd. Ord. 609, 12-22-2020)
4-1-2: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The regulations for governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city of Parma, that
certain code and standards known as the 2006 international fire code, including
appendix chapters A, B, C, D, E, F and G as published by the International Code
Council are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length
herein. A certified copy of the code adopted by this section is available for
examination in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 546, 12-10-2007)
CHAPTER 2
HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION:
4-2-1: House Numbers Required; Plan
4-2-2: Placement of Numbers
4-2-3: Street Number Chart
4-2-4: Penalty
4-2-1: HOUSE NUMBERS REQUIRED; PLAN:
All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall be numbered in accordance
with the following plan:
   A.   North and south numbers shall commence at the Union Pacific Railroad
right of way.
   B.   East and west numbers shall commence at Roswell Boulevard and A
Streets.
   C.   Odd numbers shall be on the west and north sides of the streets; even
numbers shall be on the south and east side of the streets.
   D.   There shall be one hundred (100) numbers to each block. (Ord. 398, 2-
27-84)
4-2-2: PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house in the City to
have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least two
and one-half inches (21/2") high showing the number of the house. (Ord. 398, 2-
27-84)
4-2-3: STREET NUMBER CHART:
The City Clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot
in the City which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. (Ord. 398,
2-27-84)
4-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person failing to so number any house, building or other structure occupied
by said person or, if after receiving notice to do so from the Clerk, shall
continue in the failure to so number such house, building or structure, shall
be fined one dollar ($1.00) for each day during or on which a failure to number
continues, from and after one year after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 398,
2-27-84)
CHAPTER 3
PROFESSIONAL COSTS AND FEES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Payment Of Professional Costs And/Or Fees
4-3-1: PAYMENT OF PROFESSIONAL COSTS AND/OR FEES:
The applicant for any permit or approval from the city shall, prior to or
contemporaneously with issuance of the permit or grant of final approval, pay
or reimburse the city for all professional costs and expenses reasonably
incurred in reviewing the application, construction plans, inspections, test
results, or similar evaluation of the application or its associated
construction. Professional costs and expenses include, without limitation,
engineering fees and legal fees. (Ord. 538, 7-10-2006)
CHAPTER 4
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Statutory Authorization
4-4-2: Findings Of Fact And Purpose
4-4-3: Methods Of Accomplishing Purpose
4-4-4: Interpretation And Application
4-4-5: Compliance With Provisions
4-4-6: Definitions
4-4-7: Flood Insurance Study
4-4-8: Development Permit Requirements
4-4-9: Flood Hazard Reduction Provisions
4-4-9-1: General Standards
4-4-9-2: Specific Standards
4-4-9-3: Provisions For Floodways
4-4-10: Variance And Appeal Procedures
4-4-11: City Engineer; Administrative Duties
4-4-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-4-13: Violations And Penalties
4-4-14: Severability
4-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho Code 46-1020 through 46-1024,
authorized local government units to adopt a floodplain map and floodplain
management ordinance that identifies floodplains and that sets forth minimum
development requirements in floodplains that are designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city
council does ordain the following provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 563, 4-11-
2011)
4-4-2: FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
   B.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas in special flood hazard;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
      8.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 563, 4-11-2011)
4-4-3: METHODS OF ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to erosion hazards or which result in damaging increase in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
4-4-4: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Jurisdiction And Interpretation: This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City. In the
interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
   B.   Conflicting Laws And Agreements: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and any ordinance, easement, covenant
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
4-4-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
4-4-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application:
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or
parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate
to the principal structure.
   APPEAL: A request for the building inspector's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot to three feet (1' -
3'); a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is
characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land on a floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "regulatory flood".
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base
flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is
depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1
foot. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may
be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other
source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies.
   BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of
mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials,
specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term
"development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair
of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or
drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to
lawful rights and obligations.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
   FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered
by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been
made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report by the Federal Insurance
Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) evaluating
flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway boundaries and water
surface elevations of the base flood.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial and complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any
increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus one foot (1') of
freeboard. Therefore the flood protection elevation for the City of Parma is
equal to BFE plus allowed floodway elevation plus one foot (1') of freeboard.
   FLOODPLAIN: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is
surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood
fringe 1 .
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse
and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot (1') as shown on the flood insurance rate map.
   FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the
hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
1. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
   LOWEST FINISHED FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement) that is finished or habitable. This includes any floor
that could be converted to such a use including a basement. An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
structure's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable elevation design
requirements of this chapter found at subsection
4-4-9-2A of this chapter. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood
insurance premium for a building, home or business.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basements and crawl spaces) of a structure.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
after May 24, 2011, and includes subsequent improvements to the structure.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis,
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation of a
basement, footings, piers or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The market value of the structure should be:
1. The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial
repair or improvement; or
2. In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring.
   B.   The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or
local Health, Sanitary or Safety Code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited hereby.
(Ord. 593, 5-13-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. IC 46-1021.
4-4-7: FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for Canyon County and Incorporated Areas", dated June 7, 2019,
with accompanying flood insurance maps is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at
City Hall. (Ord. 593, 5-13-2019)
4-4-8: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in section
4-4-7 of this chapter. The permit shall be for all structures, including
manufactured homes, as defined in section
4-4-6 of this chapter, and for all "development", including fill and other
activities, also as defined in section
4-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 563, 4-11-2011)
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the building inspector and may include, but not be
limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
4-4-9-2B of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
   C.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit: All floodplain development
permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one hundred
eighty (180) days. A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred
eighty (180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and thereafter is pursued to completion. (Ord. 563, 4-11-
2011)
4-4-9: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION PROVISIONS:
4-4-9-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
   A.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (Ord. 411,
4-27-1987)
      2.   All manufactured homes must be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods shall be constructed in
conformance with sections
5-4-1 through
5-4-4 of this Code. (Ord. 515, 3-10-2003)
   B.   Construction Materials And Methods:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
   C.   Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      3.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
   D.   Subdivisions And Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   All subdivision and manufactured home park proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
      2.   All subdivision and manufactured home park proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision and manufactured home park proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      4.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, the developer shall provide base
flood elevation data for subdivision and manufactured home park proposals and
other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5)
acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 563, 4-11-2011)
   E.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source
(subsection
4-4-11B of this chapter), applications for building permits shall be reviewed
to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The
test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data,
high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure
to elevate at least two feet (2') above grade in these zones may result in
higher insurance rates. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
4-4-9-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
4-4-7 of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have a finish floor elevation of one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation and the lowest floor, including basement and crawl space, shall
be elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
      2.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or their coverings
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or any other nonresidential structure
shall either have the finish floor elevation of the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
      1.   Be floodproofed to a point one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
4-4-11C of this chapter.
      4.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection A2 of this section.
      5.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1')
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood
level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
   C.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
Zones A1-30, AH and AE, which meet one of the following location criteria,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the finish floor
elevation of the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot (1') above
the base flood elevation and be securely anchored by methods constructed in
conformance with sections
 5-4-1 through
5-4-4 of this Code:
         a.   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;
         b.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
         c.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         d.   On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
which manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
      2.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in an
existing manufactured home park shall be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the
flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by
reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent
grade.
   D.   Recreational Vehicle Requirements: All recreational vehicles in Zones
A1-30, AH and AE to be placed on a site must:
      1.   Meet all the requirements for new construction as set forth in
sections
4-4-9-1 and
4-4-9-2 of this section
4-4-9, including anchoring and elevation; or
      2.   Be on the site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
      3.   Be fully licensed and highway ready on its wheels or jacking system,
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition.
   E.   Elevation Certificates: Elevation certificates shall be required for
all structures in the SFHA, special flood hazard area issued by FEMA, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and shall comply with all standards set
forth in this chapter. When completing elevation certificates on properties
removed from SFHA, use base flood elevation insurance prior to removal from
SFHA.
   F.   Setback: All buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from the floodway line except that when the area of special flood hazard
boundary is fifty feet (50') or less from the floodway line, the boundary line
shall be the setback line.
   G.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due
to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
      1.   No Rise: Encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood. If this section is satisfied,
development within the floodway shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Mitigation To Achieve No Rise: Compensating excavation in accordance
with an engineered plan for orderly conveyance of floodwater, or equivalent
mitigating measures may be performed in the floodway when certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect. Mitigation design shall include
provisions to prevent relocation or diversion of flow paths from causing
increased jeopardy to any off site property at any level of flooding from the
1-year flood up to the base flood. Provisions shall be made in a recorded
development agreement between the City and the applicant to maintain excavated
areas prone to fill from sediment and other debris as follows:
         a.   A plan and schedule for the future maintenance of the floodway
for the period of the expected lifetime thereof and a cost estimate therefor
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in the State, together with a
proposed method for funding the same including, but not limited to, the
creation and maintenance of a Reserve Fund for that purpose, shall be submitted
to the City Council for review and approval prior to the execution of the final
plat by the City. The location of the floodway to be maintained shall be
clearly depicted on the face of the final plat.
         b.   A restrictive covenant for maintenance of the floodway shall be
recorded at the time of recording the plat which said covenant shall create a
homeowners'/property owners' association or substantially similar entity and
make provision for the perpetual maintenance of the floodway. Said restrictive
covenant shall also provide that the covenant shall run with the land and that
said covenant cannot be modified or the homeowners'/property owners'
association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the express consent of
the City.
         c.   The Council may, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion,
order the owners or the entity responsible for the maintenance of the floodway
to undertake such maintenance activities as it may determine are necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and make such expenditures from
the funds reserved therefor as may be required thereby; and the owner or
responsible entity shall, as a condition of approval of floodway excavation, be
deemed to have agreed to comply with any such order and to reimburse the City
all its costs, including attorney fees, incurred in obtaining or enforcing any
such order. Any order entered by the Council pursuant to this subsection may be
enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction and the City shall be entitled to
recover its costs and attorney fees incurred in connection therewith.
      3.   Emergency Access: Where setback from the floodway line is less than
one hundred feet (100') but more than fifty feet (50'), compensating measures
shall be designed to protect a fifty foot (50') wide access strip for emergency
construction equipment. Compensating measures shall be constructed as designed
and certified by a professional engineer.
      4.   Parks And Open Spaces: In the design of public and private parks and
open space areas, fixed structures or equipment that would impede floodwaters
shall not be permitted within the floodway.
      5.   Access: Any nonfloodway area surrounded by floodway shall be
accessed by at least one road with suitable structures or culverts to pass
floodwaters. If a bridge is required, it shall be elevated one foot (1') above
the base flood elevation, have scour resistant footings extending to five feet
(5') below the bottom of the channel and be capable of supporting an H-15 load
as defined by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO).
   H.   Map And Narrative Required: All subdivision proposals and development
permit applications shall provide a map and detailed narrative describing any
abutting or on site manmade topographic features, current or proposed, that
increase flood damage potential above the natural level, including road fills
and other manmade embankments, prior stream channelization, existing and/or
proposed landscaping features, and evident agricultural land leveling that has
altered the floodplain from its original topography.
   I.   Fill Requirements: For fill placed in the regulatory special flood
hazard area:
      1.   The slope of fill adjacent to the floodway line, hereinafter called
the floodway boundary slope, shall not be steeper than five horizontal to one
vertical (5:1). Where a five to one (5:1) slope is not feasible due to lot
dimensions, compensating measures to protect against floodway encroachment
through erosion shall be constructed as designed and certified by a
professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect.
      2.   The floodway boundary slope shall be maintained with adequate ground
cover to prevent erosion.
   J.   Roadways And Manholes: Roadways and manholes within the regulatory
floodplain shall be a minimum of one-half foot (0.5') above base flood
elevation at centerline and manhole ring respectively.
   K.   Flow Paths Maintained: New roads built above the base flood elevation
shall not block or restrict conveyance of floodwater into sections of the
floodplain that may be cut off by the proposed road and shall have culverts or
bridges for flood conveyance paths.
   L.   Open Areas: Except for required berms, open areas such as parks, golf
courses, greenbelt areas, parking lots, etc., within the area of special flood
hazard shall be designed and operated so that they may flood and maintain
existing natural flood paths for waters during the base flood event.
   M.   Flood Study: When a new flood study is provided by the developer:
      1.   The study shall be performed using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Hydrologic Engineering Center's HEC-2, HEC-RAS (river analysis system), or
equivalent programs to calculate water surface elevations.
      2.   Describe methods to detain drainage contribution to the base flood
event discharge.
      3.   The study report shall include field survey data and relevant bench
marks used as bases of calculations as cross sections, stream profile and plan
showing cross section locations.
      4.   The study report shall attach HEC-2, HEC-RAS, or equivalent input
and output reports as an appendix.
      5.   Any floodway or regulatory floodplain modification shall not be
effective until approved by FEMA.
      6.   The study shall include a reach of stream extending beyond the
property boundaries of the development upstream and downstream as required to
comply with FEMA guidelines.
      7.   Demonstrate that the cumulative effect of any proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1')
at any point.
   N.   Critical Facilities: Critical facilities shall not be allowed within
any special flood hazard area, including areas designated as subject to
inundation by the 0.2 percent annual chance flood event, also known as the 500-
year flood and shown as shaded Zone X areas on FIRM maps. (Ord. 593, 5-13-2019)
4-4-9-3: PROVISIONS FOR FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
 4-4-7 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, are prohibited unless a hydraulic analysis
has been performed and certified by a professional engineer in the State of
Idaho as follows:
      1.   The hydraulic analysis shall determine and document that
improvements in the floodway will not obstruct flood flows and will not result
in a rise in base flood elevation upstream or adjacent to the site.
      2.   The hydraulic analysis shall determine and document that grading,
channel improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an
obstruction do not cause increases in downstream flood flows.
      3.   The Floodplain Administrator may make the encroachment determination
for minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade
(e.g., paving a driveway or parking lot at existing grade open fences and small
isolated obstructions such as mailbox or telephone pole).
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section
4-4-9. (Ord. 567, 4-23-2012)
4-4-10: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the City Clerk on
a form provided by the City of Parma and include at a minimum the same
information required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis
for the variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for public hearing at the next City Council meeting in
which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper of the City of Parma at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall
be provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances may be issued upon:
         a.   A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      5.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.   Appeals: The City Council shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the Floodplain Administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14)
days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure
to exhaust administrative remedies and a waiver of the applicant's right to
appeal. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the Floodplain
Administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the
appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for
the next available City Council meeting to be heard. The City Council shall
consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, and standards
specified in other sections of this ordinance, including:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            (11)   The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   E.   Decision: The City Council decision on appeal shall be in writing and
set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision.
(Ord. 567, 4-23-2012)
4-4-11: CITY ENGINEER; ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES:
The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter
by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
Duties of the City Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Permit Review:
      1.   Review all development permit applications to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review proposed developments to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required, and require that copies of such permits
be provided and maintained on file.
      3.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of subsection
4-4-9-3A of this chapter are met.
      4.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the City Engineer or his designee shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.
   B.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with section
 4-4-7 of this chapter, the City Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source in order to administer sections
4-4-9-2 and
4-4-9-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
      1.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator an as built certification
of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation
or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential
structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Elevations shall reference vertical datum on the effective FIRM.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
         a.   Permit holder shall verify and record the actual elevation in
relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM, and
         b.   Obtain and maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection
4-4-8B3 of this chapter.
      3.   Maintain, permanently, for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
      2.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying capacity is not
diminished.
   E.   Floodplain Administration Review Fee:
      1.   Fees shall be paid according to resolution adopted by the City.
(Ord. 593, 5-13-2019)
4-4-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 563, 4-11-2011)
4-4-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00)
or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation
and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 411, 4-27-1987)
4-4-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any part, term, or provision of this chapter is by the courts held to be
illegal or in conflict with any law of the State or Federal government, the
validity of the remaining portions or provisions shall not be affected, and
this chapter shall be construed and enforced as if this chapter did not contain
that particular part, term, or provision held to be invalid. (Ord. 563, 4-11-
2011)
TITLE 5
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Short Title
5-1-2: Authority And Purpose
5-1-3: Zoning Districts Purpose Statement
5-1-4: Official Zoning Maps And The Comprehensive Plan
5-1-5: Clarification Of Ambiguous Zoning District Boundaries
5-1-6: Annexation Of Unincorporated Area
5-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be recited and referred to as the PARMA
ZONING ORDINANCE and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed upon the effective date of this title. (Ord. 527,
3-14-2005)
5-1-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Authority: This title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by title
67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code, and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution, as amended.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this title shall be to:
      1.   Promote the interest of health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   Protect property rights and enhance property values.
      3.   Ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to
the people at a reasonable cost.
      4.   Ensure that the economy of the state and localities is protected and
enhanced.
      5.   Ensure that the important environment features of the state and
localities are protected and enhanced.
      6.   Encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining
lands for production of food, fiber and minerals.
      7.   Encourage urban and urban type development within incorporated
cities.
      8.   Avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land.
      9.   Ensure that the development on land is commensurate with the
physical characteristics of the land.
      10.   Protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters.
      11.   Secure safety from fire and provide adequate open spaces for light
and air.
      12.   Protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
      13.   Avoid undue water and air pollution.
      14.   Allow local school districts to participate in the community
planning and development process so as to address public school needs and
impacts on an ongoing basis.
      15.   Promote implementation of the comprehensive plan.
      16.   Stabilize expectations regarding the future development of the
city, thereby providing a basis for wise decisions with respect to such
development. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-1-3: ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The following zoning districts and related purpose statements are hereby
established:
   A.   R-1 Single-Family Residential: The purpose of the R-1 (single-family
residential) zone is to have land area set aside by zoning procedures and in
accordance with the comprehensive plan to preserve and enhance predominantly
single-family living areas at a low density standard of six (6) dwelling units
per acre or less. Such areas are to have a full range of urban services
available or projected to be established to enable lot sizes, development
designs and other development criteria to be properly met.
   B.   R-2 Combined Medium Density Residential: The purpose of the R-2
(combined medium density residential) zone is to provide medium density,
residential development areas of ten (10) dwelling units per acre or less
located primarily in older urban neighborhoods and adjacent to shopping,
recreational and cultural facilities. Medium density development concentrations
should have a full range of community services and facilities available or
projected for establishment.
   C.   R-3 Multiple-Family High Density Residential: The purpose of the R-3
(multiple-family residential) zone is to provide areas by zoning procedures and
in accordance with the comprehensive plan for medium to high density
residential development of sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre or less. This
type of zoning pattern is intended to provide transition or buffer areas
between commercial uses and less intense activities and to provide places for
higher density uses in selected places of the city's neighborhoods and
communities.
   D.   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial: The purpose of the C-1 (neighborhood
commercial) zone is to provide distinct zones by zoning procedures and in
accordance with the comprehensive plan regulated to provide local commercial
service needs primarily located at selected places at the perimeter of low
density residential neighborhoods. This zoning district is intended to restrict
incompatible uses which may be better located in the community or service
oriented shopping areas due to the size of the shopping center, location within
the community, residential neighborhood areas being served and other factors.
   E.   C-2 Community/Service Commercial: The purpose of the C-2 (community/
service commercial) zone is to establish district zones by zoning procedures
and in accordance with the comprehensive plan regulated to fulfill general
shopping retail and service needs including central business area preferences.
   F.   M-1 Light Industrial: The purpose of the M-1 (light industrial) zone is
to provide areas by zoning procedures and in accordance with the comprehensive
plan which encourage the grouping together of light industrial uses capable of
being operated under such standards as to location, appearance of buildings and
the treatment of the land about them so that they will be unobtrusive and not
unreasonably detrimental to surrounding commercial or residential uses.
   G.   M-2 Heavy Industrial: The purpose of the M-2 (heavy industrial) zone is
to provide areas by zoning procedures and in accordance with the comprehensive
plan which encourage suitable areas in which heavy industrial uses may locate,
substantially free or buffered from residential, or retail commercial
activities. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-1-4: OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS AND THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   A.   The boundaries of zoning districts shall be established and clearly
indicated upon the official zoning map which is hereby adopted as part of this
title.
   B.   All amendments to the official zoning map shall follow procedures set
forth in this title.
   C.   Areas are to be classified according to the established zoning
districts and shall give due consideration to the need for conformity with the
adopted comprehensive plan and its stated goals and objectives. (Ord. 527, 3-
14-2005)
5-1-5: CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUOUS ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainties exist as to the boundaries of any zoning district as shown
upon any zoning map or part thereof, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where any such boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley
or public way, it shall be construed as following the centerline thereof.
   B.   Where a boundary line is indicated as approximately following a lot
line, such lot line shall be construed to be the boundary.
   C.   Where zoning district boundaries are indicated so that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways, such
boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance
therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given,
such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
official zoning map.
   D.   Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property,
the location of such boundary shall be construed as nearly as possible to its
depiction on the official zoning map. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-1-6: ANNEXATION OF UNINCORPORATED AREA:
Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an ordinance of
annexation, the city council (referred to in this title as "council") shall
amend the plan and, if necessary, the official zoning map. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
5-2-1: General Regulations
5-2-2: Land Use Schedule
5-2-3: Height, Lot Line Setback And Lot Dimension Schedule
5-2-4: Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements
5-2-5: Rules And Definitions
5-2-6: Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
5-2-7: Temporary Uses Of Land
5-2-8: Home Occupations
5-2-9: Childcare Facilities
5-2-10: Fencing Regulations In Residential Zones
5-2-11: Geographic Overlay; Waiver; And Setbacks
5-2-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Land or premises shall be used, unless otherwise provided in this
title, in conformity with the regulations herein set forth for the zoning
districts in which said land or premises are located. Uses not specified within
use districts are prohibited unless determined by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator to be similar in nature to those specified.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or structure shall
be erected or structurally altered or used except in conformity with the
regulations herein set forth for the zoning district in which such building or
structure is located.
   C.   It is not intended by this title to impair or interfere with other
regulations of Federal, State or local law or with private restrictions on the
use of land, improvements or structures. Where this title imposes greater
restriction than that imposed by other law or private restrictions, this title
shall prevail.
   D.   All other City ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
title are hereby repealed upon the effective date hereof. (Ord. 591, 5-13-2019)
5-2-2: LAND USE SCHEDULE:
   TABLE 1
P = Permitted uses C = Conditional uses
  R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2
                                                  R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2
Agricultural:                                                        
 Agricultural, general1                          P   P   P   P   P   C   C
 Roadside stand                                              P   P   P   P
Commercial:                                                          
 Amusement center, indoor only                               C   P
 Auction establishment                                           C   C
 Automobile sales - new                                      C   P   P
 Automobile sales - used                                     C   P   P
 Automotive rental                                           C   P   P
 Automotive repair                                               P   P
 Automotive storage                                              C   C
 Bakery or bakery goods store                                P   P   P
 Bank, savings and loan                                      P   P
 Bar                                                         C   C
 Barber, beauty shop                                 C   C   P   P
 Bowling alley                                               C   P
 Building supply outlet                                          C   P   P
 Cabinet shop                                                    P   P   P
 Car wash                                                    C   P   P   P
 Childcare center                                    C   C   C   C   C
 Cleaning, dry                                               P   P
 Dance hall                                                      C
 Dance, music, voice studio                                  C   P
 Drive-in restaurant/food stand                              C   P
 Drive-in theater                                                C   C
 Drugstore                                                   P   P
 Equipment rental and sales yard                                 C   P   P
 Family daycare home                             P   P   P   P   P   P   P
 Farm equipment sales and services                               C   P   P
 Food store, delicatessen                            C   C   P   P
 Frozen food locker                                          C   P   P
 Furniture refinishing                                       C   P   P   P
 Furniture shop                                              P   P   P   P
 Gift shop                                                   P   P
 Group daycare facility                              C   C   P   P   C
 Hotel                                                       C   P
 Kennel                                                          C   C   C
 Laboratory, medical, dental, optical                    C   P   P
 Laundromat-self-service cleaner                             C   P
 Laundry, commercial plant                                       P   P
 Ministorage                                                     C   C
 Mortuary                                                    C   P   P
 Motel                                                           C   P
 Nursery for flowers and plants                          C   P   P   P
 Office, professional                                C   C   P   P
 Parking lot, garage or facility                         C   P   P   P   P
 Photographic studio                                     C   P   P
 Prescription pharmacy, optician                         C   P   P
 Printing and blueprinting                                   P   P   P
 Recreational vehicle park                                   C   C
 Reducing salon-masseur                                  C   P   P
 Restaurant                                                  P   P
 Retail stores and services                                  P   P
 Security guard quarters                                     C   C   C   C
 Service station                                             C   P   P   P
 Sheet metal and similar light fabricating shops                 C   P   P
 Shop for contractor                                             C   P   P
 Sign shop                                                   C   P   P   P
 Theater                                                     P   P
 Tire shop, including recapping                                  P   P   P
 Trailer, mobile home sales yard                                     P   P
Industrial:                                                          
 Adult entertainment business                                        C   C
 Airport related business                                                P
 Asphalt plant                                                           P
 Beverage bottling plant                                             P
 Cement or clay products manufacturing                               C   P
 Chemical storage and manufacturing                                  C   C
 Concrete batch plant                                                    P
 Contractors' storage yard                                           P   P
 Dairy products processing                                           P   P
 Food processing plant                                               P   P
 Fuel yard                                                           C   P
 Grain storage                                                       P   P
 Hangar                                                              C   C
 Ice manufacture - cold storage plant                                P   P
 Junkyard                                                            C   P
 Lumberyard - retail                                             C   P   P
 Machine shop                                                    C   P   P
 Meatpacking plant                                                   P   P
 Monument works, stone                                               C   P
 Petroleum storage                                                   C   P
 Planing mill                                                        P   P
 Public utility yard                                                 P   P
 Railroad yard or shops                                              P   P
 Rendering plant                                                         C
 Sanitary landfill                                                       C
 Terminal, airport                                                   C   C
 Terminal yard, trucking                                             P   P
 Truck and tractor repair                                        C   P   P
 Warehousing - wholesaling                                       C   P   P
 Wireless communications facility                C   C   C   C   C   C   C
 Wood processing plant                                           C   P   P
 Wrecking yard                                                       C   C
Public and semipublic:                                               
 Cemetery                                        C   C   C   C   C
 Church                                          C   C   C   P   P
 Hospital                                                C   C   C
 Other public and semipublic                     C   C   C   C   C   C   C
 School                                          C   C   C   C   C   C   C
Residential:                                                         
 Bed and breakfast                                   C   P   P
 Convalescent, nursing-rest home                     C   C   P   C
 Espresso/pastry shop                                C   C   P   P
 Four-, five- and six-family dwelling                C   P   C   C
 Home occupation                                 P   P   P   P   P   P   P
 Manufactured home developments                  C   C   C
 Multi-family dwelling                                   P   C   C
 Portable laboratory                                         C   C   C   C
 Rooming-boarding house                              C   P   P   P
 Single-family dwelling                          P   P   P   P   P   C   C
 Three-family dwelling                               P   P   P   P   C   C
 Tiny homes                                      P   P
 Tiny homes park                                             C   C
 Two-family dwelling                             C   P   P   P   P   C   C
 
Note:
   1.    Excluding commercial feedlots, raising of swine, commercial poultry,
dairies (as defined) and similar intensive agricultural related uses. Livestock
is regulated as prescribed by
title 9, chapter 2 of this Code.
(Ord. 591, 5-13-2019)
5-2-3:    HEIGHT, LOT LINE SETBACK AND LOT DIMENSION SCHEDULE:
   TABLE 2
   (Setback Requirements In Feet)
                                            Minimum  Minimum
         Maximum                           Interior Corner  Minimum  Minimum Minimum  Minimum
District Height  Front Rear Interior Street Lot Area Lot     Interior Corner  Interior Corner
         (Feet)             Side     Side   (Square  Area    Lot      Lot     Lot      Lot
                                            Feet)    (Square Width    Width   Frontage Frontage
                                                     Feet)
                                            Minimum  Minimum
         Maximum                           Interior Corner  Minimum  Minimum Minimum  Minimum
District Height  Front Rear Interior Street Lot Area Lot     Interior Corner  Interior Corner
         (Feet)             Side     Side   (Square  Area    Lot      Lot     Lot      Lot
                                            Feet)    (Square Width    Width   Frontage Frontage
                                                     Feet)
R-1      252     20    155  5 to 74  20     6,0001   7,5001  607      607     607      757
R-2      252     20    155  5 to 74  20     6,0001   7,5001  607      607     607      757
R-3      452     20    155  5 to 74  20     6,0001   7,5001  607      607     607      757
C-13     452     15    15   0        15     0        0       0        0       0        0
C-23     452     0     0    0        0      0        0       0        0       0        0
M-13     452     20    0    0        20     0        0       0        0       0        0
M-23     452     20    0    0        20     0        0       0        0       0        0
Notes:
1.   The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that which is required for 2-family
dwellings shall be 1,500 square feet for each additional unit unless the lot area is permitted
to be reduced by conditional permit procedures in the case of high rise and similar development
proposals.
2.   The maximum height may be exceeded by conditional use permit with the exception that
requests for additional height not exceeding 25 percent of the requirement may be considered
and approved administratively by the planning and zoning administrator.
3.   Residential uses shall have the same requirements as set forth in the R-3 zone. When
commercial and industrial uses abut a residential zone, setbacks shall be the same as are
required in the adjacent residential district.
4.   A total of 12 feet for both side yards with 1 side being not less than 5 feet for a
single-story structure. For a 2-story or higher structure adjacent to the property line, must
add an additional 5 feet.
5.   Rear setbacks for residential properties in the residential zones shall be 15 feet if the
lot is not adjacent in the rear to a dedicated alley. If the lot is adjacent in the rear to a
dedicated alley, the rear setback shall be 5 feet.
6.   Zero setbacks exception: For any 0 setback identified in this table, the following must be
observed for new development: Any frontage on an arterial roadway must have a minimum 30 foot
setback and any frontage on a collector must have a minimum 50 foot setback.
7.   If the lot or site in question was originally platted with a frontage of 50 feet or less
and has never been replatted or further subdivided, the minimum required lot width and frontage
shall be 50 feet.
 
(Ord. 536, 5-8-2006)
5-2-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope: When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
is increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other units of measurement specified as requiring parking or
loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be
provided for such increase in intensity of use.
   B.   Existing Uses: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure
shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use.
   C.   Inadequate Number Of Spaces Does Not Result In Nonconformity: No
lawfully existing building shall be deemed to be a nonconforming building
solely because of the lack of any such required spaces; provided, that space
being used for off street parking or loading in connection with any such
building at the effective date hereof shall not be further reduced in area or
capacity.
   D.   Calculation Of Number Of Spaces: When the calculation of the required
number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number, fractions
equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next higher
whole number of spaces.
   E.   Space Requirement For Similar Uses: Parking space requirements for a
use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a use specified which
has similar traffic generating characteristics.
   F.   Joint Use: Except as required for dwellings and motels, off street
parking facilities for several buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed
uses, may be provided collectively, provided that the total number of spaces so
located together shall be not less than the sum of the separate requirements
for each of the buildings or uses.
   G.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Access: Access to parking spaces as required herein for commercial
and industrial uses shall not be less than twelve feet (12') wide and not more
than forty feet (40') wide at the curb line.
      2.   Surfacing: All open off street parking areas, except for single
dwelling spaces, shall be hard surfaced, including access driveways.
      3.   Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall
be directed away from residential properties, and such parking areas shall be
effectively screened on any side adjoining property in a residential zone by a
wall, privacy fence or hedge to a height of six feet (6') except for the front
yard setback area of the adjoining residential property, in which case the
maximum height shall be four feet (4').
      4.   Location: Required parking spaces for dwellings shall be upon the
same premises as the dwelling.
      5.   Schedule Of Parking Requirements: Parking spaces as hereinafter set
forth shall be provided for all uses allowed and conditional uses permitted in
any zone; provided, that a greater number of spaces may be required in any case
where a conditional use permit is involved.
Bowling alley                           2 parking spaces for each alley
Building, every, hereafter erected
containing more than 15,000 square feet
in area and which is designed to be     1 loading space not less than 30 feet
occupied by any use requiring regular   in length and 10 feet in width,
receipt or dispatch of merchandise by   exclusive of access platforms and
truck, there shall be provided and      maneuvering areas
maintained with adequate design to
provide safe and efficient means of
access and maneuvering
Business offices, not otherwise         1 parking space for each 250 square
specified                               feet of net floor area
Church, auditorium, theater or sports   1 parking space for each 5 seats in the
arena                                   principal assembly room or area
Convalescent, nursing or rest home,     1 parking space plus 1 parking space
sanitarium or home for the care of      for each doctor assigned full time to
children or the aged, for each 4 beds   the staff, plus 2 parking spaces for
                                        each 3 other employees
Drive-in banks                          3 additional parking spaces for each
                                        teller window
                                        A reservoir space at the entrance
Drive-in theater                        containing 1 parking space for each 10
                                        vehicles accommodated within
Dwelling unit, each                     2 spaces as defined herein, sufficient
                                        for a garage or carport
                                        11/2 spaces per "dwelling unit" as
                                        defined herein, sufficient for a garage
                                        or carport; provided, however, that for
                                        each dwelling unit in a multiple-family
Dwelling unit, each, in a multiple-     dwelling of 5 units or more, 11/
family dwelling of 2 units or more      2 spaces as defined herein, sufficient
                                        for a garage or carport shall be
                                        provided for each of the first 4 units
                                        and 11/2 spaces shall be provided for
                                        each additional unit thereafter
Floor space used by the public or by    A number of parking spaces equal to 20
members in a social hall, dance hall,   percent of the capacity in persons. For
nightclub, pool hall, restaurant or     the purposes of this section, "capacity
other similar enterprise or             in persons" shall mean the gross floor
establishment                           area divided by 15 square feet
                                        1 parking space for each 1,000 square
Hospital                                feet of net floor area plus 1 parking
                                        space for each 4 regular employees
Hotel, motel, club, lodging house,      1 parking space plus 1 parking space
fraternity or sorority house, for each  for each 3 beds
guest bedroom
                                        1 parking space for each employee,
Manufacturing establishments            based on the greatest number of
                                        employees at any 1 time
Medical or dental office or clinic      1 parking space for each 250 square
                                        feet of net floor area
Mortuary                                12 parking spaces
Retail sales establishments handling
only durable goods or bulky merchandise 1 parking space for each 600 square
such as machinery, furniture or         feet of net floor area in excess of
vehicles, personal service and repair   2,000 square feet
shops, wholesale stores
Retail stores, banks and shops other    1 parking space for each 300 square
than as specified herein                feet of net floor area
 
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-5: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms are defined as set forth herein.
All words in the present tense include the future tense; the plural includes
the singular and all words in the singular include the plural unless the
natural construction of the sentence indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building which is subordinate and incidental to the
principal building on the same lot, but does not include any building
containing a "dwelling unit" as hereinafter defined.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
premises.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Shall be defined as set forth in chapter 6 of
this title.
   AGRICULTURE: Tilling of soil, horticulture, raising crops, livestock,
dairying, including all uses customarily accessory and incidental thereto but
excluding slaughterhouses and commercial feedlots.
   AIRPORT: Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use by
aircraft and including the necessary appurtenant structures or facilities
located thereon.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the
care or treatment of cats, dogs or other animals.
   APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has complete
kitchen and sanitary facilities permanently installed.
   AUTOMOBILE RENTAL: A lot or parcel used for the rental of vehicles such as
cars, trucks, sport utilities, motor homes, recreational vehicles or
motorcycles. A building housing offices may be included as a part of the
business; however, all vehicles held for rental shall be in operating condition
and no automotive repair or service work shall be permitted on the lot or
parcel.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles,
trailers, mobile homes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the
open for sale or trade.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises used primarily for the retail sale and
delivery to the vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and of lubricating oils, tires
and incidental vehicular accessories and providing vehicular lubrication and
related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed
buildings, on which two (2) or more motor vehicles not in operating condition
are standing more than thirty (30) days or on which used motor vehicles, or
parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
   AUTOMOTIVE SALES - NEW: A lot or parcel used by an authorized dealership
that is primarily in the business of selling new vehicles such as cars, trucks,
sport utilities, motor homes, recreational vehicles or motorcycles. A building
housing a showroom, salesroom, offices, and repair/service area may be included
as a part of the dealership. The dealership may also sell used vehicles and
provide rental and/or leasing services.
   AUTOMOTIVE SALES - USED: A lot or parcel used for the sale of used vehicles
such as cars, trucks, sport utilities, motor homes, recreational vehicles or
motorcycles. All vehicles held for sale shall be in operating condition and no
automotive repair or service work shall be permitted on the lot or parcel.
   BAR: See definition of Tavern Or Lounge.
   BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner occupied, family operated, single-family
residential dwelling that provides up to five (5) guestrooms for short term
lodging, with or without meals, to paying guests. Each guest bedroom may have a
private bathroom, but no guest bedroom shall include a kitchen or cooking area
separate from the single-family dwelling's kitchen. One off street parking
space shall be provided for each guest bedroom. Caretaker's quarters, within or
outside the dwelling, shall not be permitted, and no other commercial use, such
as a restaurant or meeting room(s), shall be included as a part of a bed and
breakfast.
   BLOCK: The space along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest
intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and a right of way,
waterway or other similar barrier, whichever is the lesser.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are
provided for compensation for three (3) or more persons but not more than
twelve (12) persons who are not members of the householder's family.
   BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof security affixed to
the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings,
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot as
one or more other buildings.
   BUILDING, GOVERNMENT: A building owned or used by the federal, state, county
or city government or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality
thereof.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the
requirements of this title.
   BUSINESS OR COMMERCE: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition of any articles, substance or commodity
for profit or livelihood or the ownership or management of office buildings,
offices, recreation or amusement enterprises or the maintenance and use of
offices or professions and trades rendering services.
   CAMPING TRAILER: Shall have the same meaning as "recreational vehicle" as
defined in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   CHILD: A person less than twelve (12) years of age.
   CHILDCARE CENTER: A facility which provides care, service or supervision for
more than twelve (12) children at one time; provided, that such center is
licensed by the state and is conducted with city and state requirements (see
section
5-2-9 of this chapter).
   CITY: The city of Parma.
   CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city.
   COMMERCIAL COACH: Shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission (referred to in this title as
"commission") of the city. The planning commission is declared to also be the
zoning commission of the city.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive general plan for the city officially
adopted by the council as such.
   CONDITIONAL USE: A use or occupancy of a structure, or use of land,
sometimes referred to as a "conditional use", permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit and subject to the limitations and conditions specified
therein.
   COUNCIL: The council of the city.
   DANCE FLOOR: The surface or floor area of a structure which is set aside or
designated for the purpose of dancing.
   DAYCARE: Care and supervision provided for compensation during part of a
twenty four (24) hour day for a child or children not related by blood or
marriage to the person or persons providing for care for a child or children in
a place other than the child's or children's own home or homes (see section
5-2-9 of this chapter).
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, other than an automobile service
station, which is designed to accommodate the motor vehicles of patrons in such
a manner as to permit the occupants of such vehicles, while remaining therein,
to make purchases or receive services.
   DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, containing one or more dwelling
units. The term dwelling does not include any trailer, "motel", hotel,
guesthouse or "boarding house" as defined herein.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family building, or portion thereof,
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for use and occupancy by no
more than one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for and occupied exclusively by
two (2) families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for, or used as a residence for
not more than one family, including all household employees of such family and
constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, with a single
kitchen permanently installed. The term does not imply or include such types of
occupancy as a lodging or boarding house, club, sorority, fraternity or hotel.
   FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A residence which provides care, services and
supervision for six (6) or fewer children at one time who do not normally
reside in the home; provided, that such center is licensed by the state and
conducted in accordance with state requirements (see section
 5-2-9 of this chapter).
   FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel,
floodway and floodway fringe, as established in the flood insurance study
provided by the federal insurance administration and designated as areas A, A-
5, A-6 and A-8 on the flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors including the exterior walls of a building or portion thereof.
   FLOOR AREA, NET: That portion of the gross floor area of the building
occupied by the listed use or uses and shall include hallways, storage and
packaging space, dressing rooms or restrooms and laboratory or workrooms;
provided, however, that floor space within the building reserved for parking or
loading of vehicles and basement space used only for building maintenance and
utilities shall be excluded.
   GROUP DAYCARE FACILITY: A facility which provides care, service and
supervision for at least seven (7) but not more than twelve (12) children at
one time, who do not normally reside in the home; provided, that such facility
is licensed by the state and conducted in accordance with city and state
requirements (see section
5-2-9 of this chapter).
   HEARING EXAMINER: An individual appointed by the council who shall, as
directed by council, perform the duties of the commission.
   HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a
dwelling unit including handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery, laundering,
preserving, office of a clergyman, teaching of music, dancing and other
instruction when limited to attendance of one pupil at a time and other like
occupancies which meet all of the conditions of section
5-2-8 of this chapter.
   JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are stored or handled, including automobile wrecking yards and yards
for used building materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged
building and structural steel materials and equipment; excluding yards or
establishments for the sale, purchase, processing or storage of used cars or
machinery in operable condition and the processing of used, discarded or
salvaged materials as part of a permitted manufacturing operation on the same
premises.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which three
(3) or more dogs, cats or other household domestic animals of at least three
(3) months of age are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred for sale
or are cared for in return for compensation.
   KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, in which more
than two (2) dogs, cats or other household domestic animals of at least three
(3) months of age are kept for sale.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open, off street area of land
other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys.
   LOT: A unit of land described by metes and bounds or a part of a recorded
subdivision so recorded for transfer of ownership.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by street
lines, where the angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
   LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   LOT LINE: The boundary property line encompassing a lot. The front lot line
is the boundary line which abuts a public street. For a corner lot, the owner
may select either street line as a front lot line. The rear lot line is the lot
line most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front property line. All
other lot lines are side lot lines. An interior lot line is an inside line in
common with another lot.
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot
lines.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: Shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
5-4-2 of this title.
   MOBILE HOME: Shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   MOTEL: A building or group of buildings, on the same premises whether
detached or in connected rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units
independently accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space
located on the premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term
includes, but is not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as
auto courts, motor lodges, tourist courts or by any other title or sign
intended to identify them as providing lodging to motorists or the traveling
public.
   NONCONFORMING USE: Any use lawfully occupying a building, structure or land
at the effective date of any land use regulation or of subsequent amendment
thereto, which does not conform to the regulations.
   NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution providing care, with or without instruction,
for more than five (5) children of preschool age.
   NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME: A building housing any facility, however
named, whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide
skilled nursing care and related medical services for two (2) or more
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or requiring
care because of old age.
   PARKING LOT: An open, graded and surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of
operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles and available to the
public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or
customers.
   PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking area or
building, not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9' x 20'),
exclusive of access drives, aisles or ramps for the storage of one passenger
automobile or commercial vehicle.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: An area located on the premises or within three
hundred feet (300') of subject property which is adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with property
related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room; but shall be
located outside of any street or alley right of way.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   RECYCLING COLLECTING STATION: A building used for processing recyclable
materials, including collecting, sorting, compacting and transfer of said
materials. Recyclable materials include paper, aluminum cans, bottles, etc.,
but shall not include chemicals or other hazardous materials.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION, TEMPORARY: A vehicle or movable building or
structure where recyclable materials are collected for transfer to a recycling
station.
   REST HOME OR ELDERLY HOUSING: The same as a nursing home except that medical
care is not administered therein.
   RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room.
   ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of agricultural and related products, the majority of which have been
grown on adjacent land.
   SECURITY GUARD QUARTERS: A dwelling occupied by a resident watchman and/or a
caretaker employed on the premises for the purpose of providing twenty four
(24) hour security. Security guard quarters may be integrated within the
primary business structure, or may be separate from the business structure. A
building permit shall be required and the dwelling unit must meet sanitary
requirements of the city.
   SETBACK AREA: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied by
buildings or structures, either by the front, side or rear yard requirements of
this title or by delineation on a recorded subdivision map.
   SIGN: Any structure or natural object, such as a tree, rock, bush and the
ground itself or part thereof or device attached thereto placed thereon or
painted or represented thereon, which shall be used to attract attention to any
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business
or which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag,
pennant, insignia, device or representation used as or which is in the nature
of an announcement, declaration or advertisement. For the purpose of this
definition, the word "sign" does not include the flag, political unit or any
political, educational, habitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade,
such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
   STREET: A public right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access
to adjacent properties, acceptance or grant of which has been officially
approved by the council. The term "street" includes also the terms highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and
other such terms.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, not exceeding
three feet (3') in height, which requires permanent location on the ground or
is attached to something having location on the ground.
   TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for
consumption on the premises, not including restaurants where the principal
business is serving food.
   TRAVEL TRAILER: Shall have the same meaning as "recreational vehicle" as
defined in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Shall have the same meaning as "recreational vehicle
park" as defined in section
5-5-2 of this title.
   YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of
buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward,
except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to
the front street line.
   YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the full width of the lot lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
   YARD, SIDE: The yard lying between the nearest wall of the principal
building, accessory building and side lot line and extending from the front
yard or the front lot line to the rear yard.
   ZONING MAP: The map incorporated into this title designating the use
district zones. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-6: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A.   Continuance Of Nonconforming Use: Any use lawfully occupying a building
or land at the effective date of this title or of subsequent amendments thereto
which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued.
Maintenance and minor repairs necessary to keep a nonconforming use in sound
condition during such continuance shall be permitted.
   B.   Extension Or Enlargement Of Buildings Or Uses:
      1.   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if
thereafter the entire building is devoted to a conforming use.
      2.   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be
altered in such a way to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such nonconforming use.
      3.   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required open space or any land beyond the boundaries of the lot on
which it existed at the effective date hereof, nor may any such nonconforming
use displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
   C.   Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Building Or Use: Any nonconforming
building destroyed by fire or other calamity to an extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the appraised value may not be restored unless such
restoration shall make the building a conforming building and any intended use
shall be a conforming use; provided, however, that nothing in this title shall
be construed to prevent the restoration and the resumption of the former lawful
use of any building that is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, or other
calamity, to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%); provided, that such
restoration is started within one calendar year and diligently prosecuted to
completion.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of
land or building has been discontinued for a period of one year, or whenever
there is evidence of a clear intent to abandon a nonconforming use, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter
shall be in conformity with the regulations of the use district.
      1.   Provided, however, that if the property has improvements designed
for a use which is nonconforming pursuant to the terms of this section, the
owner shall retain the right to use said improvements for their designed
purpose, notwithstanding a period of nonuse, subject to the following
exceptions:
         a.   The nonuse of the improvements for their designed purpose
continues for a period of ten (10) years or more;
         b.   During nonuse of the improvements for their designed purpose, the
improvements are used for a different approved or unlawful use;
         c.   The improvements are redesigned for a use other than their
designed purpose; or
         d.   Failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of subsection
D2 of this section.
      2.   If the nonuse of an improvement described in subsection A of this
section continues for a period of one year or longer, the city may, by written
request, require the owner to declare his intention with respect to the
continued nonuse of the improvement in writing within twenty eight (28) days
after receipt of the request. If the owner elects to continue the nonuse, he
shall notify the city in writing of his intention and:
         a.   Post the property in at least two (2) places with a notice of his
intent to continue the nonuse of the improvement and a description of its
designed purpose. Notices shall be posted using signs of sixteen (16) square
feet each or greater, visible from adjoining public rights of way, constructed
in permanent all weather materials and maintained by the owner for the entire
period of nonuse; and
         b.   Publish a notice of intent to continue the nonuse of the
improvement and a description of its designed purpose, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county where the property is located.
         c.   For purposes of this section "designed purpose" means the use for
which the improvements were originally intended, designed and approved pursuant
to any applicable planning and zoning ordinances.
         d.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the city from passing or enforcing any other law or ordinance for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
   E.   Mobile Homes And Manufactured Houses:
      1.   Exception: Restrictions on nonconforming uses shall not apply where
a nonconforming mobile home or manufactured house currently and lawfully exists
in any residentially zoned area and is replaced by a newer and/or larger
manufactured house constructed or manufactured after 1976.
      2.   Repair And Upgrade Of Mobile Homes: All mobile homes already in
place at the date of passage of this title which do not meet the mobile home
construction and safety standards promulgated by the department of housing and
urban development in 1976, or as amended, shall be allowed to continue as
nonconforming uses; however, when repaired beyond fifty percent (50%) of value,
enlarged or replaced the same must be upgraded to class B or C "mobile homes".
This restriction does not apply to replacement of windows or siding.
      3.   Manufactured Home: A manufactured home which has been placed upon an
individual lot and maintained prior to the effective date hereof shall be a
legal nonconforming use. Such manufactured home shall not be relocated within
the city without conforming to all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-7: TEMPORARY USES OF LAND:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the city of Parma and its residents. This title
is not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by the first
amendment, but merely to regulate specific activities which are commercial in
nature.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   SPECIAL EVENT: A bona fide school, community or public event not to exceed
five (5) consecutive calendar days which is centered around a specific theme,
ceremony, holiday or historical event and sponsored by an identifiable
individual or group.
   TEMPORARY: A period of six (6) months or less.
   TEMPORARY USE: Any commercial use of land that will last for no more than
six (6) months.
   TEMPORARY USE FACILITY: Any building, vehicle, cart, trailer, mobile home or
other facility used in conjunction with a temporary use.
   C.   Temporary Use And Facilities Regulations: All temporary uses and
temporary use facilities shall be subject to the following conditions and
regulations:
      1.   No person shall engage in temporary use of land or construct, place,
or set up a "temporary use facility" as defined herein, without first procuring
a temporary use permit.
      2.   The permit shall not allow for placement of any temporary use
facility or sign within a street, vision triangle, required setback, dedicated
trash dumpster location, sidewalk, or any other position on a lot which may
substantially interfere with vehicle or pedestrian circulation, emergency
access or the normal functions of other uses on the property, or be potentially
hazardous to the public. Placement must be on private property in a commercial
zone other than C-1 or any industrial zone.
      3.   The written permission of and indemnification by the property owner
or owners on a form provided by the city shall be required in order to operate
a temporary use on property within the city.
      4.   The proposed use shall be commercial in nature and in conformance
with the zoning district within which it is to be located except commercial
uses may be located in industrial zones.
      5.   A temporary use permit shall not exempt or otherwise excuse the
applicant from complying with all other applicable city, county, state or
federal regulations pertaining to the type of activity the applicant will be
conducting under such permit. Applicants who will serve food or beverages shall
first procure a permit from the southwest district health department to ensure
compliance with applicable health regulations.
      6.   Every person who receives a temporary use permit shall clean up all
garbage or debris caused by his or her temporary use, or within twenty feet
(20') of the temporary use facility both daily and immediately upon cessation
of such use. Every temporary use must include trash receptacles and regular
trash service.
      7.   Temporary use facilities shall provide adequate accessibility as
required by ADA standards.
      8.   Any power supply connected to or used within a temporary use
facility shall comply with all city and state electrical regulations.
      9.   All temporary use facilities shall be maintained and remain in
compliance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations,
including, without limitation, fire, building, and electrical codes as well as
health regulations, during the life of the temporary use permit.
      10.   Temporary use facilities shall be placed on a noncombustible
surface and must be at least twenty five feet (25') away from combustible
materials.
      11.   Temporary use facilities shall be supported by materials approved
for direct contact with the earth and shall be anchored in a manner acceptable
to the city building inspector. No temporary use facility shall be constructed
on a permanent foundation or otherwise caused to be permanently affixed to the
land solely for the purpose of accommodating a temporary use. For purposes of
this section, any facility that cannot be removed in a twenty four (24) hour
period without destroying such facility, a significant portion thereof, or
damaging the ground upon which it sits, shall be considered permanently affixed
to the land.
      12.   Temporary use facilities consisting of buildings or portions
thereof shall comply with all city building codes and a certificate of
occupancy shall be obtained from the building inspector prior to operation of
the temporary use. Temporary use facilities consisting of a cart, trailer,
mobile home or other structure shall comply with the following:
         a.   No structure shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
         b.   No structure shall exceed thirty feet (30') in length.
         c.   No structure shall exceed one hundred two inches (102") in width.
         d.   No temporary use facility shall consist of more than one trailer,
mobile home, recreational vehicle or motor vehicle per vendor and, in addition
thereto, not more than one tent per vendor.
      13.   Anyone operating a temporary use shall do so in a manner that does
not create excessive noise, light, dust, nuisance or other detriment to the
quiet enjoyment of property in the vicinity.
      14.   Anyone engaged in a temporary use shall be allowed to engage in
their business only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      15.   Temporary use facilities shall not be placed within fifty feet
(50') of another temporary use facility or within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of a permanent use of the same kind.
      16.   Any BBQ grill associated with a temporary use must be enclosed and
permanently built into the temporary use facility.
      17.   Unsecured menu boards or sidewalk signs are prohibited. All signage
must be affixed to the temporary use facility or a preexisting sign on site.
      18.   Temporary use facilities shall have a clean appearance at all
times.
      19.   Temporary use facilities must at all times be parked in a legal
manner. Vending operations shall be conducted only to pedestrians; drive-up
service is not allowed. No service to the public shall be made from the street
side of the temporary use facility.
      20.   No licensee hereunder shall:
         a.   Fail to comply with any of the requirements and restrictions set
forth in this section;
         b.   Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those engaged in,
the solicitation;
         c.   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that
individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or
to buy anything from that solicitor;
         d.   Represent the issuance of any permit under this section as an
endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation.
   D.   Inspection And Qualifications For Permit:
      1.   At the time of filing an original application, an adult applicant
shall pay the permit fee to the city clerk. The permit fee for any temporary
use shall be set by resolution of the council. Applicant shall also bear the
actual costs of necessary inspections.
      2.   If the applicant or his employer has been convicted of a violation
of any municipal, state or federal laws, except for minor traffic violations,
in the previous five (5) years; or if the applicant has made a false statement
on the application or has had a temporary use permit revoked or suspended for a
violation of this section it may be disapproved.
   E.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Any sales under court order;
      2.   Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who
exclusively or primarily sell to, or solicit orders for delivery, from local
retailers, local businesses, local governments, local schools, or local
wholesale firms;
      3.   The sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the
same;
      4.   The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person
engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper;
      5.   The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a
function of their school; or fundraising sales by local service clubs or groups
such as Elks, Kiwanis, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts;
      6.   Any political group seeking funds or membership;
      7.   Garage, yard, or similar sales by individuals at their residence or
place of business not exceeding two (2) separate sales in one calendar year,
not to exceed three (3) days each, which sales shall not include business
inventory or items that have been purchased for the purpose of resale at
another garage sale;
      8.   Any organization exempt from taxation as provided by 26 USC 501 and
meeting all the requirements for the exemptions provided by 26 USC 503;
      9.   Any activity conducted as a special event.
   F.   Expiration Of Permit: All permits issued under the provisions of this
section shall expire on the date specified in the permit. No permit shall be
issued for a period longer than six (6) months.
   G.   Enforcement:
      1.   Violations: Any person who engages in a temporary use or operates a
temporary use facility without first procuring a temporary use permit, or
otherwise violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, where applicable, may have his or her temporary use permit
revoked. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate, additional
offense.
      2.   Compliance Notice: Upon finding that one is in violation of this
section, the planning director, his/her designee, or a code enforcement officer
may declare the use illegal and in violation of the zoning codes. The enforcing
authority may then instruct the owner or operator of the use to immediately
remove it from the premises by giving written notice to vacate the premises.
      3.   Enforcement Against Violator(s): The owner or operator may
subsequently apply for a temporary use permit to continue using the property.
If the permit is obtained then said owner may, within the conditions set forth
in such permit, continue to operate the temporary use. If the permit is not
obtained, and the owner or operator of the temporary use does not vacate the
property as directed, then the enforcement authority shall take action against
the violator.
   H.   Severance Clause: The provisions of this section are declared to be
severable. If any portion hereof is found to be invalid, such finding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions, sentences, clauses and phrases
of this section, but the same shall remain in effect, it being the legislative
intent that this section shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any
part. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-8: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a "home occupation" as
defined in section
5-2-5 of this chapter within the city without having first received a permit
therefor.
   B.   Application for a home occupation permit shall be in writing, signed to
and sworn to by the resident or the property owner upon application forms
furnished by the city.
   C.   The permit fee imposed and collected shall be as set by council and may
be issued for the term of the home occupation but shall not be transferable
from one individual or property owner to another. Home occupation permits shall
meet all of the following terms and conditions:
      1.   The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      2.   The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is carried on by
the inhabitants thereof.
      3.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except
such as is produced by the occupant on the premises. Any illegal articles or
goods sold or offered for sale on the premises such as stolen property or any
form of contraband shall be strictly prohibited.
      4.   The use does not change the character of the dwelling or adversely
affect the uses permitted in the zoning districts.
      5.   The use requires no additional off street parking spaces.
      6.   No persons are employed other than those necessary for domestic
purposes.
      7.   Not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the gross area of the one floor of
said dwelling is used for such use.
   D.   A home occupation permit may be revoked if it is determined that any of
the conditions of this section are being violated. Prior to any revocation, the
applicant shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the commission,
said hearing must be requested within seven (7) days of receipt of a notice of
intent to revoke a home occupation permit. Failure to request such a hearing
will result in revocation of the home occupation permit. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-9: CHILDCARE FACILITIES:
   A.   Family daycare homes shall be an accessory use and home occupation in
all residential districts.
   B.   Group daycare facilities and childcare centers shall be a conditional
use, requiring a conditional use permit, in districts designated in the land
use table.
   C.   Conditional use permits for group daycare facilities and childcare
centers are not transferable from one owner/operator to another nor from one
location to another.
   D.   A group daycare facility or a childcare center is a permitted accessory
use in any district where it is conducted within an operating church, school or
comparable public or quasi-judicial facility, large employment center or
similar institution. These childcare uses are subject to compliance with all
applicable standards as set forth by this section.
   E.   Family daycare homes, group daycare facilities and childcare centers
shall meet the following standards as indicated:
Requirement Daycare Homes Group Daycare Facilities Childcare Centers
Requirement             Daycare Homes Group Daycare Childcare Centers
                                      Facilities
The owner must obtain
all applicable state    X             X             X
licenses prior to
conducting business.
Provide an area
sufficient for drop off
and pick up of
children. On street
drop off and pick up is
not allowed on
collector or arterial   X
streets. Location on
collector or arterial
streets shall provide a
separate means of
ingress and egress to
the site from a public
street.
Provide off street
parking of 1 space for
each employee. Provide
an area sufficient for
drop off and pick up of
children. On street
drop off and pick up is
not allowed on                        X
collector or arterial
streets. Location on
collector or arterial
streets shall provide a
separate means of
ingress and egress to
the site from a public
street.
Provide off street
parking of 1 space for
every 8 children
maximum enrollment plus
1 additional space for
each employee. Provide
an area on site                                     X
sufficient for drop off
and pick up of children
and a separate means of
ingress and egress to
the site from a public
street.
In residential zoning
districts, no
structural alterations
to a residential
building are allowed    X             X             X
which result in change
of the exterior
residential character
of the building.
As a condition of the
conditional use permit,
the commission shall                  X             X
establish the maximum
number of children
allowed.
Landscaping, additional
setbacks, walls or
fences may be
considered and required               X             X
by the commission as
part of the conditional
use permit.
No outdoor activities
for children shall be
allowed before 7:30                   X             X
A.M. or 1/2 hour after
sunset.
Minimum of 35 square
feet of net indoor                    X             X
floor area per child.
 
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-2-10: FENCING REGULATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   A.   Fences, walls and hedges are permitted in residential zones in any
required yard or along the edge of any yard to a height of eight feet (8');
provided, that no fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of any
front yard shall be over four feet (4') in height.
   B.   On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in any such manner as to materially impede
vision between a height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of intersecting streets bounded by the property lines of such
corner lots on a line joining points along said property lines for thirty feet
(30'). Any corner lot on intersections with state maintained highways or
intersections with railroads shall comply with all requirements of state or
federal law with respect to potential vision obstructions. (Ord. 549, 7-14-
2008)
5-2-11: GEOGRAPHIC OVERLAY; WAIVER; AND SETBACKS:
   A.   Purpose: To preserve the lots and character of the area defined in
subsection B; and to encourage residential uses through more flexible standards
to maintain, protect, and enhance land use and livability.
   B.   Boundary Map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/61ec97fb1b39ef8bc70be10ad320ecd348c6f373/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1194.png]
 
   C.   Definition:
 
OUTBUILDING(S) : Building(s), such as a shed, barn, or garage, on the same
                 property but not used as a dwelling.
 
   D.   Residential Setback Standards:
      1.   Waiver: Owners of property within the boundary map identified in
subsection B may apply for a waiver from the setback requirements set forth in
section
5-2-3 and instead be subject to the setback requirements set forth in
subsection D2.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   New residential buildings, additions to existing residential
buildings, and detached outbuildings shall be subject to the following setback
standards:
            (1)   Front setbacks as measured from the property line shall be
ten feet (10') minimum, or within five feet (5') of the average setbacks of the
adjacent properties, whichever is greater.
            (2)   Interior side, street side, and rear setbacks shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') from the property line.
         b.   Detached outbuildings may have a reduced side and rear setbacks
of five feet (5') from the property line.
      3.   Remaining Standards:
         a.   All other standards identified in section
5-2-3 shall not be modified by the issuance of a waiver and remain applicable
to real property within the boundary map identified in subsection B. (Ord. 615,
4-12-2022)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Duties Of The Planning And Zoning Administrator
5-3-2: Amendment And Reclassification
5-3-3: Conditional Use Permit Procedures
5-3-4: Variance Procedures
5-3-5: Fee Schedule
5-3-6: Planned Unit Developments 1  (Rep. by Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
5-3-7: Mediation
5-3-8: Violation, Enforcement And Penalty
5-3-9: Severability
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-5-3-1 of this code.
5-3-1: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The council may appoint a planning and zoning administrator for the purposes
outlined in this section. In the event an administrator is not appointed by
council for any reason, the city attorney or mayor shall serve as the planning
and zoning administrator on an ad hoc basis. The duties of the administrator
are as follows:
   A.   Interpret and administer this title by answering general questions and
assisting the public in the land use process;
   B.   Make administrative and discretionary determinations where required or
appropriate, provided that any affected person may appeal an administrative or
discretionary determination of the administrator to the council;
   C.   Arrange for scheduling and notice of public hearings and assist the
commission and council in fulfilling their responsibilities under this title;
   D.   Perform other reasonable and necessary functions to assure the
consistent, clear and faithful implementation of this title. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-3-2: AMENDMENT AND RECLASSIFICATION:
   A.   Initiation Of Proceedings:
      1.   This title may be amended whenever the council deems that amendment
is required for public convenience, necessity or general welfare. Any amendment
shall be enacted pursuant to this section, and for purposes of this section,
includes any measure to change district boundaries, establish or disestablish
districts, to change district regulations, to add, repeal or amend any other
provision of this title or the whole of this title.
      2.   An amendment to the text of this title or to the official zoning map
may be initiated by the council or the commission or by an application of one
or more of the owners of property affected by the proposed amendment.
      3.   Applications shall be filed with the commission on forms prescribed
by the commission, accompanied by such data and information necessary to assure
the fullest presentation of facts.
      4.   No application for the same general purpose concerning the same
property which has been denied by the city shall be received or processed
within one hundred eighty (180) days of such denial except by majority approval
of the council.
   B.   Commission Notice And Public Hearing:
      1.   The commission, prior to recommending an amendment, supplement, or
repeal of any portion of this title, shall conduct at least one public hearing
in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The notice
and procedure for such hearing shall comply with Idaho Code section 67-6511.
      2.   If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the commission may recommend and the council may adopt or reject the amendment
to this title under the same notice and hearing procedures.
      3.   When notice is required to be given to two hundred (200) or more
property owners or purchasers of record, an alternative form of procedure of
official notice of the public hearing for both the commission and council shall
be that the public hearing notice shall be published in the official newspaper
or newspaper of general circulation in the area two (2) consecutive times.
      4.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive
plan, the request for amendment shall not take place until after the
comprehensive plan has been amended under notice and hearing procedures
provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code, after which the request may be heard
again as provided for under the notice and hearing procedures as set forth
herein.
   C.   Development Agreements:
      1.   Legislative Purpose: The council finds that the ability to execute a
development agreement in connection with a change of zoning provides benefits
for both the property owner or developer and the city by providing a balance
between the owner or developer's desire for certainty in the development
process and the city's desire for control of any project impacts as a means to
ensure harmony with the established surrounding pattern of development; and,
therefore, the ability to execute such development agreements in appropriate
circumstances is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Parma.
      2.   Creation And Form: At a minimum, development agreements shall
include the following:
         a.   A legal description of the subject property.
         b.   A description of the uses permitted on the land, which may
include preliminary site plan, elevation plans and other pertinent exhibits.
         c.   Provisions of any reservation or dedication of land.
         d.   The duration of the agreement.
         e.   The commitments or other terms of the agreement.
      3.   Commitments And Safeguards: The written commitments or conditions
exacted shall be specific and shall have a reasonable relation to the zoning
change approved. In addition, the following safeguards shall be applied:
         a.   A development agreement shall not prevent the city in subsequent
actions applicable to the property from applying new rules, regulations or
policies that do not conflict with commitments applicable to the property set
forth within any duly executed agreement.
         b.   If a commitment involves ongoing performances and the owner or
developer fails to comply with the commitment after completion of construction,
said failure may be dealt with by the city according to the violation and
penalty provisions of this chapter or the local land use planning act and/or
for specific performance of the development agreement, including attorney fees
and costs associated with the enforcement of the agreement.
         c.   When a commitment is required to be satisfied prior to completion
of construction and it is not so satisfied, construction shall be halted until
compliance is established.
      4.   Recordation: Development agreements shall be attached as an exhibit
to the ordinance establishing the zoning map amendment. Agreements shall take
effect and shall be recorded by the city in the office of the county recorder
upon the adoption of the ordinance establishing the zoning map amendment by the
council. Should a development agreement be terminated by the city, and the
zoning designation upon which the use is based be reversed, a document
recording such termination and zoning reversal shall also be recorded by the
city in the office of the county recorder. Unless otherwise modified or
terminated by the council, an agreement shall be binding on the owner of the
parcel, each subsequent owner and each other person acquiring an interest in
the parcel.
      5.   Termination, Modification And Extension: The establishment of a
development agreement and the written commitments contained therein, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be deemed written consent
to change the zoning of the subject property to its prior designation upon
failure to comply with the conditions imposed by the agreement. A development
agreement may be modified only with the permission of the council after
complying with the notice and hearing provisions of this section. A development
agreement may be terminated by the city, and the zoning designation upon which
the use is based may be reversed upon the failure of the owner, developer or
each subsequent owner or person acquiring an interest in the subject parcel to
comply with the commitments in the agreement within two (2) years. The two (2)
year period of time for compliance of commitments may be extended by the city
for just cause and upon application for such by the owner, and after complying
with the notice and hearing provisions of this section. For commitments that
are ongoing in nature, the council may act to enforce the development agreement
at any time.
   D.   Action By The Commission:
      1.   The commission shall cause to be made by any of its members or by
any member of its staff such investigation of facts bearing upon such
amendment, supplement, repeal or matter of hearing as in the opinion of the
commission will serve to provide the necessary information to enable the
commission to act.
      2.   Not later than thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing,
the commission shall file with the council a written report stating the action
taken by the commission and its recommendation.
   E.   Council Notice And Public Hearing: The council, prior to adoption of an
amendment, supplement or repeal of this title, shall hold at least one public
hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission. If the
council makes a material change in the proposed amendment, supplement or
repeal, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the council adopts
the amendment, supplement or repeal. If the council approves the proposed
amendment, it shall thereafter be made a part of this title by appropriate
amendment to the official zoning map and zoning ordinance text.
   F.   Annexation: Prior to annexation of unincorporated area, the council
shall request and receive a recommendation from the commission on the proposed
zoning of said area upon annexation. Concurrently with or immediately following
the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the council shall provide for
amendments to the official zoning map and map component of the comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURES:
The following provisions shall apply to conditional use permits:
   A.   Every use which requires the granting of a conditional use permit is
declared to possess characteristics such as to require review and appraisal by
the commission to determine whether or not the use would cause any damage,
hazard, nuisance or other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity. The
commission may require higher standards of site development than listed
specifically in this title in order to correlate the proposed use to other
property and uses. The commission may revoke or modify its approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section under specific conditions and when it is not in conflict with the
comprehensive plan.
   B.   Applications for conditional use permits shall be filed with the city
clerk on forms prescribed by the commission accompanied by such data and
information necessary to assure the fullest presentation.
   C.   The commission shall conduct at least one public hearing on each
conditional use permit application in which interested persons shall have
opportunity to be heard. Notice procedures shall comply with 67-6512, Idaho
Code. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or
purchasers of record, an alternative form of procedure of official notice shall
be that the public hearing notice shall be published in the official newspaper
or newspaper of general circulation two (2) consecutive times.
   D.   The commission shall cause to be made by any of its own members or by
any member of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon the
application as in the opinion of the commission will serve to provide the
necessary information to enable the commission to act.
   E.   Upon the granting of the conditional use permit, conditions may be
attached, including, but not limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Controlling the duration of the use and/or development;
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designating the location and nature of development, including signs;
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services;
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in an ordinance;
      8.   Specifying the period of time for which a permit is issued and
conditions which, if not followed, will bring about revocation of the
conditional use permit;
      9.   Requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon
service delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts,
providing services within the planning jurisdiction.
   F.   Prior to granting a conditional use permit, studies may be required of
the social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed use. A
conditional use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding
precedent and shall not be transferable from one parcel of land to another.
   G.   Whenever the commission grants or desires a conditional use permit, it
shall specify in writing:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   H.   The applicant or any affected person having an interest in real
property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundaries
of the subject property may appeal the decision of the commission provided
written notice of such an appeal is filed with the city clerk within fifteen
(15) days after the written decision of the commission is signed.
   I.   In reviewing an appeal pertaining to the conditional use permit, the
council shall hold a de novo public hearing using the public hearing notice and
procedures prescribed for the commission. The council may approve, disapprove
or modify the action of the commission. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-4: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
The following provisions shall apply in considering variances:
   A.   The commission shall consider variances to the terms of this title
which will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result
in unnecessary hardship. A "variance" is a modification of the requirement of
this title as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard,
rear yard, setback, parking space, height of buildings or other zoning
provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the
structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a
right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a
showing of undue hardship.
Hardships shall not be self-imposed, but shall result from special site
characteristics relating to the size, location, configuration or dimensions of
the site or the placement of existing structures thereon, or from geographic,
topographic or other physical conditions which render the site unique from
other properties in the same zone or vicinity.
Prior to granting a variance, notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be
provided to property owners adjoining the parcel under consideration. In acting
upon a variance, the commission shall make a full investigation and shall only
grant a variance upon finding that the following are true:
      1.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions, applicable to the property involved, which do not apply generally
to other properties within the same zoning district.
      2.   That the exceptional or extraordinary circumstances in conjunction
with a literal interpretation and application of the regulation would result in
undue hardship by depriving the applicant of reasonable use and enjoyment of
the property or of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties located
in the same zoning district.
      3.   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of
special privilege.
      4.   That the granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental
to the public health, safety or welfare, or interest or injurious to the
property or improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of
such property or improvement.
      5.   That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the
spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan and will not effect a change in
zoning.
   B.   An application for a variance may be initiated by or at the request of
a property owner. Such application shall be filed with the commission on forms
prescribed by the commission accompanied by such data and information necessary
to assure the fullest presentation of facts.
   C.   Prior to granting a variance, the commission shall conduct one public
hearing in accordance with the procedures prescribed for conditional use
permits, except that notice shall be provided only to property owners adjoining
the property for which the variance request is made.
   D.   Whenever the commission grants or denies a variance, it shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   E.   Upon the granting of the variance, terms and conditions may be attached
that:
      1.   Specify the nature and extent of relief being granted;
      2.   Minimize any adverse effect on neighboring properties or
improvements.
   F.   The applicant or any affected person having an interest in real
property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundaries
of the subject property may appeal the decision of the commission pursuant to
subsections
5-3-3H and I of this chapter. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-5: FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees for planning and zoning applications and related matters, shall be
established, amended or modified as necessary by duly adopted resolution of the
council. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-5-3-1 of this code.
5-3-7: MEDIATION:
   A.   Request For Mediation: The processing of any application pursuant to
this title may include mediation upon the written request of the applicant, an
affected person, the commission, the planning and zoning hearing examiner or
the council. Provided, however, that any request for mediation by the
commission, planning and zoning hearing examiner or the council shall be deemed
written and in compliance with this section if the request is made on the
record at any regular or special meeting. Mediation may occur at any point
during the processing of the application, including after a final decision has
been made. If mediation occurs after a final decision, any resolution of
differences through mediation must be the subject of another public hearing
before the final decision making authority.
   B.   Mediator: The mediator shall be selected by the mutual agreement of the
applicant and the affected persons opposing the application. If no agreement
can be reached, the mediator shall be selected by the final decision making
authority. The mediator must be an attorney, hearing examiner, city/county
planner or other professional with experience in land use and zoning matters,
as well as some familiarity with the processing of land use applications and
the quasi-judicial authority of municipalities.
   C.   First Mediation Session: Mediation is not mandatory unless it is
requested by the final decision making authority in which case the applicant,
together with any other affected persons identified by the decision making
authority, shall participate in at least one mediation session. The party
requesting the mediation shall pay the expense of the mediator for the first
session. If the requesting party is not the city, the party requesting the
mediation shall pay the expenses reasonably incurred by the city in mediation.
   D.   Subsequent Mediation Sessions: If additional mediation sessions are
agreed upon by the interested parties, the parties shall arrange with the
mediator for additional mediation sessions. The interested parties shall
determine among themselves, and with the mediator, at the commencement of any
subsequent mediation session, how the mediator shall be compensated. Mediation
sessions may continue as long as the interested parties and the mediator feel
that mediation is progressing toward resolution. If a mediation session ends
with no agreement for a subsequent session, the mediation shall be deemed
concluded.
   E.   Conclusion Of Mediation: Upon the conclusion of mediation, the mediator
shall notify the planning and zoning administrator. If the mediation was not
successful, no details or other information shall be given by the mediator. If
the mediation is successful, the mediator shall transcribe the terms of the
agreed upon resolution, securing the signature of the applicant and at least
one representative of those in opposition at the final mediation session. The
mediator shall deliver the agreement to the planning and zoning administrator.
   F.   Successful Mediation: If the mediation is successfully concluded upon
terms that do not involve the withdrawal of the application, the application
shall be scheduled for the next available hearing date of the decision making
authority for action consistent with this chapter. The final decision making
authority may conclude the matter upon the terms of the signed agreement.
   G.   Time Limitations Tolled: During mediation, any time limitation relevant
to the application shall be tolled. Such tolling shall cease when the applicant
or any other affected person, after having participated in at least one
mediation session, states in writing that no further participation is desired
and notifies the other parties, or upon notice of a request to mediate wherein
no mediation session is scheduled for twenty eight (28) days from the date of
such request.
   H.   Official Record: The mediation process shall not be part of the
official record regarding the application. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-8: VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted. Violations
of this title shall be and are hereby declared a nuisance.
   B.   It is the duty of the planning and zoning administrator, or the police
department of the city, or their authorized designee, to enforce all provisions
of this title and refer violations to the city attorney who shall initiate
actions in the courts when necessary, and his failure to do so shall not
legalize any violation of such provisions.
   C.   The planning and zoning administrator, or the police department of the
city, or their duly authorized designee, shall have the right to enter upon any
land during the daytime in the course of his duties and, if approached by the
property owner or lessor, shall show proper identification and give that
individual notice as to the purpose of the visit. They may enter in any
building upon being invited by an owner or tenant and may enter a structure
closed to them by permission of an owner or occupant or through absence of the
same upon obtaining an administrative search warrant.
   D.   In any case where any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this title, the city, through any authorized
representative, may in its discretion pursue appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation;
to prevent the occupancy or use of said building, structure, or land; or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such building,
structure or land. In enforcement of this title, authorized city
representatives shall take such action as may be necessary to terminate the
violation, including, without limitation, the issuance of a citation,
solicitation of assistance from other local authorities, abatement of a
nuisance, posting of some type of cease and desist or stop work order,
withholding a certificate of occupancy or building permit, or pursuit of civil
or criminal legal remedies. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-3-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions of this title or application thereof to any persons or
circumstances are held invalid, the remainder of the title or the application
of provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
CHAPTER 4
MANUFACTURED HOME AND TINY HOME REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Development Standards
5-4-4: Administration And Enforcement
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the location and approval of
manufactured housing, and tiny homes, as permanent dwelling units on individual
lots zoned for single-family residential uses. (Ord. 589, 5-13-2019)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
   MANUFACTURED HOME: For purposes of this chapter, manufactured home shall be
defined as a structure constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
construction and safety standards and 39-4105(10), Idaho Code, which is
designed to be used as a permanent residential dwelling.
   PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: A manufactured home which had the running gear and
towing hitch, or similar devices, removed and is set up per manufacturer's
instructions on permanent footings, with supports having an anchoring system
that is totally concealed under the structure and complies with Department of
Housing and Urban Development standards.
   TINY HOME: A dwelling which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in
floor area excluding lofts. (Ord. 589, 5-13-2019)
5-4-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a manufactured home, or tiny home as a permanent residential
dwelling on a parcel of land shall be permitted in any zoning district of this
title which permits a single-family site built dwelling, except for lands
falling within an area defined as a "historic district" under section 67-4607,
Idaho Code, provided the following standards are met:
   A.   The manufactured home is multisectional with a minimum width of twenty
feet (20') and a minimum enclosed floor space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet.
   B.   The manufactured home, or tiny home is placed on an excavated and
backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is
located not more than twelve inches (12") above grade.
   C.   Manufactured homes shall have pitched roofs with a minimum slope of a
nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
   D.   The manufactured home, or tiny home has exterior siding and roofing
materials which in color, material, and appearance are generally similar to the
exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings
within the community, or which are comparable to the predominant materials used
on surrounding dwellings.
   E.   The manufactured home, or tiny home shall have a foundation of concrete
or other material allowed by the Building Code for site built homes which is
aesthetically comparable with the manufactured home having the appearance of
site built construction.
   F.   Other local regulations and provisions for the construction of single-
family residences. (Ord. 589, 5-13-2019)
5-4-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Application: Application shall be made to the building official on a
building permit application form. The completed application shall include all
information necessary to determine conformity with required development
standards of this chapter. The applicant shall also attach to the application:
      1.   A plot plan showing existing conditions and the proposed location of
the home and other improvements at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty
feet (1" = 20').
      2.   A copy of the manufacturer's instructions for installation and
anchoring of the home on permanent footings.
      3.   Other local regulations and provisions for the construction of
single-family residences.
   B.   Certificates And Inspection:
      1.   The applicant shall sign the completed application certifying the
manufactured home meets the required development standards of this chapter and
that site development will be in accordance with said standards and the plot
plan submitted. The applicant shall also certify that once the manufactured
house is permanently affixed, the applicant will declare the house as real
property for taxation purposes in accordance with 63-304, Idaho Code. These
certifications shall be made prior to the moving of the home to the building
site.
      2.   Following application and plot plan approval by the building
official, the building official shall issue a building permit for the footings
and foundation. Upon satisfactory inspection of the footings and foundation for
the attachment of the manufactured home, the building official shall verify, in
writing, that all development standards have been met as certified by the
applicant. The home may then be attached to the foundation in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions, City codes for permanent utility connections,
and other building requirements.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a final inspection
shall be made to assure proper attachment of the home to the foundation and
other, full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 589, 5-13-2019)
CHAPTER 5
MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Purpose
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: Exceptions
5-5-4: Mobile Homes Prohibited On Individual Lots Outside Of Parks
5-5-5: Other Mobile Home/Manufactured Units
5-5-6: Permits And Inspection
5-5-7: Mobile Home Park Development Standards And Procedures
5-5-7-1: General Conditions And Limitations
5-5-7-2: Zoning Approval Required For A New Or Expansion Of An Existing Mobile
Home Park And Procedures
5-5-7-3: Site Requirements
5-5-7-4: Mobile Home Space Requirements
5-5-7-5: Improvement Requirements
5-5-8: Recreational Vehicle Parks
5-5-9: Violations And Penalties
5-5-10:    Tiny Home Parks
5-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and requirements for the occupation
of mobile homes, as well as for the construction of mobile home parks and
recreational vehicle parks, as they relate to adjacent land uses and the
general purposes set forth in the Parma zoning ordinance and the Parma
subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
   COMMERCIAL COACH: A manufactured structure designed to be used for
commercial and other nonresidential purposes, that bears the label of the
department of labor and industrial services, building bureau. The label shall
designate the unit's plan approval number, occupancy group classification and
type of construction specified in the building code.
   MOBILE HOME: A structure, similar to a manufactured home, built on a
permanent chassis, but not constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
construction and safety standards and 39-4105(11) Idaho Code, which has
sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended for residential purposes
and is transportable in one or more sections.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: Any privately owned place where two (2) or more mobile
homes used for human occupancy are parked within five hundred feet (500') of
each other on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of land within a mobile home park designated for
the accommodation of a mobile home.
   NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME: A mobile home which is not permitted under the
district in which it is located, but which was permitted by or conformed to
requirements of a zoning ordinance in effect at the time it was placed on the
property.
   PERMANENT LIVING QUARTERS: The use of a mobile home on one specific site for
living quarters for a period in excess of forty five (45) days in any twelve
(12) month period shall constitute a use for permanent living quarters.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit primarily designated as temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel which either has its own
power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are:
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: An area for the temporary placing of movable
vehicles designed and used for human occupation and housekeeping which involves
land under single ownership with lots rented for the location of recreational
vehicles and provision of facilities and services to campers by management.
   SECURITY TRAILER: A mobile home used for residential purposes in the
operation of a business or industry to provide living quarters on the premises
for a night watchman or caretaker. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Applications: A petition may be filed requesting an exception to any
portion of the standards of design or required improvements of this chapter.
The petition shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state fully the
grounds for request.
   B.   Commission: The commission may approve an exception to any portion of
the standards of design or required improvements set forth herein where the
applicant can show that: 1) due to topographical or other conditions peculiar
to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provisions, and 2) the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare nor injurious to other property in the vicinity. The reasons for
granting any exception shall be stated in writing in the minutes of the
commission.
   C.   Appeal: A decision of the commission may be appealed to the council by
the petitioner, the city or other interested party within fifteen (15) calendar
days of the decision. The appeal shall be written and filed with the city
clerk, who shall notify the appellant of the hearing date scheduled by the
council. If an appeal is not submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days, the
decision shall be conclusive and no further administrative remedy shall exist.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-4: MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS OUTSIDE OF PARKS:
   A.   Prohibited: Mobile homes are prohibited on individual lots outside of
mobile home parks.
   B.   RV As Permanent Dwelling: Nothing within these regulations shall be
construed to allow a recreational vehicle as a permanent dwelling.
   C.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes on permanent foundations are
subject to the regulations for single-family residences.
   D.   Single Building Site: No person shall maintain two (2) or more occupied
mobile homes on a single legal building site other than in a mobile home park.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-5: OTHER MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED UNITS:
   A.   Security Unit: A mobile home or manufactured unit used as residential
quarters for watchmen or caretakers and located on the premises of an
industrial or business establishment in any zone except R-1, R-2, and R-
3 residential zones may be permitted by conditional use permit, provided the
sanitary regulations of the city are met. The unit shall be registered with the
building official or his authorized representative within thirty (30) days of
the effective date of the conditional use permit and shall be subject to annual
inspection by the building official. Discontinuance of residential use of any
such mobile home for thirty (30) days on the lot where originally permitted or
any change of ownership may result in voidance of the permit.
   B.   Construction Sites: A commercial coach, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other licensed vehicle used for office purposes or the temporary
housing of tools, equipment, etc., during the duration of construction shall be
permitted in all zones.
   C.   Temporary Office: A mobile home or commercial coach may be used for a
temporary office in commercial and industrial zones by conditional use permit.
The unit must be connected to the city water and sewer systems, if restroom
facilities are provided. A building permit must be obtained prior to
installation.
   D.   Temporary Classroom:
      1.   A commercial coach or unit specially designed for classroom purposes
may be used as a temporary classroom. The unit must be connected to the city
water and sewer systems if restroom facilities are provided. A building permit
must be obtained prior to installation.
      2.   Temporary classroom units which are moved periodically from school
to school and are not considered permanent must obtain a building permit and
are subject to site location approval by the building official.
   E.   Portable Lab: A specially equipped mobile home or commercial coach may
be used for portable laboratory purposes in commercial and industrial zones
upon grant of a conditional use permit by the commission. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-6: PERMITS AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Building Permits:
      1.   Prior to occupancy of any mobile home upon real property in the
city, the property owner shall obtain a building permit. The fee for such
installation permit is established by resolution of the council and includes
the cost of inspection by the building official.
      2.   Said permit shall be valid until removal of the mobile home from the
property.
      3.   A building permit shall not be transferable from one location to
another, but may be transferable from one person to another for the same mobile
home in the same location.
      4.   When an approved mobile home installation for which a fee has been
paid is replaced by its owner with a mobile home using the same connections,
the permit fee for replacement shall be the same as a new installation.
      5.   Upon issuance of a building permit for the installation of a mobile
home, a decal indicating approval of the mobile home shall be placed on the
unit by the building official so as to be visible from the street, unless
otherwise screened from view.
   B.   Temporary Use Permits:
      1.   Fees, Restrictions: A fee set by the council for a temporary use
permit for a mobile home or recreational vehicle not to exceed forty five (45)
days in any twelve (12) month period may be used by the building official to
allow the use of one or more units upon a parcel of land of single ownership.
Any such temporary permit shall not, other than permitting a smaller area
requirement, vary or alter the provisions of this title. No public hearing
shall be required for the issuance of such temporary use permit. The intent of
this section is to allow friends, relatives and bona fide visitors to place and
use their mobile homes or recreational vehicles for a limited period of time
under circumstances which would otherwise be prohibited by this title. No
permit shall be required of friends, relatives or bona fide visitors staying
two (2) weeks or less.
      2.   Emergency Permits: When a true emergency condition exists (example:
fire or flood), a mobile home may be used for temporary living quarters for a
period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. Documentation of the emergency
condition must be submitted with an application for an emergency permit. Said
permit may at the time be issued by the building official when an extended
emergency exists. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-7: MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
5-5-7-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Land Area: The minimum land area necessary to establish a mobile home
park shall be two (2) acres.
   B.   Density:
      1.   Density shall not exceed eight (8) mobile homes per gross acre. If
it is determined by the commission that a street widening or terminating
dedication is necessary, the amount of land dedicated shall be subtracted from
the gross site area when calculating the proposed density.
      2.   When a mobile home park is located adjacent to a waterway, gross
site area shall not include property behind the edge of the bank or the right
of way access to the waterway. When waterways are fenced, property behind the
fence shall not be included as a part of gross site area.
   C.   Yard Requirements:
      1.   The setback required in each instance shall be a line parallel to
and measured at right angles from the front, side or rear property line. The
front and rear building setback lines shall extend the full width of the
property. No building, structure or mobile home shall be located so that any
part extends into the area between the building setback line and the property
line. Fences and signs may be placed within the aforementioned area as an
exception to this subsection.
      2.   Mobile homes and other structures within mobile home parks shall be
set back at least ten feet (10') from any interior property line. The setback
from any abutting public street right of way shall be at least twenty feet
(20') from the property line.
      3.   In any required yard through which there is vehicle access between a
public or private parking area and a street, no fence, wall, hedge, or other
vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision from a public
sidewalk to vehicles backing from said parking area(s) across the public
sidewalk.
   D.   Boundary Development: An ornamental sight obscuring fence or wall of
not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height, and/or
earthen berm or evergreen planting of not less than five feet (5') in height is
required to surround the mobile home park in instances where it is felt that
such requirement will enhance the successful operation of the park and the
surrounding area, and/or secure safety of residents. Such fence, wall, berm, or
planting may be placed up to the property line if adequate vision clearance for
entrances and exits is maintained.
   E.   Parking Requirements:
      1.   There shall be two (2) vehicle parking spaces at least nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20') for each mobile home space, with clear and unobstructed
access to an accessway. Any parking space in the accessway shall not fulfill
this requirement.
      2.   Guest parking shall be provided on a mobile home park parking site
(but not in the required accessway if said accessway has less than 34 feet of
surfaced roadway) at the rate of one space for each mobile home space.
   F.   Access To Public Street: A mobile home park must have two (2) accesses
to a public street or streets having not less than sixty feet (60') of right of
way width. Each park shall have not less than sixty feet (60') of frontage on a
public street, except as authorized by the commission. No mobile home space
shall be located in such a manner that a public street must be used to maneuver
the mobile home into that space.
   G.   Service Buildings: Service buildings which house sanitation facilities
shall be permanent structures, complying with all applicable city and state
statutes regulating building, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems.
   H.   Structures: Structures located on any mobile home space shall be
limited to a storage building, ramada, garage or carport. These structures may
be combined as one structure. No structural additions shall be built onto or
become a part of any mobile home, and no mobile home shall support any building
in any manner. The words "structural addition" shall not be construed to
exclude the construction of an awning or patio cover adjacent to a mobile home.
All structures shall be of a material, size, color and pattern so as to be
compatible with the mobile home to which they are associated.
   I.   Skirting: Skirting of mobile homes is required within thirty (30) days
of installation. Skirting shall be of a material, quality, color and appearance
that is the same or complementary of the rest of the structure. (Ord. 527, 3-
14-2005)
   J.   Mobile Home Requirements And Restrictions: All mobile homes already in
place at the effective date of this chapter which do not meet the mobile home
construction and safety standards promulgated by the department of housing and
urban development in 1976, or as amended, shall be allowed to continue as
nonconforming uses; however, when repaired beyond fifty percent (50%) of value,
enlarged or replaced the same must be upgraded to class B or C "mobile homes".
This restriction does not apply to replacement of windows or siding. Any mobile
home brought into a mobile home park after the effective date of this chapter
must meet the rehabilitation requirements of chapter 25, title 44, Idaho Code
as of the date it arrives in the park for placement on a mobile home space.
(Ord. 537, 5-8-2006)
5-5-7-2: ZONING APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR A NEW OR EXPANSION OF AN EXISTING MOBILE
HOME PARK AND PROCEDURES:
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new mobile home
park or expansion of an existing park within the city limits until the proposed
location is approved by the commission and a conditional use permit for mobile
home park purposes is granted following a public hearing held in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the Parma zoning ordinance. Such showing shall
be made in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Plot Plan Required: The application for a conditional use permit to
construct a new mobile home park or to expand an existing mobile home park
shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of the plot plan of the proposed park.
The plot plan should show the general layout of the entire mobile home park,
and should be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch representing forty
feet (1":40'). The following information is required on the plot plan:
      1.   Name of the person who prepared the plan.
      2.   Name of the mobile home park and address.
      3.   Scale and north point of plan.
      4.   Vicinity map showing relationship of mobile home park to adjacent
properties.
      5.   Boundaries and dimensions of the mobile home park.
      6.   Location and dimensions of each mobile home space. Designation of
each space by number or letter combination.
      7.   Location and dimensions of each existing or proposed building.
      8.   Location and width of accessways.
      9.   Location and width of walkways.
      10.   Location of each lighting fixture for lighting the mobile home
spaces and grounds.
      11.   Location of recreation areas and buildings, and area of recreation
space in square feet.
      12.   Location and type of landscaping plantings, fence, wall or
combination of any of these or other screening materials.
      13.   Location of point where mobile home park water and sewer system
connects with the public system.
      14.   Location of available fire hydrants and irrigation.
      15.   Enlarged plot plan of a typical mobile home space, showing location
of the patio, parking sidewalk, utility connections and landscaping.
   B.   Detailed Plans: In addition to the plot plan, detailed plans are
required showing:
      1.   New structures.
      2.   Water and sewer systems.
      3.   Electrical systems.
      4.   Road, sidewalk and patio construction.
      5.   Parking location and layout.
      6.   Drainage system and snow storage.
      7.   Recreation area improvements.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: A conditional use permit shall be subject to the
plans, and other conditions upon the basis of which it was granted.
   D.   Noncompliance: In the event of failure to comply with the plans and/or
other conditions of the conditional use permit, the commission may, after
notice and hearing, revoke the conditional use permit.
   E.   Permitted Uses Within The Park: No building, structure or land within
the boundaries of a mobile home park shall be used for any purpose except the
following:
      1.   Mobile homes for residential use only, together with the normal
accessory uses to residential living such as patio slab, carport or garage and
a storage or washroom building.
      2.   Private and public utilities.
      3.   Community recreation facilities, including swimming pools.
      4.   A fixed residence for the use of a caretaker or a manager
responsible for maintaining the operation. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-7-3: SITE REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be considered the minimum site requirements for a new
mobile home park or the expansion of an existing mobile home park:
   A.   Accessways: Accessways shall connect each mobile home space to public
right of way and shall be a minimum of thirty four feet (34') in width. Where
the entrance accessway is divided by a median planting strip, the minimum width
shall be fifty feet (50') and each side shall then be one-way.
   B.   Recreation Area: A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of
recreation area shall be provided for each mobile home space. The recreation
area may be in one or more locations in the park. At least one recreation area
shall have a minimum size of five hundred (500) square feet and be of a shape
that will make it usable for its intended purpose.
   C.   Electricity:
      1.   Installation of meter bases to serve each mobile home shall comply
with provisions of the state electrical code.
      2.   An electrical permit must be obtained from the state for inspection
of any placement or replacement of mobile homes in the park.
   D.   Sewage Disposal:
      1.   All plumbing in the mobile home park must connect to the public
sewer system and shall comply with appendix E of the uniform plumbing code.
      2.   Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a three inch
(3") sewer connection. Said connection shall be provided with suitable
fittings, so that a watertight connection can be made between the mobile home
drain and sewer connection. Such individual mobile home connections shall be so
constructed that they can be closed when not linked to a mobile home, and shall
be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor free condition.
      3.   Sewer connection fees for each mobile home space will be that amount
established by resolution of the council.
      4.   A plumbing permit must be obtained from the state for inspection of
the placement or replacement of each mobile home in the park.
   E.   Water Supply: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water
shall be furnished in each mobile home park, capable of furnishing a minimum of
five (5) gallons per minute per mobile home space. All water piping shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with state of Idaho regulations for
public drinking water systems.
      1.   Individual water service connections which are provided for direct
use by mobile homes shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by
the parking of such homes. The mobile home park water system shall be adequate
to provide thirty five (35) pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile
home connections.
      2.   Fees for connecting to the city water system will be that amount
established by resolution of the council.
   F.   Hydrants: Hydrants will be installed in accordance with the fire code.
An adequate water supply of three hundred (300) gallons per minute shall be
provided.
   G.   Building Permit: Construction or alteration of a mobile home park
requires a permit from the building department. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-7-4: MOBILE HOME SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum mobile home space requirements for a new mobile home park or
expansion of an existing mobile home park are as follows:
   A.   Mobile homes up to and including fourteen feet (14') single wides shall
be placed on lots not less than thirty five feet (35') wide with not less than
three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet of space. Doublewides and
expansion mobile homes shall be placed on lots not less than forty five feet
(45') wide with not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of
space.
   B.   Minimum space requirements between mobile homes:
      1.   End to end, fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Side to side, fifteen feet (15').
      3.   No detached accessory structure may be located closer than three
feet (3') from the rear or side lot line or any lot line abutting a property
line or another mobile home lot. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-7-5: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Roadways within an accessway and sidewalks shall be paved with a
crushed rock base and asphaltic or concrete surfacing according to structural
specifications established by the city engineer.
   B.   Minimum surfaced width of the roadway within an accessway shall be
twenty four feet (24') if no on street parking is allowed and thirty four feet
(34') if parking is allowed on one side. The first fifty feet (50') of the
accessway measured from the street shall be surfaced to a width of thirty four
feet (34') and shall be connected to an existing street in accordance with
plans approved by the city engineer.
   C.   Any unimproved public street adjacent to a new mobile home park must be
improved by the developer with curb, gutter, and pavement to a width of one-
half (1/2) plus eight feet (8') of roadway.
   D.   Patios shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or suitable hard surfaced
materials.
   E.   All accessways and walkways within the park shall be lighted at night
to provide a minimum of one and one-half (11/2) foot-candles of illumination.
   F.   Wires for services to light poles and mobile home spaces shall be
underground.
   G.   The mobile home park shall be well drained. Provisions for drainage
shall be made in accordance with a drainage plan approved by the city engineer.
   H.   Recreation areas shall be suitably improved and maintained for
recreational purposes and shall be appropriate for the residents of the park.
   I.   A fenced storage area shall be provided by each mobile home park for
the storage of accessory items such as boats, recreational vehicles, campers
and related equipment owned by the park residents. Such items shall be stored
in the storage area and not be parked beside the mobile home. Said storage area
shall contain a minimum of sixty (60) square feet per mobile home space. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-8: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
   A.   Zoning: Recreational vehicle parks shall be located in compliance with
the land use schedule.
   B.   Application For Permit: To obtain a permit for construction of a
recreational vehicle park, the applicant shall:
      1.   Submit an application with two (2) sets of plans and specifications
to the city for review by the building official and other departments to check
compliance with applicable laws or ordinances. If a conditional use permit is
required, the application will be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be
established by resolution of the council and the matter scheduled before the
commission for public hearing.
      2.   The material submitted shall include a plot plan and building plans
and specifications for all buildings, improvements and facilities, such as
electrical, plumbing, gas and sewerage system to be constructed within the
park. If the building official is satisfied that the proposal, as submitted, or
subject to corrections, meets the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he
shall then issue the permit to the applicant based upon the true valuation of
construction.
      3.   A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
or suspended whenever the permit is issued on the basis of incorrect
information supplied or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of
the provisions of this chapter. Said suspension or revocation shall be in
writing and the permit may be reinstated upon correction of the problem within
an established period of time.
   C.   Development Standards: The following minimum standards shall apply to
the development of a recreational vehicle park:
      1.   Landscaping And Screening: The park boundaries shall be reasonably
screened whether by barriers or ornamental fences, walls, trees, shrubs, or
open spaces, to assure reasonable integration with adjoining land usages and to
assure health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the area.
      2.   Play Areas: Recreation and children's play area shall be provided in
a ratio of two hundred (200) square feet per space and consist of a well kept
lawn with shade trees.
      3.   Occupant Improvements: Any space occupant shall not be permitted to
erect, install or place any structure or facility upon the space.
      4.   Waste Disposal: Waste disposal facilities for recreational vehicles
shall be provided in an isolated, screened service area in a manner and method
acceptable to the building official and/or health officer.
      5.   Access: All spaces shall abut upon a roadway not less than thirty
feet (30') in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or
highway. Dead end roadways shall provide adequate vehicle turning space or a
cul-de-sac with not less than a forty foot (40') radius, exclusive of parking.
Roads to service areas shall be not less than twenty feet (20') wide.
      6.   Utilities: All utilities shall be underground.
      7.   RV Spaces: Minimum requirements for each RV space:
         a.   Dimensions: Twenty five feet (25') wide and fifty feet (50')
long.
         b.   Parking area: One off street, paved parking area not less than
nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20') or, in lieu of off street parking, a thirty
four foot (34') paved roadway.
         c.   Minimum yards: Front, ten feet (10'); side and rear, five feet
(5').
         d.   Patio: Masonry or concrete patio one hundred (100) square feet.
         e.   Hydrant: One frostproof exterior potable water supply hydrant.
      8.   Central Facilities: Adequate space for clothes drying and adjoining
laundry facilities.
         a.   Sufficient supply of pure, healthful drinking water, and not less
than one water outlet for each recreational vehicle. There shall be no common
drinking vessel. An abundant supply of hot water for bathing, washing, and
laundry facilities is to be provided at all times.
         b.   Flush toilets in conveniently located buildings, well lighted,
ventilated with screened openings and constructed of moistureproof materials
permitting satisfactory cleaning. Floors of concrete or similar material,
slightly pitched to floor drain. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person or corporation, whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits any
such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. City shall have all enforcement powers set forth in
chapter 3 of this title or other provision of Idaho law. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-5-10: TINY HOME PARKS:
   A.   Definitions:
      1.   TINY HOUSE: A dwelling which is 400 or less square feet in floor
area excluding lofts.
   B.   Zoning: Tiny home parks shall be located in compliance with the land
use schedule.
   C.   Application For Permit: To obtain a permit for construction of a tiny
home park, the applicant shall:
      1.   Submit an application with two (2) sets of plans and specifications
to the city for review by the building official and other departments to check
compliance with applicable laws or ordinances. If a conditional use permit is
required, the application will be accompanied by a nonrefundable to be
established by resolution of the council and the matter scheduled before the
commission for public hearing.
      2.   The material submitted shall include a plot plan and building plans
and specifications for all buildings, improvements and facilities. such as
electrical. plumbing, gas and sewerage system to be constructed. If the
building official is satisfied that the proposal. as submitted, or subject to
corrections, meets the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall then
issue the permit to the applicant based upon the true valuation of
construction.
      3.   A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
or suspended whenever the permit is issued on the basis of incorrect
information supplied or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of
the provisions of this chapter. Said suspension or revocation shall be in
writing and the permit may be reinstated upon correction of the problem within
an established period of time.
   D.   Development Standards: The following minimum standards shall apply to
the development of a tiny home park:
      1.   Landscaping And Screening: The park boundaries shall be reasonably
screened whether by barriers or ornamental fences, walls, trees, shrubs, or
open spaces, to assure reasonable integration with adjoining land usages and to
assure health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the area.
      2.   Play Areas: Recreation and children's play area shall be provided in
a ratio of two hundred (200) square feet per space and consist of a well kept
lawn with at least two shade trees.
      3.   Occupant Improvements: Any space occupant shall not be permitted to
erect, install or place any structure or facility upon the space.
      4.   Waste Disposal: Waste disposal facilities for recreational vehicles
shall be provided in an isolated, screened service area in a manner and method
acceptable to the building official and/or health officer.
      5.   Access: All spaces shall abut upon a roadway, open to public access,
not less than thirty feet (30') in width which shall have unobstructed access
to a public street or highway. Dead end roadways shall provide adequate vehicle
turning space or a cul-de-sac with not less than a forty foot (40') radius.
exclusive of parking. Roads to service areas shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') wide.
      6.   Utilities: All utilities shall be underground.
      7.   Tiny Home Spaces: Minimum requirements for each Tiny Home space:
         a.   Dimensions: Twenty five feet (25') wide and fifty feet (50')
long.
         b.   Parking Area: One off street, paved parking area not less than
nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20') or, in lieu of off street parking, a thirty
four foot (34') paved roadway.
         c.   Minimum Yard Setbacks: Front, ten feet (10'): side and rear, five
feet (5').
         d.   Patio: Masonry or concrete patio one hundred (100) square feet.
         e.   Hydrant: One frostproof exterior potable water supply hydrant
with backflow prevention device.
      8.   Central Facilities: Adequate space for clothes drying and adjoining
laundry facilities.
         a.   Sufficient supply of potable water, and not less than one water
outlet for each tiny home. There shall be no common drinking vessel. An
abundant supply of hot water for bathing, washing, and laundry facilities is to
be provided at all times.
         b.   Flush toilets in conveniently located buildings, well lighted.
ventilated with screened openings and constructed of moistureproof materials
permitting satisfactory cleaning. Floors of concrete or similar material,
slightly pitched to floor drain.
   E.   Utility Services: Each potential unit shall be required to connect to
city water and sewer services. Each potential unit shall have its own
individual water meter and sewer hookup. Composting toilets shall not be
permitted. (Ord. 590, 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 6
ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose And Findings
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Classification
5-6-4: License Required
5-6-5: Issuance Of License
5-6-6: Fees
5-6-7: Inspection
5-6-8: Expiration Of License
5-6-9: Suspension
5-6-10: Revocation
5-6-11: Hearing; Appeal
5-6-12: Transfer Of License
5-6-13: Location Restrictions
5-6-14: Viewing Room Regulations
5-6-15: Escort Agencies; Additional Regulations
5-6-16: Public Nudity; Additional Regulations
5-6-17: Prohibition Against Children In A Sexually Oriented Business
5-6-18: Hours Of Operation
5-6-19: Exemptions
5-6-20: Injunction
5-6-21: License Application
5-6-22: Prohibition Against Warning Devices And Other Mechanisms
5-6-23: Off Street Parking; Monitoring Of Activities; Video Surveillance
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult
businesses, commonly called sexually oriented businesses, in order to promote
the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of
Parma, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within
the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
   B.   Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available
to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres,
426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes
v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S.
Ct. 1382 (2000); State of Idaho v. Morris, Rocky Mountain Videos, Adult Shoppe,
Northwest Films, Inc., RAN Enterprises, Inc., Canyon County third judicial
district court case #CV 2000-02792 (2000); and on studies in other communities
including, but not limited to, Cleburne, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Garden
Grove, California; Adams County, Colorado; Seattle, Washington; Phoenix,
Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Las Vegas, Nevada; and
Cleveland, Ohio, the council finds:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for some of the activities that occur on
their premises.
      2.   Employees of some sexually oriented businesses may be unable to
observe the activities of their customers at all times, thereby increasing the
likelihood of ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities on their premises.
      3.   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses may engage in
higher incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of
other establishments.
      4.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
      5.   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which
creates unhealthy conditions.
      6.   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
      7.   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-
AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.
      8.   Since 1982, there has been an increasing cumulative number of
reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the
United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985;
733,374 in 1999; and 859,000 in 2002.
      9.   From April, 1986, when HIV became a reportable disease by Idaho Code
section 39-602, through December 31, 2000, there were 736 cases of HIV/AIDS in
the state of Idaho.
      10.   From January 1, 2001 through December 31, 2001, reported cases of
HIV/AIDS in the state of Idaho decreased to 702, but that has been the last
decrease seen in the statistics.
      11.   From January 1, 2002 through the second quarter of 2004, there has
been an increasing cumulative number of cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of
Idaho.
      12.   At the end of the second quarter of 2004, there were 761 reported
cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of Idaho.
      13.   The number of cases of syphilis reported in Idaho in 2003 was 45,
with 21 of those cases being in region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette
and Washington counties); for the first half of 2004, 28 new cases of syphilis
have been reported in region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and
Washington counties).
      14.   The number of cases of genital chlamydia in Idaho reported annually
has risen steadily, since 1999, with 2,609 statewide cases reported in 2003,
making chlamydia the most reported of all notifiable infectious diseases in the
United States. Of the 2,609 cases reported in 2003, 475 were in region 3
(Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington counties); for the first
half of 2004, 243 new cases of genital chlamydia have been reported in region 3
(Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington counties).
      15.   The number of cases of gonorrhea reported in Idaho in 2003 was 76,
with 14 of those cases being in region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette
and Washington counties); for the first half of 2004, 9 new cases of gonorrhea
have been reported in region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and
Washington counties).
      16.   The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October
22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
      17.   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
      18.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      19.   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented
films.
      20.   The findings noted in this section raise substantial governmental
concerns.
      21.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      22.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      23.   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in sexually
oriented businesses.
      24.   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      25.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
      26.   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
      27.   The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license
has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
      28.   The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and
prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases.
      29.   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides, computer generated images, or other
photographic reproductions to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of
the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse by individuals of themselves or others.
   ADULT BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, sexual encounter establishment or nude model studio. The definition of
"adult businesses" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear seminude; or
   B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of
way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; and either:
1. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours, or
2. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or
principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers
to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas", the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character
and theme are the exhibition or display of "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities".
   EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY, AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or other status.
Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The chief of police, or the sworn officers in his or
her charge as he or she may designate, or such other person as may be
designated by the council.
   ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
   LICENSING OFFICER: The city clerk.
   MANAGER: An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by an adult
business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise
responsible for the operation of the business.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
   OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in a
state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of
the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
   OPERATOR: Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or
person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PEEP BOOTH: A viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of floor space.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate an adult business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity.
   PREMISES OR PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a
license and/or permit and that is classified as an adult business.
   PRINCIPAL OWNER: Any person owning, directly or beneficially: a) ten percent
(10%) or more of a corporation's equity securities; b) ten percent (10%) or
more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or c) in the
case of any other legal entity, ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership
interests in the entity.
   SEMINUDE OR IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION: The showing of the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person appears seminude and is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or photographed
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Seminude model
studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state of Idaho or
a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
   A.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
   B.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll in the
class; and
   C.   Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any
one time.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial establishment, that as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a
place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities". The definition of sexual
encounter establishment or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; crimes against nature; any other sexual offense
prohibited by Idaho Code not otherwise specified herein; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under
the criminal or penal code of other states or countries.
   B.   For which:
      1.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
      2.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
      3.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any twenty four (24) month period.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or
female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
   C.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A and B of this section.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: Of a sexually oriented business means the increase
in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty five percent (25%),
as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: Of a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-3: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   A.   Adult arcades;
   B.   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
   C.   Adult cabarets;
   D.   Adult motels;
   E.   Adult motion picture theaters;
   F.   Adult theaters;
   G.   Escort agencies;
   H.   Seminude model studios; and
   I.   Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this
chapter.
      2.   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a
person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee license shall file with the city clerk a completed
application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city clerk. An
application shall be considered complete if it includes the information
required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter. The application shall be notarized. The application
shall include the information called for in subsections C1 through C7 of this
section as follows:
      1.   The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five
(5) years.
      2.   Current business address.
      3.   A set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background
checks pursuant to this chapter and the applicant's social security number to
be used for the same purpose.
      4.   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name, principal owner or owners, business location, legal description, business
mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
      5.   Written proof of age, in the form of either: a) a copy of a birth
certificate and current photo, b) current driver's license with picture, or c)
other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency.
      6.   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or
permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, whether
any such license or permit has been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so,
the reason or reasons therefor.
      7.   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive
service of process. The information provided pursuant to subsections C1 through
C6 of this section and this subsection C7 shall be supplemented in writing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten (10)
working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information
originally submitted false or incomplete.
   D.   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
   E.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, such as a corporation, each principal owner, officer, director,
general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions
relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section
5-6-5 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   F.   A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the
requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A
person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business
license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter,
where applicable.
   G.   The information provided by an applicant in connection with the
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the city
clerk on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only: 1) to other
governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety
function, or 2) as may otherwise be required by law or court order. (Ord. 527,
3-14-2005)
5-6-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the city
clerk shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license
shall expire upon the final decision of the city clerk to deny or grant the
license. Within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application,
the city clerk shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent
to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall approve the issuance
of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true:
      1.   An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in
relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   An applicant has failed to provide information as required by
section
5-6-4 of this chapter for issuance of the license.
      4.   A business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of an
offense leading to a criminal conviction described herein, a management
responsibility or a controlling interest, has been convicted of a "specified
criminal activity" as defined in this chapter. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect.
      5.   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
      6.   An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
      7.   The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning
district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are
allowed to operate under the city of Parma's zoning ordinance or is not in
compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented
businesses in the appropriate zoning district(s).
   B.   An applicant ineligible for a license due to subsection A4 of this
section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time
period required by the applicable subsection has elapsed.
   C.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that
applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented
business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented
business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The
sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily
read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee
is then working or performing and shall produce such license for inspection
upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-6: FEES:
   A.   The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be set by the council at an amount determined to be sufficient to
pay the cost of administering this program, subject to subsection B of this
section. In the absence of any specific resolution, the maximum limits set
forth in subsection B of this section shall apply.
   B.   In no event shall the fees exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for the initial license and one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the
renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license. In no event shall the
fees exceed seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the initial license and fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business employee
license. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-7: INSPECTION:
   A.   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall
constitute consent of the licensee and his/her agents or employees to permit
the city's police department or any other agent of the city to conduct routine
inspections of any licensed adult business during the hours the establishment
is conducting business. An applicant, operator, licensee, or employee, or any
agent of an applicant, operator, licensee, or employee, shall permit law
enforcement officers, and any other federal, state, county or city agency in
the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this chapter,
to inspect those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business where
patrons or customers are permitted to occupy for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this chapter, at any time the business is occupied or open for
business.
   B.   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-8: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in section
5-6-4 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   B.   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least
ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 527, 3-
14-2005)
5-6-9: SUSPENSION:
The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
   A.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
   B.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-10: REVOCATION:
   A.   The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to
revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section
5-6-9 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to
revoke a license if the officer determines that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      2.   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      3.   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      4.   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      5.   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the
licensed premises. This subsection B5 will not apply to an adult motel, unless
the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: a) in
exchange for money, or b) in a public place or within public view.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
   D.   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section
5-6-11 of this chapter, the enforcement officer revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation
becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of subsection
 5-6-11B of this chapter are met, a provisional license will be granted
pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer
finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections B1 and B4 of this
section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license
if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-11: HEARING; APPEAL:
   A.   If the enforcement officer determines that facts exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the
intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor,
by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed
to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer.
Within five (5) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may
provide to the mayor and council in writing a response that shall include a
statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended,
or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the mayor shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on
respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response,
the mayor and council shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have
the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses
on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by the mayor and council in
the time stated or, if after the hearing the council finds that grounds as
specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then
such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after
the mayor sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been
denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising
the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
If the council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the mayor
shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so
notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall
contemporaneously therewith issue the license.
   B.   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the
applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has
been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right
to appeal such action by filing a petition for judicial review with the
district court for Canyon County, Idaho, following the procedures set out in
rule 84 of the Idaho rules of civil procedure. Upon the filing of any court
action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's
enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall
immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional
license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually
oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business
employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved
party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's
enforcement. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-6-13: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Any sexually oriented business described or defined in this chapter shall be
located in an industrial zone by conditional use permit only. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-6-14: VIEWING ROOM REGULATIONS:
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a
film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
      4.   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station
at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more managers' stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection A5 must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and,
at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of this section.
      7.   No viewing booth may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured
at the floor level.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
      10.   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing booths.
      11.   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths.
      12.   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
      13.   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      14.   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
   B.   A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A14 of this section
commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 527, 3-
14-2005)
5-6-15: ESCORT AGENCIES; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years.
   B.   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-16: PUBLIC NUDITY; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally,
in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or engages in
specified sexual activities.
   B.   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally
in a sexually oriented business appears in a seminude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least ten feet (10')
from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the
floor.
   C.   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually
oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to
any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business.
   D.   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly
and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. (Ord. 527, 3-
14-2005)
5-6-17: PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-18: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-19: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It is a defense to prosecution under section
 5-6-16 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in
a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Idaho; a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
      2.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      3.   In a structure:
         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
in the class; and
         c.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-20: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid license or in violation of section
5-6-12 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6)
months' incarceration. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a
separate offense or violation. City shall have all enforcement powers set forth
in chapter 3 of this title or other provision of Idaho law. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-6-21: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   All owners of sexually oriented businesses existing on the date of
publication of the ordinance codified herein and their employees shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein
to file their licensing applications with the city clerk of the city of Parma.
Owners and employees of sexually oriented businesses in existence on the date
of publication of the ordinance codified herein shall, upon application, be
issued temporary licenses and permitted to continue operation of and employment
by said sexually oriented businesses while their license applications are
pending final decision by the enforcement officer in accordance with subsection
5-6-5A of this chapter.
   B.   All owners and employees of new sexually oriented businesses that are
not in existence on the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein
shall not conduct business without a license issued by the enforcement officer.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-6-22: PROHIBITION AGAINST WARNING DEVICES AND OTHER MECHANISMS:
Warning devices and other mechanisms used to alert anyone within a sexually
oriented business to the presence of law enforcement, or used to permit
operation of a sexually oriented business in violation of this code and then
quickly restore lighting, configuration, or any other part of a sexually
oriented business to permissible standards under this chapter, are prohibited
in all sexually oriented businesses including adult motels. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-6-23: OFF STREET PARKING; MONITORING OF ACTIVITIES; VIDEO SURVEILLANCE:
It shall be the duty of an operator of a sexually oriented business to
designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons in any off
street parking under the control of the operator. Such employees shall visually
inspect the off street parking not less often than every thirty (30) minutes
during the hours of operation of the business, and for thirty (30) minutes
after the close of business or until all patrons have left the parking area. In
lieu of visual inspection in person, the operator may install video cameras and
monitors and regularly check the monitors, not less often than every thirty
(30) minutes. The video camera surveillance system shall be equipped with
recording devices which shall record during hours of operation. The recording
media must be kept for thirty (30) days after recording and made available to
law enforcement personnel upon request. All areas under video surveillance must
be signed with metal signs, using conspicuous lettering, informing persons in
that area of the existence of the video surveillance. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
CHAPTER 7
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose
5-7-2: Definitions
5-7-3: Towers In Zoning Districts
5-7-4: Collocation Requirements
5-7-5: Tower And Antenna Design Requirements
5-7-6: Tower Setbacks
5-7-7: Tower Lighting, Signage, And Attachments
5-7-8: Amateur Radio Antennas
5-7-9: Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers
5-7-10: Additional Application Submittal Requirements
5-7-11: Permits
5-7-12: Notice Of Public Hearing
5-7-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   To accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community, the council finds that regulations regarding wireless communication
facilities, spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such
structures are necessary in order to:
      1.   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to
the residents and businesses of the city;
      2.   Minimize adverse visual effects of spires, poles, antennas,
steeples, towers, and other such structures through careful design and siting
standards;
      3.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from spire, pole,
antenna, steeple, tower, and other such structures' failure, through structural
standards and setback requirements; and
      4.   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the
number of towers needed to serve the community. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   TOWER: Any facility designed and constructed solely for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio, and similar communication
purposes. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
The term includes the structure and its associated means of support.
   WCF OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Refers to a tower and all
attachments. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-3: TOWERS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Residential (R) districts:
      1.   On residentially zoned parcels, towers supporting amateur radio
antennas shall not be permitted in the front, side or street side yard.
      2.   Personal wireless facilities shall be prohibited in all residential
(R) zones.
   B.   Commercial (C) and industrial (M) districts:
      1.   Wireless antennas may be permitted to be attached to existing light
standards and power line support devices (or replacement equivalent of same
height) provided, however, the antenna(s) is either flush mounted or mounted in
a manner that provides minimum visual impact. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
all provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to wireless antennas located
on existing light standards and power line support devices. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-7-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A proposal for a new tower in excess of applicable zone district height
requirements shall not be approved unless the council finds that the
communications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated
on an existing or approved tower or building within the following radii of the
proposed tower:
      1.   A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one hundred ten
feet (110').
      2.   A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet (80')
but not more than one hundred ten feet (110').
      3.   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over fifty
feet (50') but not more than eighty feet (80').
      4.   A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height over thirty
five feet (35') but not more than fifty feet (50').
   B.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the
proposed tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an approved tower or
building within the required search radius due to one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Unwillingness of another tower or facility owner to entertain shared
use.
      2.   The proposed collocation of an existing tower or facility would be
in violation of any local, state or federal law.
      3.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
      4.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
      5.   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
      6.   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, or
other professional qualified to provide necessary documentation.
   C.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall
be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate
both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2)
additional users if the tower is over one hundred ten feet (110') in height,
for at least one additional user if the tower is over fifty feet (50') in
height.
   D.   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas
upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
   E.   Wireless communication facilities proposed at a location which has an
approved conditional use permit (approved after the effective date hereof) for
an existing facility which was required to allow collocation shall not be
required to obtain a separate conditional use permit as long as all the
requirements of the previously approved conditional use permit will be complied
with. Design review, and subsequent building permit, will be required for any
such proposal. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-5: TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All wireless communication facilities shall be required to obtain
design review approval prior to construction.
   B.   Towers and antennas shall be required to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities
such as the federal aviation administration.
   C.   Wireless communication facility towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the council determines that an alternative design would better blend
into the surrounding environment.
   D.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the issuing authority, no part of any antenna or
tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
   E.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage
climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs within the
bottom twenty feet (20') of the tower shall be removed and shall only be used
when the tower is being serviced.
   F.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
   G.   Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-6: TOWER SETBACKS:
   A.   Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with
the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers may encroach into
the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another
industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
   B.   If the tower does not exceed the height limitations of the zone in
which it is located, the tower shall meet the setback requirement of the zone
except as allowed in subsection A of this section. If the tower exceeds the
height limit of the zone in which it is located, the tower shall be set back
one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in total tower height. In either case,
the tower shall be constructed to the Telecommunications Industry Association/
Electronic Industries Association (TIA/EIA) 222 revision F standard entitled
"Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Supporting Structures" as now in
existence or as hereinafter amended. Otherwise, the tower shall be located a
minimum of one foot (1') for each foot of height from all property lines (the
fall zone). No storage or structures other than the accessory utility
buildings, are permitted in the fall zone, except as may be specifically
permitted by the council through a conditional use process.
   C.   Towers shall be set back from all existing public right of way lines
(or planned right of way lines if additional right of way is planned to be
acquired in the future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the
tower including all antennas and attachments. If this requirement conflicts
with other setback requirements of this code the setback with the greater
distance shall prevail, except as may be allowed in subsection E of this
section.
   D.   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public
street.
   E.   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied, at the sole discretion of the council, to allow the
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church
steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-7: TOWER LIGHTING, SIGNAGE, AND ATTACHMENTS:
   A.   No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way,
except during time of repair or installation, any stationary lights, strobe
lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as
specifically required by the federal aviation administration, federal
communications commission, or other federal or state authority.
   B.   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached
to the tower if approved by the city.
   C.   The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning or
equipment information signs, is prohibited.
   D.   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any
way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during
periods of construction or repair. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-8: AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS:
In accordance with the federal communications commission's preemptive ruling
PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting amateur radio
antennas may exceed thirty feet (30') in height provided that a determination
is made by the city that the proposed tower height is technically necessary to
successfully engage in amateur radio communications. A conditional use permit
is required for any amateur radio antenna in excess of thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-9: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
As a condition of approval of any required conditional use permit for personal
wireless facilities, all abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities
shall be required to be removed within sixty (60) days of cessation of use as a
personal wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by the city. A
copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the applicant
to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the use as a
personal wireless facility, shall be submitted at the time of application. In
the event that the tower and associated facilities are not removed within the
sixty (60) days, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city
and the costs of removal assessed against the property. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-10: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the information required elsewhere in this code, development
applications for wireless communication facilities, shall include the following
supplemental information:
   A.   Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
showing that the proposed facility will be in compliance with the FCC standards
regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
   B.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
describes the tower height and design (including a cross section and
elevation); documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas; describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and includes other
information necessary to evaluate the request.
   C.   For all wireless communication facilities, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of
the tower, as required by this code, if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   D.   Documentation showing that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the federal aviation administration.
   E.   Written approval of the site location with specific reference to the
height of the tower and any lighting issues, from the federal aviation
administration, and the chief of the Idaho bureau of aeronautics.
   F.   Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission coverage
at the subject site and within an area large enough to provide an understanding
of why the facility needs to be in the chosen location.
   G.   A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is the most
appropriate site within the immediate area. For the purposes of this
subsection, the analysis shall include all properties within the search radii
stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
      2.   Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct adequate
cellular telephone transmissions;
      3.   Physical site constraints that would preclude construction of a
wireless communication facility on any other site;
      4.   Technical limitations of the system that limit siting options. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-11: PERMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reerect, or
replace, any tower without first making application to the city and securing a
building permit.
   B.   A zoning permit shall not be required for antennas and/or towers
erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication, or for
broadcast remote pick up operations. Temporary antennas shall be permitted for
a maximum of seventy two (72) hours unless specifically approved by the
council.
   C.   In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for
conditional use permits, as stated within this title, the council shall make an
additional finding concerning the duration of the conditional use permit. Upon
finding that the conditional use permit is to be limited in duration, a
condition limiting the duration and the basis for such a condition shall be
included within the findings of fact and conclusions of law for the conditional
use permit. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-7-12: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
All wireless communication facilities requiring a conditional use permit shall
comply with the conditional use notice requirements within this title with the
following additional requirements: All property owners within one thousand feet
(1,000') of all property lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if
applicable) shall be notified of the public hearing by the city, by mail, a
minimum of fifteen (15) days before the scheduled public hearing. The applicant
will be required to provide the names of the property owners to the city. (Ord.
527, 3-14-2005)
CHAPTER 8
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Landscape Provisions
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ARBORICULTURAL: The cultivation of trees; the art of planting, dressing and
managing trees and shrubs.
   CLASS 1, 2, AND 3 TREES: Classes of trees listed in this chapter. Class 1
trees are usually small and ornamental. Class 2 trees are appropriate for
planting near streets, sidewalks and paved areas and are medium to large in
their size and shape. Class 3 trees are large and require considerable amounts
of open space.
   CONTROLLER: Every person (owner, agent, tenant, occupant, contractor,
developer or lessee) who exercises care, custody and control of real property,
to include that abutting a right of way upon which a public tree or shrub is
located.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED IN PROFESSIONAL ARBORICULTURAL PRACTICE: As used in this
chapter, this phrase shall mean and refer to a standard of care to be employed
when planting, installing, selecting, caring for, maintaining, pruning,
removing, or otherwise treating a tree or shrub. Such standard of care shall be
consistent with techniques routinely employed by professionals trained and
knowledgable in arboriculture.
   INJURIOUS PEST OR DISEASE: Organisms capable of seriously damaging the form
or structural integrity of the tree.
   NUISANCE: Shall have the meaning described in subsection
5-8-2D of this chapter.
   PARKWAY: That portion of public right of way situated between the curb line
of any street and the property line abutting and adjoining any street. In the
absence of a curb, the curb line of a street shall be deemed to be the edge of
that portion of public right of way maintained and open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel. The purpose of the parkway is to
increase pedestrian safety and to improve the visual aesthetics and
environmental quality of roadways.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or
organization of any kind.
   PESTICIDE: An agent used to destroy pests.
   PRUNING: The removal of plant parts, dead or alive, in a careful and
systematic manner so as not to damage other parts of the plant or the tree as a
whole.
   PUBLIC TREE AND/OR SHRUB: Any tree or shrub located, in whole or in part,
upon or over any street or other public property.
   SHRUB: A multiple stemmed, woody plant whose height at maturity is between
three feet (3') and fifteen feet (15').
   STREET: Highways, roads, alleys and bridges, dedicated, purchased or
otherwise acquired for the public, including the unimproved or unused portion
thereof, maintained and open to use by the public, including sidewalks,
parkways and special tree planting easements adjacent to a street granted by
property owners.
   TOPPING: Cutting back the limbs of a tree within the tree's crown to such a
degree as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree. Topping starves
the tree of needed nutrients and increases its vulnerability to disease and
insect infestation.
   TREE: A woody perennial plant usually having one main stem or trunk and many
branches; it usually exceeds fifteen feet (15') in height at maturity.
   VISION OR SIGHT TRIANGLE: A protected vision area established to ensure that
drivers have an unobstructed view as they come upon a driveway access, alleyway
or intersection. Measuring from the projected intersection of the roadway edge
a distance of forty feet (40') along each roadway edge and connecting the two
(2) points with a straight line, this defines the boundaries of a vision
triangle at the intersection of two (2) roads. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-8-2: LANDSCAPE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: This section is intended to encourage the
preservation, expansion, protection and proper maintenance of the city's public
trees and shrubs. Its primary goals are:
Enhance the beauty of the city through appropriate tree and shrub landscape
practices.
Encourage and stimulate the planting and growing of desirable trees and shrubs.
Educate the public about the protection and preservation of trees and shrubs.
Establish a protocol for the planting, retaining and removing of trees and
shrubs as part of a development or redevelopment process.
Provide for the general care and maintenance of Parma's urban forest.
Protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Applicability: This section applies to all areas adjoining a public
street; all trees and shrubs located in or partially in the public right of
way, public parks, parkways and other city property, as well as to trees and
shrubs located on public and private property that have been declared to be a
public nuisance. This section shall also apply to all aspects of the
construction development and redevelopment process involving the planting,
retaining or removing of trees.
   C.   Care Of Trees And Shrubs In The City: Every controller shall be
responsible for meeting all requirements of this chapter for tree and shrub
landscaping, care and maintenance performed in or near any public right of way
adjacent to the controller's private real property, including the following
activities or actions:
      1.   Removal and replacement of public trees and shrubs, or portions
thereof, that are declared to be a public nuisance. Whenever a public tree or
shrub is removed, the controller shall replace it with a like variety, from the
appropriate category, selected from the tables set forth in this chapter unless
this replacement requirement is waived by the council for good cause shown.
      2.   Removal of private trees and shrubs located on the controller's
private real property that are declared a public nuisance.
      3.   Pruning of trees and shrubs: The branches of trees that overhang
sidewalks must be pruned to provide at least eight feet (8') of vertical
clearance. Tree branches that overhang the street must be pruned to provide at
least fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance.
      4.   Removal, pruning, maintenance and care of public trees and shrubs
shall be conducted in a manner generally accepted in professional
arboricultural practice.
      5.   Control pests injurious to trees and shrubs.
      6.   Public tree and shrub debris and leaves that fall in the public
streets shall be the city's responsibility to remove. Public or private tree
and shrub debris and leaves that fall onto property adjacent to public streets,
as well as leaves raked into the street, shall be the adjoining controller's
responsibility to remove.
   D.   Public Nuisances: The following are hereby declared public nuisances:
      1.   Any tree, shrub or other plant, which by reason of location or
condition: a) constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare
of the general public, b) harbors pathogens or injurious insects which
reasonably may be expected to injure or harm other trees or shrubs, c)
obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, d) obstructs a
streetlight or traffic control device, and/or e) obstructs the view in the
vision triangle.
      2.   Any tree suspected of having Dutch elm disease, unless it is being
treated according to routine inspection and treatment program generally
accepted in professional arboricultural practice.
      3.   Landscape areas that are not maintained and become inundated with
weeds and/or trash.
      4.   Right to inspect: City agents have the authority to enter onto
private property where there is reasonable cause to believe that there is a
tree, shrub, or landscape area that is a public nuisance.
   E.   Nuisance Abatement: A controller shall take immediate steps that are
generally accepted in professional arboricultural practice to abate any public
nuisance described in this chapter. The city shall issue a written notice to be
personally served or sent by certified mail to the person listed by the Canyon
County assessor's office as the record owner of the particular property. The
notice shall describe the nuisance and the steps necessary for its abatement.
If any person fails or neglects to abate the nuisance within five (5) days from
the delivery of the abatement notice, the city may proceed to abate the
nuisance without further notice. Abatement costs will be assessed to the
property and shall become a special assessment against the property upon which
the nuisance existed or, if the nuisance was in the public right of way, the
adjoining property with maintenance responsibilities outlined in this chapter.
   F.   Damaging, Endangering, Destroying Or Topping Of Public Trees Or Shrubs:
It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Damage, mutilate or destroy any public tree or shrub.
      2.   Store or place, or cause to be stored or placed, oil, gasoline,
chemicals (such as herbicides), or any other material harmful to vegetation,
near a public tree or shrub.
      3.   Attach a potentially harmful device or structure (such as a tree
house or sign) to a public tree or shrub.
      4.   Spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which are toxic
to persons, animals, trees, shrubs and vegetative matter.
      5.   Make excavations in the soil within one foot (1') of the roots of a
public tree or shrub unless done in a manner generally accepted in professional
arboricultural practice.
      6.   Damage roots of a public tree or shrub by compacting or filling on
or around its base.
      7.   Damage a public tree or shrub by the practice of "topping", except
those severely damaged through no fault of the controller or trees and shrubs
under utility wires or other overhead obstructions.
      8.   Any person removing live or dead trees, shrubbery or other
vegetative matter from city parks or along the streets and alleys of the city
shall remove this vegetation in such a fashion that no tree stump or main root
system remains to a depth of twelve inches (12") below the ground surface.
After excavation, the ground is to be restored and the surface left smooth.
   G.   Violations: Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be a misdemeanor.
   H.   Recommended Public Tree And Shrub Categories: Anytime a controller or
other person is required to plant or replace any public tree or shrub, the
variety shall be chosen with specific reference to species characteristics
including mature size and root structure. The city shall approve only those
varieties that will be compatible with existing and future anticipated
subsurface, surface and overhead uses, at the site including sidewalks,
streets, overhead utilities, inground utilities, traffic and pedestrian
sightlines, etc. Public trees and shrubs shall be categorized as follows:
      1.   Class 2 tree category: Medium sized trees planted for street tree
and general landscape uses. These trees grow to heights varying from thirty
(30) to sixty feet (60') and have a canopy spread extending thirty (30) to
sixty feet (60').
      2.   Class 3 tree category: Long living trees that attain large height
and trunk diameter may be utilized for street tree use, provided the area is
large enough to accommodate them. These trees grow to heights varying from
sixty (60) to one hundred feet (100') and possess a canopy spread extending
thirty five (35) to eighty feet (80').
      3.   Class 1 tree category: The following trees and shrubs shall be
placed below overhead power lines. These are class 1 trees; they generally grow
to a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') and have a fifteen (15) to thirty
foot (30') canopy spread.
Deciduous Trees Conifers
Deciduous Trees                         Conifers
                                                            Gold cost
Acer grandidentatum Bigtooth maple      Juniperus chinensis Blue point
                                        columnar            Mint julip
                                                            Pfitzer
                                        Juniper scopulorum
                    Keithsform shanting columnar (5
Acer trancatum      maple               varieties           Hillspire juniper
                    Warrenred shanting  available)          Skyrock juniper
                    maple               Juniperus
                                        Virginians
                                                            Woodwardi
Alnus glutinosa     Alder               Thuja occidentalis  arborvitae
                                                            Brandon arborvitae
                                                            Emerald arborvitae
Amelanchier         Princess Diana
grandiflora         serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis  Serviceberry        Flowering Trees
Amelanchier         Autumn serviceberry Crataegus laevigata Crimson cloud
grandiflora                                                 hawthorn
Amelanchier         Cole select         Crataegus virdis    Winterking green
grandiflora         serviceberry                            hawthorn
Caragana                                                    Flowering crabapple
arborescens         Siberian peashrubs  Malus               (22 varieties
                                                            available)
Cercis canadensis   Eastern redbud      Prunus triloba      Rose tree of China
Crataegus crus-     Inermis cockspur    Pyrus calleryana    Pear
galli               hawthorn
Crataegus           Washington hawthorn Syringa reticulata  Japanese tree lilac
phaenopyrum
Crataegus lavallei  Lavelle hawthorn
Prunus newport      Newport plum
Prunus padus        May day tree
commutate
Prunus virginiana   Canada red
                    chokecherry
Sorbus aucparia     European mountain
                    ash
Ulmus glabra        Camperdown elm
 
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
CHAPTER 9
GATEWAY STREET BEAUTIFICATION
SECTION:
5-9-1: Intent And Purpose
5-9-2: Applicability And Gateway Streets
5-9-3: Street And Street Side Improvements
5-9-4: Maintenance Of Contiguous Property
5-9-5: Off Street Parking Areas
5-9-6: Fencing Along Gateway Streets
5-9-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The city of Parma recognizes that beautification can be a significant expense
to business people, property owners and residents. At the same time,
beautification improves the livability of a community, enhances the appearance
and customer attraction of commercial areas, increases property values, screens
undesirable views, and can reduce air and noise pollution through landscape
requirements. The intent of these regulations is to achieve a balance between
the right of individuals to develop and maintain their property in a manner
they prefer and the right of city residents to live, work, shop, and recreate
in pleasant, healthy, and attractive surroundings. Among the benefits derived
from beautification are the following:
   A.   Aesthetic benefits:
      1.   Reduced glare and reflected light;
      2.   Shade for buildings, streets and parking lots;
      3.   Defines outdoor spaces;
      4.   Seasonal color, including flowers and fall color;
      5.   Frames and reveals desired views;
      6.   Adds natural elements to otherwise harsh urban development;
      7.   Attracts birds and other urban wildlife;
      8.   Helps maintain the rural feel of the city; and
      9.   Visually ties the city to the surrounding countryside.
   B.   Economic benefits:
      1.   More profitable business districts;
      2.   Consumers report greater willingness to pay for products in
aesthetically attractive, landscaped commercial areas;
      3.   Attracts new businesses;
      4.   Encourages redevelopment and economic investment in the local
community;
      5.   Office and retail space leases more quickly;
      6.   Reduces energy consumption for air conditioning, etc.; and
      7.   Increases residential property values.
   C.   Environmental benefits:
      1.   Prevents soil erosion;
      2.   Removes particulate pollutants from the air;
      3.   Provides extra oxygen in the atmosphere;
      4.   Removes carbon dioxide from the air;
      5.   Improves soil condition;
      6.   Purifies water supplies, especially storm runoff;
      7.   Reduces unwanted noise; and
      8.   Controls and directs excessive wind. (Ord. 551, 2-9-2009)
5-9-2: APPLICABILITY AND GATEWAY STREETS:
This chapter applies to Parma's gateway streets, Grove Avenue and Roswell
Boulevard. Grove is considered a gateway street at all places within the
corporate city limits as now existing or as may be hereafter adjusted. Roswell
is considered a gateway street from the point where it enters city limits as
now existing or as may be hereafter adjusted, northerly to the intersection
with Grove, though, as set forth more fully in section
5-9-3 of this chapter, that portion of Roswell lying south of the train tracks
shall be treated distinctly from the portion lying north of the train tracks.
This chapter also applies to any real property contiguous to a gateway street
which shall be hereinafter referred to as a "contiguous property". Gateway
streets are some of the most heavily traveled thoroughfares in the city and
transport most of the commerce in and out of the city. They also provide
visitors with their primary physical impression of Parma and access to the
majority of Parma's businesses. It is essential to the public health, safety
and welfare that any use or new construction along gateway streets complies
with the provisions of this title generally and this chapter in particular.
(Ord. 551, 2-9-2009)
5-9-3: STREET AND STREET SIDE IMPROVEMENTS:
Any application for: a) rezoning, b) subdividing, c) special use permit or d)
any building permit for new construction or alteration affecting fifty percent
(50%) or more of the value of improvements where such application involves a
gateway street or contiguous property shall comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Street Cuts: No utility cuts into the pavement of gateway streets will
be permitted without a permit from the government entity having jurisdiction.
   B.   Curb, Gutter And Sidewalks:
      1.   Property contiguous to Roswell Boulevard north of the railroad
tracks: Six inch (6") vertical curb and gutter, and eight foot (8') sidewalks,
meeting city standards shall be constructed adjacent to Roswell Boulevard. See
figure 1 of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/61ec97fb1b39ef8bc70be10ad320ecd348c6f373/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
 
      2.   Property contiguous to Roswell Boulevard south of the railroad
tracks: A swale system and a five foot (5') cement meandering sidewalk meeting
city standards shall be constructed adjacent to Roswell Boulevard. See figure 2
of this section. Once constructed, the swale system shall be maintained in a
working and weed free condition by the property owner or the city may mail the
property owner notice of the owner's failure to maintain the system and, after
fourteen (14) calendar days from date of the city's notice, perform necessary
maintenance to the swale system and assess the property for the city's
maintenance costs and expenses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/61ec97fb1b39ef8bc70be10ad320ecd348c6f373/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.png]
 
   C.   Plans: Plans for curb, gutter, sidewalk and pavement match design must
be submitted to and approved by the government entity having jurisdiction.
   D.   Streetlights And Trees: Applicants shall be required to install
streetlights and trees approved by the city. City approval shall include
installation, location and spacing of streetlights and trees determined by the
city. Trees must be installed in tree wells. Power to the streetlights and
irrigation water for the trees must be provided by the applicant. Tree types
must be from an approved list provided by the city. However, for any
application triggering this section involving property on or contiguous to any
portion of Roswell lying south of the train tracks, no streetlights or trees
shall be required.
   E.   Guarantee Of Improvements:
      1.   In lieu of the actual installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks,
the council may permit the applicant to provide a financial guarantee in a form
acceptable to the city engineer in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specified
improvements as estimated by the city engineer, to be held in trust by the
department or city to guarantee completion of said improvements.
      2.   In lieu of the actual installation of streetlights, street trees,
tree wells and irrigation, the council may permit the applicant to provide a
financial guarantee or surety in the form of a letter of credit, certificate of
deposit, or cash which shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specified
improvements as estimated by the city engineer, to be held in trust by the city
to guarantee completion of said improvements.
   F.   Inspections: The applicant shall be required to pay the department and/
or city inspection fees for the inspection of improvements.
   G.   Completion Required Prior To Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy Or
Approval Of Final Plat: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the
applicant, nor final plat approved, until the improvements required have been
installed, or an acceptable guarantee of improvements, as set forth in
subsection E of this section, has been received by the city. (Ord. 551, 2-9-
2009)
5-9-4: MAINTENANCE OF CONTIGUOUS PROPERTY:
For all parcels of property contiguous to "gateway streets", as described in
section
5-9-2 of this chapter, the yards and setback areas adjoining any public street,
including, without limitation, gateway streets and their cross streets, must be
landscaped and maintained. For purposes of this section, the term "landscape"
shall mean, at a minimum, the intentional growing of a grass lawn, or other
similar ground covering vegetation, over the entire yard and setback area.
Provided, however, that areas improved and used and maintained as off street
parking driveways, walkways, gardens or flowerbeds shall be exempt. For
purposes of this section, the term "maintained" shall mean the exercise of all
reasonable and customary activities to preserve vegetative matter in a healthy,
clean, trimmed or pruned, weed free condition as well as the exercise of
diligence in preventing the accumulation of debris, trash, garbage, inoperable
equipment, waste, trimmings or clippings, appliances, indoor furniture or use
of the yard and setback areas for storage of anything not intended for regular
use in the yard or setback area itself. (Ord. 551, 2-9-2009)
5-9-5: OFF STREET PARKING AREAS:
Portions of any parcel of property contiguous to "gateway streets", as
described in section
5-9-2 of this chapter, that are used for off street parking shall, in addition
to any other requirement applicable to such use, landscape and maintain ten
percent (10%) of the off street parking area. As nearly as practicable, said
ten percent (10%) area shall be adjacent to the gateway street(s). (Ord. 551,
2-9-2009)
5-9-6: FENCING ALONG GATEWAY STREETS:
All parcels of property contiguous to "gateway streets", as described in
section
5-9-2 of this chapter, shall comply with this section when constructing any
fence after the effective date hereof. Any fence constructed along the sides or
front edge of any front yard on property on or contiguous to a gateway street
shall be a nonprivacy fence and not more than four feet (4') in height. (Ord.
551, 2-9-2009)
CHAPTER 10
SIGNAGE
SECTION:
5-10-1: Purpose
5-10-2: Prohibited Signs
5-10-3: Exempted Signs
5-10-4: Nonconforming Signs
5-10-5: Signs By Use Districts
5-10-6: Specific Sign Type Requirements
5-10-7: General Provisions And Requirements
5-10-8: Administration And Enforcement
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Parma by establishing standards to ensure the placement of safe,
effective signage in all the use districts within the city. (Ord. 527, 3-14-
2005)
5-10-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs are expressly prohibited in all use districts,
except as otherwise provided by this chapter:
   A.   Miscellaneous Banners And Posters: Banners, yard sale signs or
advertisements, portable temporary signs, or posters which are visible from a
public right of way and are tacked, nailed, pasted, posted, painted, chained or
attached in any way to any curb, telephone pole, newspaper or similar stand,
mailbox, traffic sign, bus bench (except as hereafter specifically allowed),
electric light or power pole, traffic signal pole, wall, fence, post, fire
hydrant, or tree.
   B.   Off Premises Advertising Signs (Billboards): Permits for new
billboards, whether poster panels or painted bulletins, proposed to be emplaced
after the effective date hereof shall not be allowed. Such signs already
located within city limits prior to the effective date hereof or subsequently
annexed into the city after the effective date hereof may be relocated to new
sites within city limits. For purposes of this chapter, a "billboard" is any
sign of thirty two (32) square feet or larger that does or may refer to
persons, goods, services, businesses or other messages not associated with the
parcel where the sign is located.
In order to relocate a billboard within the city, application shall first be
made to the planning and zoning division. A relocated billboard must meet/
comply with requirements listed in section
5-10-5, "Signs By Use Districts", of this chapter (except as hereafter noted)
as well as subsection
5-10-6B, "Off Premises Billboard Type Signs", of this chapter in order to be
allowed. If the sign is deemed to meet applicable codes the city shall permit
the sign.
   C.   Hazardous Or Unsafe Signs: Any sign that, in the reasonable opinion of
the building official, planning director, engineer or police officer, creates a
hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or a hazard to the public in general.
   D.   Abandoned Signs: Signs located on property which becomes vacant and
unoccupied for a period of thirty (30) days or more, or any sign which pertains
to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-3: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs erected in the city
except for the following which shall be exempt in accordance with the following
provisions. No sign shall be exempt from any provision of this chapter or other
applicable law concerning the safety of signs, the public or property.
   A.   Construction signs having an area not in excess of fifty (50) square
feet, provided that such signs are erected no more than sixty (60) days prior
to the construction, are confined to the site of construction, and are removed
not more than thirty (30) days after completion and prior to occupancy.
   B.   Direction or instructional signs which do not advertise a business, but
which identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways or signs providing
direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs and those of similar
nature.
   C.   Governmental signs for traffic control, for direction to public
facilities, or for regulatory notice, warning or other public purposes.
   D.   Holiday decorations and signs of a decorative nature, incidental and
commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday, provided
such signs are located outside the vision triangle.
   E.   House numbers, nameplates, home occupation signs, "no trespassing",
"beware of dog" or "no dumping" signs.
   F.   Memorial tablets or tablets containing the name, date erected and use
of buildings, when built into the walls of the buildings and constructed of
bronze, brass, marble, stone or other noncombustible materials.
   G.   Window signs, except in residential zones, provided the total copy area
of such signs occupies no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total
window area.
   H.   Political signs, provided such signs shall be posted no more than sixty
(60) days before an election, removed within two (2) weeks following election
day, not be destructive to public property upon posting or removal, not posted
in any public right of way or on any utility pole, and vision triangles are
maintained. No electric political signs shall be allowed in residential use
districts.
   I.   Religious, charitable, educational, institutional or other signs
determined to be similar not exceeding one square foot in area for each three
(3) linear feet of frontage of the main building on the principal street shall
be allowed within residential or agricultural use districts, provided no sign
shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. Such signs may be
floodlighted or illuminated, shall require a sign permit and shall comply with
all other locational requirements of this chapter.
   J.   Picket signs, provided they are hand carried.
   K.   Temporary signs pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic,
educational or religious organizations, provided said signs are not placed more
than thirty (30) days prior to and removed within seven (7) days of the end of
the drive or event.
   L.   Other temporary business signs not exceeding three feet (3') in height
or more than three feet (3') in width. Not more than one such sign shall be
permitted per business, and signs shall only be displayed during regular
business hours and shall not be located on sidewalks, streets or other public
rights of way. As an exception to the above, temporary business signs may be
placed on sidewalks in commercially zoned districts subject to compliance with
the following:
      1.   Signs shall not exceed three feet (3') in height nor three feet (3')
in width.
      2.   Not more than one sign shall be permitted per business.
      3.   Signs shall only be displayed during the hours in which the business
is open.
      4.   Signs shall not be placed at locations which impede the vision of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or shall not be placed within ten feet (10')
of a street corner or alley.
      5.   Signs shall be placed so as to allow a minimum of five feet (5') of
free and unobstructed sidewalk area.
      6.   Signs shall be self-supporting so as to keep them from blowing over.
      7.   Signs shall be constructed in a professional manner. No broken,
unsightly, inferior or old worn materials may be utilized.
   M.   Signs permitted or required by other provisions of law, e.g., signs
required by subsection
5-2-6D of this title.
   N.   Searchlights, hot air or helium balloons greater than ten feet (10') in
their widest dimension, or other devices determined to be similar, which do not
advertise, but which are intended to provide direction or attraction to a
business, service, or activity subject to the following:
      1.   No searchlight beam shall flash against any building, cause any
visual or traffic hazard, sweep an arc greater than forty five degrees (45°)
from vertical and the searchlight shall be set back at least thirty feet (30')
from any public right of way.
      2.   No searchlight or balloon shall be used by a new or existing
business or enterprise more than four (4) times yearly for a maximum period of
seven (7) consecutive days.
   O.   Bus stop benches may have flat, poster or painted signs fastened to
their back supports/rests. Signs so attached to bus stop benches must be
securely fastened. Portable signs may not be chained, tied, propped upon or
otherwise affixed to benches. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-4: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs shall not be replaced, relocated or be structurally altered
unless every portion of such sign is made to conform to all city regulations
governing signage. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-5: SIGNS BY USE DISTRICTS:
It is unlawful for any person to erect or install a sign having a size or
height greater than allowed by the following schedule. It is unlawful for any
person to erect or install a sign located on the site or in a zoning use
district in violation of the controls specified in this schedule:
Zoning District Permitted Signs Illumination Location Maximum Size
Zoning District Permitted Signs Illumination   Location        Maximum Size
                1 family name                  Flush on a
                sign            No             building        2 square feet
                                               structure
                1 home                         Flush on a
                occupation sign No             building        2 square feet
                                               structure
                1 temporary
                sign
R-1, R-2        advertising                    5 feet or more
                sale or rental  No             from any        8 square feet
                of the premises                property line
                where the sign
                is located
                1 sign                         10 feet or more
                identifying a   No             from any        16 square feet
                conditional use                property line
                on the premises
                1 family name                  Flush on a
                sign            No             building        2 square feet
                                               structure
                1 home                         Flush on a
                occupation sign No             building        2 square feet
                                               structure
                1 temporary
                sign
                advertising                    5 feet or more
                sale or rental  No             from any        8 square feet
                of the premises                property line
                where the sign
                is located
                1 sign                         10 feet or more
                identifying a   No             from any        16 square feet
R-3             special use on                 property line
                the premises
                1 sign
                identifying the
                following
                permitted uses
                in the R-       Internal only
                3 zone: multi-  (if property   10 feet or more
                family          fronts on a    from any        24 square feet
                dwelling,       collector or   property line
                convalescent/   arterial
                nursing-rest    roadway)
                home or similar
                quasi-
                commercial
                residential use
                1 temporary
                freestanding
                sign                           10 feet or more
                advertising     No             from any        32 square feet
                sale or rental                 property line
                of the premises
                where the sign
                is located
                                                               2 square feet
                                                               per foot of
                                                               street frontage,
                                                               excluding street
C-1, C-2, M-1,                                                 frontage for
M-2                                                            which there is
                                                               no access to the
                1 sign for each                                property.
                street frontage                Wholly within   Provided that
                for on premises Yes            private         the minimum sign
                advertising                    property        size for each
                only                                           parcel shall be
                                                               64 square feet
                                                               and the maximum
                                                               shall be 140
                                                               square feet
                                                               regardless of
                                                               street frontage
                                                               footage
 
Notes:
1.   The limitation for maximum sign size and location may vary from the
foregoing schedule upon issuance of a conditional use permit.
2.   Private signs directing traffic on private property are permitted.
3.   Signs imitating or similar to official traffic signs or other official
signs which may be confused with official signs or reasonably confuse the
public are prohibited.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-6: SPECIFIC SIGN TYPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Portable Signs:
      1.   Size: No sign shall exceed four feet (4') in height and eight feet
(8') in width.
      2.   Number: No business shall be allowed more than one sign per street
frontage.
      3.   Location And Duration: All portable signs shall only be located on
private commercial property. Signs shall only be allowed for on premises
advertising and only at approved locations in accordance with the following
duration provisions:
         a.   Ninety Day Placements: New or relocated businesses shall only be
allowed to locate a portable sign for no more than ninety (90) continuous days.
After the ninety (90) day period, the sign will be in violation and must be
removed. Businesses in operation for more than ninety (90) continuous days
shall not be allowed ninety (90) day placements.
         b.   Thirty Day Placements: Existing businesses desiring to advertise
sales shall only be allowed to locate a portable sign no more than once during
any ninety (90) day period. The maximum duration of such placement shall not
exceed thirty (30) continuous days.
      4.   Lighting: Interior illumination by other than white light and
exterior illumination by other than soft yellow light shall not be permitted.
No portable sign shall be animated in any manner.
   B.   Off Premises Billboard Type Signs:
      1.   No billboard type wall or roof signs shall be allowed.
      2.   Not more than one sign shall be allowed per parcel. Minimum spacing
between billboard signs on the same side of a roadway shall be no less than one
thousand (1,000) linear feet measured along the centerline of the roadway.
Minimum spacing between a billboard sign on one side of a roadway from a
billboard sign on the other side of a roadway shall be no less than three
hundred (300) linear feet measured along the centerline of the roadway.
      3.   In no case shall the bottom of any sign surface be lower than twelve
feet (12') from the ground.
      4.   All newly constructed signs shall be of single or dual pole, steel
construction, completely freestanding without bracing.
      5.   Billboard signs shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height, or
twenty six feet (26') in length, or exceed three hundred twelve (312) square
feet in area. Illumination shall only be by indirect or floodlighting. Lights
shall not extend more than eight feet (8') from the sign structure if attached
to the sign or sign structure in any way.
   C.   Off Premises Directional Sign: No sign shall be permitted which causes
the combined allowable square footage of all ground or freestanding signs on
the property (vacant or developed) to exceed that allowed within the specific
zoning use district in which it is located as provided in section
5-10-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-7: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
   A.   Location And Projection: All sign structures shall be on private
property except as otherwise allowed in this chapter for temporary signs. No
permanent sign structures shall be placed within any easement, right of way or
projected future right of way as determined by the city engineer.
      1.   Projection Over Right Of Way: No sign shall project over the right
of way within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of the projected future curb
lines of intersecting streets. Signs located outside of intersection areas that
are to project over public right of way shall not project beyond a point within
twenty four inches (24") of a line drawn perpendicularly upward from the back
of the projected future curb line as determined by the city engineer, provided
no sign projects more than six feet (6') over the public right of way, and it
is determined by the city engineer that said projection shall not constitute a
future traffic hazard or conflict with existing or future utilities or street
signing.
      2.   Projection Over Sidewalk Or Ground: Signs that are to project over
public right of way shall be twelve feet (12') from the sidewalk or ground,
except a marquee which may be eight feet (8') from the sidewalk or ground to
the bottom of the marquee.
      3.   Vision Triangle: No sign shall be located in such a manner as to
obstruct the vision triangle of an intersection unless exception is granted in
accordance with other applicable city ordinances. In no case shall the bottom
side of any sight obstructing sign surface or structure located in the vision
triangle be lower than twelve feet (12') from the sidewalk or ground. Exception
may be allowed for small ground signs not extending more than three feet (3')
in height above the projected future gutter line road elevation.
      4.   Drive Approaches: No sign shall be located in such a manner as to
hinder the safe vehicle use of a drive approach by unduly restricting vision of
traffic.
   B.   Blanketing Of Signs: To prevent blanketing the following shall apply:
      1.   No signs shall be erected in the same horizontal plane with other
signs unless spaced the following distance apart, measured center to center:
         a.   Signs projecting from sign structures three feet (3') or less,
spacing ten feet (10').
         b.   Signs projecting from sign structures three feet (3') to four
feet (4'), spacing twenty feet (20').
         c.   Signs projecting from sign structures four feet (4') to six feet
(6'), spacing twenty five feet (25').
         d.   Signs projecting from sign structures more than six feet (6'),
spacing thirty feet (30').
      2.   Any sign erected at a shorter distance apart than required above
shall be erected above the top edge or below the bottom edge of the adjacent
sign.
   C.   Criteria: Size, height, number, illumination and spacing as provided in
the schedule by zoning use districts in section
5-10-5 of this chapter.
   D.   Attachment:
      1.   Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frame of
the building over which they are constructed and erected.
      2.   Marquee signs may be placed on, attached to or constructed as part
of a marquee. Such signs shall, for the purpose of determining projection,
clearance, height and material, be considered a part of and shall meet the
requirements for a marquee as specified in any adopted, applicable building
code.
      3.   Temporary cloth signs shall be supported and attached with wire rope
of three-eighths inch (3/8") minimum diameter. No strings, fiber ropes or wood
slats shall be permitted for support or anchorage purposes. Cloth signs and
panels shall be perforated over at least ten percent (10%) of their area to
reduce wind resistance.
   E.   Electrical: The enclosed shell of electric signs shall be watertight,
except that service holes fitted with covers shall be provided into each
compartment of such signs. Electrical equipment shall be installed in
compliance with any adopted, applicable uniform electrical code. Every
electrical sign projecting over any street or alley or public place shall have
inscribed on the surface of the sign the name of the sign erector, the listing
label, and the date of manufacture.
   F.   Interstate And Primary Highway Signs: Signs along interstate and
primary highways shall conform to federal and state transportation department
regulations.
   G.   Abandoned Signs: All abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of
the sign or owner of the premises within six (6) months of abandonment.
   H.   Sign Maintenance And Repair: Nothing in this chapter shall relieve the
owner or user of any sign or owner of property on which a sign is located from
maintaining the sign in a safe condition and in a good state of repair. Ground
area surrounding freestanding signs shall be kept free of rubbish and weeds.
(Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
5-10-8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspection And Maintenance: The public works director, police
department or their duly authorized representatives are authorized and directed
to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and for such purposes shall have
the powers of law enforcement officers. Upon presentation of proper
credentials, enforcement officers may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the city to make inspection of a sign, its structural
and electrical connections and to ensure compliance with any of the provisions
of this chapter, including repair or structural alteration for safety of signs
which present a hazard to the public.
   B.   Violations: Any person erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering,
repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting or demolishing, equipping,
using or maintaining any sign or sign structure in the city, or causing or
permitting the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and a public
nuisance.
   C.   Notice To Comply: Upon finding that any sign is in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or endangers public safety, enforcement officers
may declare the sign illegal. Enforcement officers shall provide the owner
written or oral notice that the sign has been declared unlawful, specifying the
reasons why the sign is unlawful and ordering that the sign be repaired,
modified or removed within a reasonable time being either the same day or up to
thirty (30) calendar days from pronouncement or issuance of notice.
   D.   Appeals: The council shall hear and decide appeals from any decision,
requirement or interpretation made by an enforcement officer, or his duly
authorized representatives, in the enforcement of this chapter. Such appeals
must be made within thirty (30) days from the date of such action.
   E.   Removal Of Unlawful Signs: Any sign found in violation of this chapter
may be impounded and sold or otherwise disposed of as follows:
      1.   Impoundment And Expense: Any unlawful sign which has not been
removed following expiration of the notice to comply period, may be impounded
and the costs of removal and storage shall constitute a lien in favor of the
city upon and against such sign. Neither the city or its agents shall be liable
for any sign damage at the time of removal or storage. If removal and storage
costs have not been paid and the sign reclaimed within thirty (30) days of its
removal by the city, the city may proceed to sell or otherwise dispose of the
sign in accordance with subsection E3 of this section.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership: Any person claiming ownership of any impounded
sign shall furnish proof of ownership. The owner of the premises shall be
presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon, unless otherwise brought to the
attention of the city. The sign shall be released to the owner upon payment of
all the costs assessed against such sign.
      3.   Sale Or Disposal Of Impounded Signs: All signs impounded which are
not reclaimed may be subjected to sale to the highest bidder for cash in the
manner provided in subsection E4 of this section. Any proceeds in excess of
removal and storage costs shall be paid to the owner. In the event there are no
purchasers for the sale of such signs, the city may discard such signs in any
way deemed convenient.
      4.   Notice Of Sale Or Disposal: Whenever any sign shall be sold
hereunder, written notice shall be given to the owner as well as notice in one
issue of the official newspaper five (5) days prior to the date of sale. The
notice shall state that a sign sale will be had giving the time and place of
such sale, that all bids shall be for cash to the highest bidder and that the
city reserves the right to reject any or all bids. Upon payment of the bid
prices, the city shall execute and deliver a bill of sale to the purchaser of
such sign.
      5.   Not A Limitation Of Enforcement Options: The city shall have the
discretion to enforce this chapter by any criminal or civil, legal or equitable
prosecution. City shall have all enforcement powers set forth in chapter 3 of
this title or other provision of Idaho law. (Ord. 527, 3-14-2005)
TITLE 5A
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
5A-1-1: Short Title, Applicability, Exemptions, And Purpose
5A-1-2: Definitions
5A-1-3: Establishment Of Service Areas; Imposition Of Impact Fee; Fee Schedule;
Exemptions
5A-1-4: Collection Of Impact Fees; Enforcement
5A-1-5: Certification
5A-1-6: Individual Assessment
5A-1-7: Developer Credits and Reimbursement
5A-1-8: Methodology For The Calculation Of Impact Fees
5A-1-9: Extraordinary Impact
5A-1-10: Fee Payer Refunds
5A-1-11: Establishment Of Capital Projects Fund; Fund Accounts
5A-1-12: Expenditure Of Impact Fees
5A-1-13: Appeals, Protest And Mediation
5A-1-14: Periodic Reviews; Annual Budget
5A-1-15: Audit
5A-1-16: Advisory Committee
5A-1-17: Miscellaneous Provisions
5A-1-18: Rules Of Construction
5A-1-1: SHORT TITLE, APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS, AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Short title: This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City
of Parma Development Impact Fee Ordinance.
   B.   Findings: The Parma, Idaho City Council finds that:
      1.   The City of Parma is experiencing considerable growth and
development.
      2.   The new growth and development occurring within the City of Parma
will place ever-increasing demands on the City to provide, improve and expand
existing public facilities to serve that new growth and development and the tax
revenues generated from that new growth and development often does not generate
sufficient funds to provide the necessary improvements and expansion of the
public facilities to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   Those users that create the increased demand should bear their proportionate
share of the cost of public facilities needed to serve the new growth and
development.
   C.   Authority: Title 67, Chapter 82, Idaho Code.
   D.   Applicability: This ordinance applies to all new development and
construction within the City limits of the City of Parma, Idaho.
   E.   Purpose: The intent of this chapter is to ensure that new residential
and non-residential development bears a proportionate share of the cost of
System Improvements; to ensure that such proportionate share does not exceed
the cost of such System Improvements required to accommodate new Development;
and to ensure that funds collected from new Development are actually used for
System Improvements in accordance with the Act. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended and words and terms
appearing in the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular:
ACCOUNT:      The interest-bearing account within the Impact Fee Capital Projects Fund as
              established in this chapter.
ADVISORY      The City's Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee ("Advisory Committee") formed
COMMITTEE:    and staffed by the City pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8205 to prepare and recommend
              the Capital Improvements Plan and any amendments, revisions or updates of the same.
APPROPRIATE:  Shall mean to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to the expenditure of
              funds by appropriation or other official act of the Board of Commissioners.
BUILDING      The permit required for foundations, new construction and additions pursuant to
PERMIT:       Parma City Code.
              Land, buildings, apparatus, vehicles and equipment as identified in the City's
CAPITAL       Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by the City, and specifically including those
FACILITIES:   related costs including System Improvement Costs, but not including maintenance,
              operations, or improvements that do not expand their capacity.
CAPITAL       Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or
IMPROVEMENTS: other action, which increases the service capacity of the City's public facilities
CAPITAL       A component of the Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the City pursuant to
IMPROVEMENTS  Chapters 65 and 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code, as they may be amended, which component
ELEMENT:      meets the requirements of the capital improvements plan required by the Act.
CAPITAL       The Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan recommended by the Development
IMPROVEMENTS  Impact Fee Advisory Committee and adopted by the City that identifies the Capital
PLAN:         Facilities for which the City's Impact Fees may be used as a funding source.
CAPITAL
PROJECTS FUND Shall mean and refer to the City's Development Impact Fee Capital Projects Fund
(the "Capital established by action of the City Council pursuant to this code and Idaho Code § 67-
Projects      8210(1).
Fund"):
CITY:         City of Parma, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The Parma City Council.
DEVELOPER:    Any person or legal entity undertaking Development and/or the subdivision of
              property pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 50-1301 through 50-1334, as may be amended.
              Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use of
DEVELOPMENT:  a building or structure, or any change in the use, character or appearance of land,
              which creates additional demand and need for public facilities and/or subdivision of
              property that would permit any change in the use, character or appearance of land.
DEVELOPMENT   Any written duly authorized document from the City which authorizes the commencement
APPROVAL:     of a Development.
              A requirement attached to a Developmental approval or other City governmental action
DEVELOPMENT   approving or authorizing a particular Development project including, but not limited
REQUIREMENT:  to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or contribution of
              goods, services, land or money as condition of approval.
DWELLING      Any structure, or portion thereof, providing living facilities for one family as
UNIT:         herein defined, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
              sanitation.
EXTRAORDINAR  Those costs incurred as result of an extraordinary impact.
Y COSTS:
              An impact which is reasonably determined by the City to:
                 A.   Result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will
EXTRAORDINAR  significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated from the
Y IMPACT:     project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development agreement as allowed
              by Idaho Code § 67-8214(2), as it may be amended; or
                 B.   Result in the need for system improvements which are not identified in the
              Capital Improvements Plan.
FEE PAYER:    The person who pays or is required to pay the City's Impact Fee. A fee payer may
              include a Developer.
              A payment of money imposed as condition of Development Approval to pay for a
              proportionate share of the costs of System Improvements needed to serve the
              Development. The term does not include the following:
                 A.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative plan review, or inspection cost
              associated with permits required for Development;
                 B.   Connection or hookup charges;
IMPACT FEE:      C.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation charges
              for services provided directly to the development; or
                 D.   Amounts collected from a Developer in a transaction in which the City has
              incurred expenses in constructing Capital Improvements for the Development if the
              owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the construction or
              installation of those Capital Improvements, unless a written agreement is made,
              pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8209(3) as it may be amended, for credit or
              reimbursement.
LAND USE      A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities,
ASSUMPTIONS:  intensities and population in the service area over at least a ten (10) year period.
LEVEL OF      A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for Public
SERVICE:      Facilities.
              A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction and safety
              standards, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode,
              is eight (8) feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
              when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which
              is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
MANUFACTURED  without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes
/MOBILE HOME: the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in such
              structure, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the
              requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and with respect to
              which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary
              of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under
              42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.
              Any building or building component other than a manufactured/mobile home, which is
MODULAR       constructed according to the International Building Code, as adopted or any
BUILDING:     amendments thereto, which is of closed construction and is either entirely or
              substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site.
PRESENT       The total current monetary value of past, present or future payments, contributions
VALUE:        or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or money.
PROJECT:      A particular Development on an identified parcel of land.
              In contrast to System Improvements, shall mean site improvements and facilities that
PROJECT       are planned and designed to provide service for a particular Development Project and
IMPROVEMENTS: that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the
              Project.
PROPORTIONATE That portion of System Improvement Costs determined pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8207
SHARE:        which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the Project.
PUBLIC        Land, public safety facilities, including fire and law enforcement, apparatus,
FACILITIES:   vehicles and equipment which have a useful life of ten (10) years or more.
RECREATIONAL  A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational,
VEHICLE:      camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or
              drawn by another vehicle.
              Land within the boundaries of the City as established pursuant to this Title, in
SERVICE AREA: which specific Public Facilities provide service to Development on the basis of
              sound planning or engineering principles or both as identified in the City's Capital
              Improvements Plan.
              A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to
              an individual unit of Development calculated in accordance with generally accepted
SERVICE UNIT: engineering or planning standards for a particular category of Capital Improvements.
              As specifically used in this Ordinance, service units include all dwelling units as
              defined herein and includes, on the square foot basis, nonresidential Development.
SYSTEM        In contrast to Project Improvements, shall mean Capital Improvements to Public
IMPROVEMENTS: Facilities which are designed to provide service to a Service Area.
              Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of System Improvements, including
              design, acquisition, engineering and other costs, and also including, without
              limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code § 50-1702(h), as it may be
              amended, to provide additional Public Facilities needed to service new growth and
              Development. For clarification, System Improvement Costs do not include:
                 A.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of Public Facilities other than
              Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan;
                 B.   Improvements, repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital;
SYSTEM           C.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
IMPROVEMENT   serve existing Development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
COSTS:        environmental or regulatory standards;
                 D.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
              provide better service to existing Development;
                 E.   Administrative and operating costs of the City unless such costs are
              attributable to Development of the Capital Improvements Plan, as provided in Idaho
              Code § 67-8208, as it may be amended; and
                 F.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other
              indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the City to
              finance Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 617,
              2-14-2023)
 
5A-1-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREAS; IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE; FEE SCHEDULE;
EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Establishment of Service Areas. There is hereby established a Service
Area which Service Area includes all land in the City of Parma.
   B.   Imposition of Impact Fees. Impact fees for the City are hereby imposed
on all new Development located within the City of Parma.
   C.   Fee Schedule. Impact fees shall be calculated in accordance with the
fee schedule set forth below providing for standard fees based on the total
number of Dwelling Units or square feet of nonresidential space in the
Development, unless:
      1.   The Fee Payer requests an individual assessment pursuant to section
this Title; or
      2.   The City finds the Development will have an Extraordinary Impact
pursuant to this Title.
      The methodology for determining the cost per service unit provided for in
the fee schedule is set forth in the City's Capital Improvements Plan as
adopted by the City pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8208, as it may be amended.
      Impact Fee Schedule:
Parks and Recreation
Parks and Recreation
Single-Family (per Dwelling Unit)                 $1,342.00
Multifamily (per Dwelling Unit)                   $556.00
Transportation Multimodal
Single-Family (per Dwelling Unit)                 $722.00
Multifamily (per Dwelling Unit)                   $300.00
Transportation- Roadways
Single-Family Residential (per Dwelling Unit)     $474.00
Multi-Family Residential (per Dwelling Unit)      $132.00
Nonresidential -Retail (per 1000 sq. ft)          $804.00
Nonresidential-Office (per 1000 sq. ft.)          $310.00
Nonresidential-Industrial (per 1000 sq. ft)       $139.00
Non-Residential-Institutional (per 1000 sq. foot) $558.00
 
   D.   Procedures:
      1.   Building Permit. Upon submittal of complete building permit plans or
manufactured home installation permit for the Development to the City, the City
shall calculate the impact fee for the Development within thirty (30) Days of
submittal unless:
         a.   The Fee Payer had previously requested and been granted an
individual assessment pursuant to this chapter; or
         b.   The City has previously determined the Development may have an
Extraordinary Impact pursuant to this chapter.
   E.   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction; or
      2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the
number of Service Units;
      3.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured/mobile home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that, the number of
Service Units does not increase; or
      4.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot; or
      5.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of Service Units; or
      6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of System Improvements; or
      7.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle if the Fee Payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either:
         a.   Modular building, manufactured/mobile home or recreational
vehicle was legally in place on the lot or space prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance; or
         b.   An Impact Fee has been paid previously for the modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space.
   F.   Exemption Claim Process. A Fee Payer shall claim an exempt development
activity upon application of a building permit or manufactured/ Mobile home
installation permit required, prior to the time construction commences. Any
exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waved by the Fee Payer. Claims for
exemption shall be determined by the Administrator within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the claim for exemption.
(Ord. 617, 2-14-2023; amd. Ord. 627, 11-1-2024)
5A-1-4: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Payment of Fees. The Impact Fee shall be paid to the City at the
following times:
      1.   If a Building Permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit
is required, then before or at the time the permit is issued;
      2.   If no Building Permit or manufactured/mobile home installation
permit is required, then at the time that construction commences; or
      3.   At such other time as the Fee Payer or Developer and the City have
agreed upon in writing.
   B.   Enforcement. When any Impact Fee is due pursuant to this chapter, or
pursuant to the terms of any written agreement between a Fee Payer and the
City, and such Impact Fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the City may
exercise any or all of the following powers as applicable to its authority, in
any combination, to enforce the collection of the Impact Fee:
      1.   Withhold Building Permits, manufactured home installation permits,
or other City Development Approval related to the Development for which the
Impact Fee is due until all Impact Fees due have been paid, and issue stop work
orders, and revoke or suspend a Building Permit;
      2.   Withhold utility services from the Development for which the Impact
Fee is due until all Impact Fees due have been paid;
      3.   Add interest to the Impact Fee not paid in full at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104, as it may be amended, plus five percent
(5%) beginning on the date at which the payment of the Impact Fee was due until
paid in full;
      4.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) of the total Impact Fee (not
merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month beginning on
the date at which the payment of the Impact Fee was due until paid in full; and
      5.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code § 67-8213(4)
for failure to timely pay an Impact Fee following the procedures contained in
Idaho Code Title 45, Chapter 5. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-5: CERTIFICATION:
   A.   A Fee Payer may request a written certification of the impact fee
schedule or individual assessment which shall establish the impact fee for that
Development. Such certification shall establish the Impact Fee so long as there
is no material change to the particular Development as identified in the
individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule. A certification
may be applied for in the following manner:
      1.   Requests for certification shall be in writing and made to the City.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving such request, the City shall issue a
written certification of the amount of the Impact Fee due for the proposed
Development. The certification shall include an explanation of the calculation
of the Impact Fee including an explanation of factors considered under Idaho
Code § 67-8207 and shall also specify the System Improvement(s) for which the
Impact Fee is intended to be used. The City shall provide the certification to
the Fee Payer. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-6: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT:
   A.   In lieu of calculating the amount of the Impact Fee using the impact
fee schedules in this Title, an individual assessment of Impact Fees is
permitted when the Fee Payer demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that
the established Impact Fee is inappropriate.
      1.   Individual Assessment Process. A Fee Payer may file a written
request for an individual assessment of the Development by the City with the
City prior to the receipt of a building permit or other necessary approvals or
entitlements from the City. A request for an individual assessment process
shall involve consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant
information submitted by the Fee Payer to adjust the amount of the Impact Fee.
If a Fee Payer files a request for the use of an individual assessment, the Fee
Payer shall be responsible for retaining a qualified professional to prepare
the individual assessment that complies with the requirements of this chapter,
at the Fee Payer's expense. The Fee Payer shall bear the burden of proving by
clear and convincing evidence that the resulting individual assessment is a
more accurate measure of its proportionate share of the cost of System
Improvements, based on the City's adopted Level of Service, than the
development impact fees that would otherwise be due pursuant to the fee
schedule.
         a.   Each individual assessment request and supporting documentation
submitted by the Fee Payer shall be based on the same level of service
standards and unit costs for System Improvements used in the City's Capital
Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
         b.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the City may then
be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by the City as the basis
for calculating the Impact Fee. The criteria for acceptance, rejection or
acceptance with modifications shall be whether the individual assessment is a
more accurate measure of demand for System Improvements element(s) created by
the proposed Development, or the costs of those facilities, than the applicable
fee shown in the fee schedule.
         c.   The City shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days
following receipt of a completed request for individual assessment together
with all supporting information from the Fee Payer, so as not to unreasonably
delay the Developer's (Fee Payer's) subsequent applications to the City for
Building Permits.
         d.   The decision by the City on an application for an individual
assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of the Impact Fee,
shall specify the System Improvement(s) for which the Impact Fee is intended to
be used, and shall include an explanation of those factors identified in Idaho
Code § 67-8207.
         e.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with
modifications by the City then the Impact Fee due under this chapter for such
Development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment. (Ord.
617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-7: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   When a Developer or their predecessor in title or interest has
constructed System Improvements of the same category as a Capital Improvements
Element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of
System Improvements of the same category as the Capital Improvements Element,
and the City has accepted such construction, contribution or dedication, the
City shall issue a credit against the Impact Fees otherwise due for the same
Capital Improvements Element in connection with the proposed Development, as
set forth in this section, credit shall be issued regardless of whether the
contribution or dedication to System Improvements was required by the City as a
condition of Development Approval or was offered by the Developer and accepted
by the City in writing, and regardless of whether the contribution or
dedication was contributed by the Developer or by a local improvement District
controlled by the Developer.
   B.   Credits against an Impact Fee shall not be given for:
      1.   Project Improvements; or
      2.   Any construction, contribution or dedication not agreed to in
writing by the City prior to commencement of the construction, contribution, or
dedication. Credits issued for one Capital Improvements Element may not be used
to reduce Impact Fees due for a different capital improvement. No credits shall
be issued for System Improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
   C.   Valuation of Credit at Present Value:
      1.   Land. Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the Fee
Payer's option, be valued at the present value of:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for
such land as shown in the records of the City assessor; or
         b.   That fair market value established by a private appraiser
acceptable to the City in an appraisal paid for by the Fee Payer.
      2.   Improvements. Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall be valued by the City at the present value of such
improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and
construction cost estimates submitted by the Fee Payer to the City. The City
shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted,
or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on
alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable to the City as a more
accurate measure of the value of the offered System Improvements to the City
   D.   When Credits Become Effective:
      1.   Land. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective
when the land has been conveyed to the City in a form acceptable to the City,
at no cost to the City, and has been accepted by the City. Upon request of the
Fee Payer, the City shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit
available.
      2.   Improvements. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall generally become effective when (a) all required
construction has been completed and has been accepted by the City, (b) a
suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the
City, and (c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the City and the state of Idaho. Upon request of the Fee Payer,
the City shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
   E.   Credit Request Process:
      1.   Request. In order to obtain a credit against an Impact Fee otherwise
due, a Fee Payer shall submit to the City a written offer of request to
dedicate to the City specific parcels of qualifying land or a written offer to
contribute or construct specific System Improvements to the Capital Facilities
in accordance with all applicable State or City design and construction
standards, and shall specifically request a credit against the type of Impact
Fee for which the land dedication or System Improvements is offered.
      2.   Review. After receipt of the written offer of request for credit,
the City shall review the request and determine whether the land or System
Improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of providing Capital
Facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of the credit. If the City
determines that the offered credit satisfies that criteria and will be
acceptable to the City Board of Commissioners, then the credit shall be issued.
The City shall complete its review and determination of an application within
thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for credit.
      3.   Credits Exceeding Fee Amounts Due. If the credit due to a Fee Payer
pursuant to this Title exceeds the Impact Fee that would otherwise be due from
the Fee Payer pursuant to the chapter (whether calculated through the Impact
Fee schedule in section
5A-1-3 or through an individual assessment), the Fee Payer may choose to
receive such credit in the form of either: (a) a credit against future Impact
Fee due for the same System Improvements; or (b) a reimbursement from Impact
Fees paid by future Development that impacts the System Improvements
contributed or dedicated by the Fee Payer. Unless otherwise stated in an
agreement with the Fee Payer, the City shall be under no obligation to use any
of the City funds - other than Impact Fees paid by other Development for the
same System Improvements - to reimburse the Fee Payer for any credit in excess
Impact Fees that are due.
      4.   Written Agreement Required. If credit or reimbursement is due to the
Fee Payer pursuant to this section, the City shall enter into a written
agreement with the Fee Payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
contribution, dedication, or funding of the System Improvements giving rise to
the credit. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount,
time and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10)
years.
      5.   The City's determination on the written offer of request for credit
shall be provided to the Fee Payer. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-8: METHODOLOGY FOR THE CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   General Provisions.
      1.   Accounting Principles. The calculation of the Impact Fee shall be in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A development impact
fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee may result in an
incidental benefit to owners or Developers within the service area other than
the Fee Payer.
      2.   Levels Of Service. The Impact Fee shall be calculated on the basis
of levels of service for Public Facilities in the adopted Capital Improvement
Plan that are applicable to existing Development as well as new growth and
Development. The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or
existing Public Facilities for which the Impact Fee is imposed must be
attributable to the capacity demands generated by the new Development.
   B.   Methodology; Proportionate Methodology. The Impact Fee shall not exceed
a proportionate share of the cost of the System Improvements determined in
accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8207, as it may be amended. Impact Fees shall
be based on actual System Improvements Costs or reasonable estimates of such
costs. The amount of the Impact Fee shall be calculated using the methodology
contained in the adopted Capital Improvements Plan.
   C.   Proportionate Share Determination.
      1.   The Impact Fee shall be based on a reasonable and fair formula or
method under which the Impact Fee imposed does not exceed a proportionate share
of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the City in the provision of System
Improvements to serve the new Development. The proportionate share is the costs
attributable to the new Development after the City considers the following:
         a.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money,
dedication of land or construction of System Improvements;
         b.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new Development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
         c.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated by the
City to System Improvements; and
         d.   All other available sources of funding such System Improvements.
      2.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of System
Improvements to be paid by the Developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the City and accounted for in the calculation of the Impact Fee:
         a.   The costs of existing System Improvements within the Service
area;
         b.   The means by which existing System Improvements have been
financed;
         c.   The extent to which the new Development will contribute to System
Improvements Costs through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to System Improvements Costs
through Developer or landowner contributions;
         d.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute
to the cost of existing System Improvements in the future;
         e.   The extent to which the new Development should be credited for
providing System Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
Service Area;
         f.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
Development;
         g.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
         h.   The availability of other sources of funding System Improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers and special taxation. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-9: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT:
   A.   The City may make an initial determination that Development may impose
an Extraordinary Impact due to a review of a development application
transmitted to the City pursuant to the City's zoning authority under the Local
Land Use Planning Act, chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code.
   B.   Process:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after City's receipt of the development
application, the City will notify the Fee Payer of the City's initial
determination that the Development may impose an Extraordinary Impact. Such
notice shall include that a supplemental study, at the Fee Payer's expense will
be required.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a Development
with Extraordinary Impact, the City shall meet with the Fee Payer to discuss
whether the Fee Payer wants to: (a) pay for the supplemental study necessary to
determine the System Improvements Costs related to the proposed Development;
(b) modify the proposal to avoid generating Extraordinary Impact; or (c)
withdraw the application for certification, or Development approval.
      3.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required
to document the proposed Development's proportionate share of System
Improvements Costs, then the City and the Fee Payer shall jointly select an
individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The Fee
Payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization
to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental
study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless
the Fee Payer agrees to a longer time.
      4.   Once the study has been completed, the Fee Payer may choose to: (a)
pay the proportionate share of System Improvements Costs documented by the
supplemental study; or (b) modify the proposed Development to reduce such
costs; or (c) withdraw the application.
      5.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay the System Improvements Costs
documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to
writing between the City and the Fee Payer prior to review and consideration of
any application for any Development approval or Building Permit related to the
proposed Development.
      6.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the Fee Payer to pay the
proportionate share of System Improvements Costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this ordinance shall obligate the City to approve Development
that results in an Extraordinary Impact to the City. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-10: FEE PAYER REFUNDS:
   A.   Duty to Refund:
      1.   An Impact Fee shall be refunded to a Fee Payer, or successor in
interest, or a property owner in the following circumstances:
         a.   Service is available but never provided;
         b.   A Building Permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured
home, is denied or abandoned;
         c.   The Fee Payer pays an Impact Fee under protest and a subsequent
review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment determines
that the fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the City was
entitled to receive;
         d.   The City has collected an Impact Fee and the City has failed to
Appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to this Title; or
         e.   Failure of the City to commence construction or encumber the
funds in the Capital Projects Fund.
      2.   Any Impact Fee paid shall be refunded if the City has failed to
commence construction of System Improvements in accordance with this chapter,
or to appropriate funds for such construction, within eight (8) years after the
date on which such fee was collected by the City. Any refund due shall be paid
to the owner of record of the parcel for which the City's Impact Fee was paid.
The City may hold Impact Fees for longer than eight (8) years but in no event
longer than eleven (11) years from the date collected if the City identifies in
writing: (a) a reasonable cause why the fees should be held longer than eight
(8) years; and (b) an anticipated date by which the fees will be expended. If
the City complies with the previous sentence, then any Impact Fees so
identified shall be refunded to the Fee Payer if the City has failed to
commence construction of System Improvements in accordance with the written
notice, or to Appropriate Funds for such construction on or before the date
identified in such writing.
      3.   After an Impact Fee has been paid pursuant to this chapter and after
a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City, no refund of any part
of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is later
demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to
reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
      4.   Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half the legal
rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
originally paid.
   B.   Process: The City shall make a determination of whether a refund is due
within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request for a refund from
the Fee Payer, successor in interest, or an owner of record of the property for
which the fee was paid. When the right to a refund exists, the City shall send
the refund within ninety (90) days after the City determines that a refund is
due. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-11: ESTABLISHMENT OF CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND; FUND ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Capital Projects Funds Established. The Capital Projects Fund will be
maintained by the City for the purpose of ensuring that all Impact Fees
collected, pursuant to this chapter, are used to address impacts reasonably
attributable to new Development for which the Impact Fees are paid. The Capital
Projects Fund shall have its own interest-bearing Account. The interest earned
on the account pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by
Idaho Code § 57-127, as it may be amended, but shall be considered funds of the
Capital Projects Fund and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of
funds as the Impact Fees on which the interest is generated.
   B.   Deposit of Impact Fees. All monies paid by a Fee Payer, pursuant to
this chapter, shall be identified as Impact Fees and upon receipt by the City
shall be promptly deposited in the Capital Projects Fund Account.
      1.   Monies in the Capital Projects Fund Account shall be spent in the
order collected, on a first- in/first-out basis.
      2.   The City shall maintain and keep accurate financial records for the
Account which records shall:
         a.   Show the source and disbursement of all revenues;
         b.   Account for all monies received;
         c.   Ensure that the disbursement of funds from the Account shall be
used solely and exclusively for the provisions of projects specified in the
Capital Improvements Plan; and
         d.   Provide an annual accounting for the Impact Fee Capital Projects
Fund Account showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the
projects that were funded, which annual accounting shall be provided to the
City as part of the annual audit process of this chapter. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-12: EXPENDITURE OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Expenditures. Expenditures of Impact Fees collected and deposited in
the Capital Projects Fund shall be made only for System Improvements within the
Service Area for which the Impact Fee was collected in accordance with the
Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   Capital Improvements Plan Reimbursement; Surcharge. A portion of each
Impact Fee collected may be designated as a surcharge for reimbursement for the
cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan in accordance with Idaho Code §
67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the Development's proportionate share
of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-13: APPEALS, PROTEST AND MEDIATION:
   A.   Appeals. Any Fee Payer that is or may be obligated to pay an Impact
Fee, individual assessment or an Extraordinary Impact, or that claims a right
to receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption or credit under this chapter, and
who is dissatisfied with a decision made either by the City in applying this
chapter, may appeal such decision. The Fee Payer shall have the burden on
appeal of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the decision was in
error.
   B.   Appeal Process.
      1.   Appeals of denials of an exemption from Impact Fees under this
Title.
         a.   A Fee Payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the
City within thirty (30) days after the date of a denial of an exemption. Such
notice of appeal shall include a statement describing why the Fee Payer
believes that the appealed decision was in error, together with copies of any
documents that the Fee Payer believes support the claim.
         b.   The City shall schedule a hearing in front of the City Council
within thirty (30) days of receiving the appeal. The Fee Payer or its
representative shall have a right to be present and to present evidence in
support of the appeal. The City personnel who made the decision under appeal or
their representatives shall likewise have the right to be present and to
present evidence in support of the decision.
         c.   The City Council shall consider the decision denying the
exemption and also consider any additional evidence that may be offered by the
Fee Payer and City staff. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify in
whole or in part the decision appealed from and issue a written decision within
thirty (30) days.
         d.   A final decision of the City Council may be judicially reviewed
pursuant to Idaho Code § 31-1506.
      2.   Appeals of impact fee schedule assessments, refunds, reimbursements,
credits, individual assessments, or extraordinary impacts under this chapter.
         a.   The Fee Payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the
City within thirty (30) days after the date of the City's decision, or the date
on which the Fee Payer submitted a payment of the Impact Fee under protest,
whichever is later. Such written application shall include a statement
describing why the Fee Payer believes that the appealed decision was in error,
together with copies of any documents that the Fee Payer believes support the
claim.
         b.   The City Council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days
after receipt of a written notice of appeal. The Fee Payer or its
representative shall have a right to be present and to present evidence in
support of the appeal. The City personnel who made the decision under appeal or
their representatives shall likewise have the right to be present and to
present evidence in support of the decision. The criteria to be used by the
City Council in considering the appeal shall be whether: (a) the decision or
interpretation made by the City or (b) the alternative decision or
interpretation offered by the Fee Payer, more accurately reflects the intent of
this chapter that new development in the Service Area pay its proportionate
share of the costs of system improvements to public facilities necessary to
serve new development and whether the chapter has been correctly applied. The
City Council shall issue a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying the
decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal.
   C.   Payment Under Protest. A Fee Payer may pay an Impact Fee under protest
in order not to delay in the issuance of a Building Permit by the City. A Fee
Payer making a payment under protest shall not be estopped from exercising the
right to appeal provided herein, nor shall such Fee Payer be estopped from
receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected.
   D.   Mediation.
      1.   Any Fee Payer that has a disagreement with a decision made by the
City regarding an Impact Fee determination that is or may be due for a proposed
Development pursuant to this chapter, may enter into a voluntary agreement with
the City as the case may be, to subject the disagreement to mediation by a
qualified independent party acceptable to both parties to the mediation.
      2.   Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a
timely appeal, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that the request
for mediation is filed no later than the last date on which a timely appeal
could be filed pursuant to this section.
      3.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the Fee Payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in this section.
      4.   If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be
shared equally by the parties to the mediation, and a written agreement
regarding the payment of such costs shall be executed prior to the commencement
of mediation.
      5.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues, the Fee
Payer retains all rights of appeal as set forth in this section. (Ord. 617, 2-
14-2023)
5A-1-14: PERIODIC REVIEWS; ANNUAL BUDGET:
   A.   Review and Modification of Capital Improvements Plan. Unless the City
Council deems some other period is appropriate, the City shall, at least once
every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the original adoption of the
Capital Improvements Plan, review the Development potential and update the
Capital Improvements Plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho
Code § 67-8206, as it may be amended. Each update shall be prepared by the City
in consultation with the Advisory Committee.
   B.   Annual budget. The City shall annually adopt a capital budget. (Ord.
617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-15: AUDIT:
As part of its annual audit process, the City shall prepare an annual report:
   A.   Describing the amount of all Impact Fees collected, appropriated or
spent during the preceding year; and
   B.   Describing the percentage of taxes and revenues from sources other than
the Impact Fees collected, appropriated or spent for System Improvements during
the preceding year. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-16: ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Establishment and Purpose. Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8205, there is
hereby established Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee (Advisory
Committee), whose purpose is to carry out the duties as set forth in Idaho Code
§ 67-8205(3), as it may be amended.
   B.   Membership. The Advisory Committee shall be composed of at least five
(5) members, all of whom must reside within the City. Two (2) or more members
shall be active in the business of development, building or real estate. Two
(2) or more members shall not be in the business of development, building or
real estate. Employees may not be appointed as members of the committee.
   C.   Meetings. Meetings may be called by the Advisory Committee by giving
reasonable notice of the time and place of the meeting in accordance with the
Open Meetings Law, Idaho Code §§ 74-201 et seq., as may be amended. The
Advisory Committee shall adopt reasonable rules as are necessary to carry out
the duties and responsibilities of the committee subject to the approval of the
City, and elect such officers as deemed necessary. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-17: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from requiring a
Developer to construct reasonable Project Improvements, as are required by the
fire codes and other rules that are adopted by the state    fire marshal, in
conjunction with a Development.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit
private agreements between property owners or developers, the Idaho
Transportation Department and governmental entities in regard to the
construction or installation of System Improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for System Improvements Costs incurred by a Developer including
inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for Project
Improvements which are used or shared by more than one (1) Development project.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the City to approve Development
which results in an Extraordinary Impact.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the City to approve any
Development request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of
service below minimum acceptable levels established in this chapter.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional
right to develop real property or diminish the City in regulating the orderly
development of real property within its boundaries
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall work to limit the use by the City of the
power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or
procedures authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement District or
general obligation bond issues.
   G.   The City shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue, which
shall include but not necessarily be limited to plans generated during the
annual budget process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, and
implementation of user fees, administrative and regulatory fees and other forms
of revenue.
   H.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a
Project for which a complete application for a Building Permit has been
received by the City, prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall not be
subject to the Impact Fee imposed by this chapter. If the resulting Building
Permit is later revised or replaced after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, and the new Building Permit(s) reflects a development
density, intensity, development size or number of Service Units more than ten
percent (10%) higher than that reflected in the original Building Permit, then
the Impact Fee may be charged on the difference in density, intensity,
development size or number of Service Units between the original and the
revised or replacement Building Permit.
   I.   Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific
System Improvements within such Capital Improvements Plan and not expended or
refunded pursuant to this chapter shall be retained in the same account until
the next fiscal year.
   J.   If the City discovers an error in the Capital Improvements Plan that
results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share of System
Improvement Costs on any proposed Development, the City shall: (a) adjust the
Impact Fee to collect no more than a proportionate share; or (b) discontinue
the collection of any Impact Fees until the error is corrected by ordinance.
   K.   If Impact Fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or
misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a Fee
Payer shall be refunded by the City within thirty (30) days after the
acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided
for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. Any
amounts underpaid by the Fee Payer shall be paid to the City within thirty (30)
days after the acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the
legal rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the
fee was paid. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
5A-1-18: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this chapter shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Act and
the Parma City Council may be fully carried out. (Ord. 617, 2-14-2023)
TITLE 5B
PARMA RURAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
SHORT TITLE, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
5B-1-1: Short Title
5B-1-2: Authority
5B-1-3: Applicability
5B-1-4: Findings
5B-1-5: Purpose
5B-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Parma Rural Fire Protection
District Development Impact Fees Ordinance. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to the City of Parma's (the “City”) general
police powers, its authority to enact ordinances, and its authority as provided
by the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act codified at Chapter 82 of Title 67,
Idaho Code (the “Act”) and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho to
impose development impact fees; and the City's and the Parma Rural Fire
Protection District's authority to enter into an Intergovernmental Agreement
and to impose, collect, and expend development impact fees as provided in I.C.
§ 67-8204A. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
Except as otherwise exempt in section
5B-5-11, these provisions shall apply to the development of property located
within the unincorporated area within the boundaries of the City of Parma,
Idaho. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-1-4: FINDINGS:
   A.   Parma Rural Fire Protection District (“the District”) is a taxing
District organized and existing by virtue of Chapter 14 of Title 31, Idaho
Code, and the District's boundaries include all areas within the City limits
and areas surrounding the City; and
   B.   The District's duty and responsibility is to provide protection of
property against fire and the preservation of life and enforcement of any of
the fire codes and other rules that are adopted by the state fire marshal; and
   C.   The City is experiencing considerable growth and Development; and
   D.   The purposes of the Act are set forth in I.C. § 67-8202 as follows:
      1.   Ensure that adequate Public Facilities are available to serve new
growth and Development; and
      2.   Promote orderly growth and Development by establishing uniform
standards by which local governments, such as the City and the District, may
require those who benefit from new growth and Development pay development
impact fees for their Proportionate Share of the costs of new Public Facilities
needed to serve new growth and Development; and
      3.   Establish minimum standards for adoption of development impact fee
ordinances by Cities; and
      4.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and Development are
required to pay no more than their Proportionate Share of the cost of Public
Facilities needed to serve that new growth and Development and to prevent
duplicate and ad hoc Development Requirements; and
      5.   To empower Cities to adopt ordinances to impose development impact
fees.
   E.   The Act does not authorize the District to enact a development impact
fee ordinance; and
   F.   The Act, under I.C. § 67-8204A, allows the City and the District to
enter into an Intergovernmental Agreement in situations where both are affected
by significant growth and development (as is currently happening within the
City). The intergovernmental agreement provides for the collection and
expenditure of development impact fees for System Improvements by creating a
new funding mechanism for the District's incurred System Improvements Costs in
order to meet the demand and growth within the City. Moreover, the agreement
promotes orderly growth and development while safeguarding the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the City's residents and property owners; and
   G.   New growth within the City imposes and will impose increasing and
excessive demands upon the existing District's capital facilities; and
   H.   New growth within the City is expected to continue, and will place
ever-increasing demands on the District to provide and expand the District's
capital facilities to serve that new growth; and
   I.   The tax revenues generated from new Development within the City often
do not generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary improvements and
expansion of the existing District capital facilities to accommodate for that
new growth; and
   J.   Section 67-8204A of the Act authorizes the City to adopt an impact fee
system and to enter into the Intergovernmental Agreement with the District to
offset, recoup, or reimburse the portion of the needed improvements costs to
the District's capital facilities caused by new growth and Development in the
City; and
   K.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system facilitated by the
Intergovernmental Agreement with the District, will promote the purposes set
forth in the Act, in that it would:
      1.   Ensure that adequate District Capital Facilities are available to
serve new growth and Development;
      2.   Promote orderly growth and Development by establishing uniform
standards by which the City may require that those who benefit from new growth
and Development pay a Proportionate Share of the cost of new District Capital
Facilities needed to serve new growth and Development in the City;
      3.   Establish minimum standards for the adoption of District impact
fees;
      4.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and Development are
required to pay no more than their Proportionate Share of the cost of District
Capital Facilities needed to serve new growth and Development in the City; and
      5.   Prevent duplicate and ad hoc Development Requirements in the City;
and
   L.   The Capital Improvements Plan contains the Capital Improvements planned
by the District during the term of the Capital Improvements Plan, and such
element has been developed in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 82
of Title 67, Idaho Code; and
   M.   The Capital Improvements Plan sets forth reasonable methodologies and
analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new Development on the
District's capital facilities and determines the cost of acquiring or
constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands for such facilities
created by new Development; and
   N.   In accordance with Idaho Code, the Capital Improvements Plan was based
on actual System Improvements costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. In
addition, the Capital Improvements Plan uses a fee calculation methodology that
is the net of credits for the Present Value of revenues that will be generated
by new growth and Development based on historical funding patterns and that are
anticipated to be available to pay for System Improvements, including taxes,
assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers; and
   O.   The District impact fees established by this title are based on the
Capital Improvements Plan, and do not exceed System Improvements costs required
to serve new Development that will pay the District Impact Fees; and
   P.   The District's capital facilities, included in the calculation of fees
in the Capital Improvements Plans, will benefit all new residential Development
throughout the City, and it is therefore appropriate to treat all areas of the
City as a single Service Area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and
spending the District Impact Fees collected from Developers; and
   Q.   There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between
Development impacts created by each type of Development covered by this title,
which includes the development impact fees assessment of such Development
covered by this title and the development impact fees that such Developer will
be required to pay; and
   R.   This title creates a system by which development impact fees paid by
Developers will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the costs
incurred by the District to construct and/or purchase System Improvements in
ways that benefit the Development for which each development impact fee was
paid within a reasonable period of time after the development impact fee is
paid, and in conformance with I.C. § 67-8210; and
   S.   This title creates a system under which development impact fees shall
not be used to correct existing deficiencies for any District Capital
Facilities, or to replace or rehabilitate existing District Capital Facilities,
or to pay for routine operation or maintenance of those facilities; and
   T.   This title creates a system under which there shall be no double
payment of development impact fees, in accordance with I.C. § 67-8204(19); and
   U.   This title is consistent with all applicable provisions of the Act
concerning development impact fee ordinances. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-1-5: PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement the
Capital Improvements Plan; and
   B.   The intent of this title is to ensure that new Development bears a
Proportionate Share of the cost of System Improvements; to ensure that such
Proportionate Share does not exceed the cost of such System Improvements
required to accommodate new Development; and to ensure that funds collected
from new Development are used for System Improvements in accordance with the
Act; and
   C.   It is the further intent of this title to be consistent with those
principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of System Improvements to
new Development, and for adopting development impact fee ordinances,
established by the Act; and
   D.   It is not the intent of this title to collect more money from any new
Development than the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for System
Improvements created by such new Development; and
   E.   It is the intent of this title that any monies collected, as imposed
District Impact Fees, are deposited in the District Impact Fees Capital
Projects Trust Fund account, are never commingled with monies from a different
impact fee account, are never used for a development impact fee component
different from that for which the fee was paid, are never used to correct
current deficiencies in the District's capital facilities, and are never used
to replace, rehabilitate, maintain, or operate any District Capital Facilities.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5B-2-1: Definitions
5B-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended and words and terms
appearing in the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular:
ACCOUNTS: Any of one or more interest bearing accounts within the City of
Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection District Development Impact Fee Capital
Projects Trust Fund established in chapter 1 of this title.
ACT: The Idaho Development Impact Fee Act as set forth in Chapter 82 of Title
67, Idaho Code.
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of this title as provided in the
Intergovernmental Agreement.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The City of Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection District
Development Impact Fee Advisory Standing Committee formed and staffed by the
District pursuant to I.C. § 67-8205 to prepare and recommend the Capital
Improvements Plan and any amendments, revisions, or updates of the same as
provided in Chapter 3 of this title.
APPROPRIATE: To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to the
expenditure of funds by appropriation or other official act of the Fire
District Commissioners.
BUILDING PERMIT: The City permit required for foundations, new construction,
and additions.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or
more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity
of District Capital Facilities.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELEMENT: A component of the Capital Improvements Plan
identified in the District's CIP adopted by the City Council pursuant to
Chapters 65 and 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code, and as amended, which meets the
requirements of the Capital Improvements Plan required by the Act.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: The Parma Rural Fire Protection District Impact Fees
Study and Capital Improvements Plan, recommended by the Advisory Committee, and
adopted by the Fire District Commissioners and the City Council pursuant to the
Act that identifies District Capital Facilities for which District Impact Fees
may be used as a funding source.
CITY: The City of Parma.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Parma.
DEVELOPER: Any person or legal entity undertaking Development including a
Development that seeks a subdivision of property pursuant to I.C. §§ 50-1301
through 50-1334, as amended.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or installation of a building or structure, any
change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use, character,
or appearance of land, which creates additional demand and need for Public
Facilities or the annexation into the City and/or subdivision of property.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written duly authorized document from the City which
authorizes the commencement of a Development.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or
other City governmental action approving or authorizing a particular
Development Project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which compels
the payment, dedication, or contribution of goods, services, land, or money as
condition of approval.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUND (the “TRUST FUND”): The
District's City of Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection District Development
Impact Fee Capital Projects Trust Fund account established by action of the
Fire District Commissioners.
DISTRICT: The Parma Rural Fire Protection District, a fire District organized
and existing by virtue of the Fire Protection District Law, Chapter 14 of Title
31, Idaho Code.
DISTRICT CAPITAL FACILITIES: District facilities, stations, apparatus,
vehicles, and equipment which are identified in the Capital Improvements Plan,
and specifically includes those related costs including System Improvements
Costs, but not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not
expand their capacity.
DISTRICT IMPACT FEES: A payment of money imposed as a condition of a
Development to pay for a Proportionate Share of the District's costs of System
Improvements needed to serve the Development. The term does not include the
following:
   A.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative plan review or inspection
cost associated with permits required for Development; or
   B.   Connection or hookup charges; or
   C.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation
charges for services provided directly to the Development; or
   D.   Amounts collected from a Developer in a transaction in which the
District has incurred expenses in constructing Capital Improvements for the
Development if the owner or Developer has agreed to be financially responsible
for the construction or installation of those Capital Improvements, unless a
written agreement is made, pursuant to I.C. § 67-8209(3) as amended, for credit
or reimbursement.
EMS: The emergency medical facilities for preservation of life services
provided by the District.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as result of an Extraordinary Impact.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the
Administrator to:
   A.   Result in the need for District System Improvements, the cost of which
will significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be
generated from the Project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a
development agreement as allowed by I.C. § 67-8214(2), as amended; or
   B.   Result in the need for District System Improvements which are not
identified in the Capital Improvements Plan.
FEE PAYER: The person who pays or is required to pay a District Impact Fees. A
Fee Payer may include a Developer.
FIRE DISTRICT COMMISSIONERS: The Board of Commissioners of the Parma Rural Fire
Protection District, which is its governing board.
INTERGOVERNMENTA L AGREEMENT: The City of Parma and Parma Rural Fire Protection
District Intergovernmental Agreement to Collect and Expend Development Impact
Fees for Fire District Systems Improvements entered into by and between the
City and the District pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A for the collection and
expenditure of District impact fees established pursuant to this title.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the Service Area and projections of land
uses, densities, intensities, and population in the Service Area over at least
a ten-year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and
service demand for Public Facilities.
MANUFACTURED/ MOBILE HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile
home construction and safety standards, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or
is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three
hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in such structure,
except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of this sub-section except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards
established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component other than a Manufactured/
Mobile Home, which is constructed according to the International Building Code,
as adopted or with any amendments thereto, which is of closed construction and
is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other
than the building site.
ORDINANCE: Shall mean and refer to this Parma Rural Fire Protection District
Development Impact Fees Ordinance.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future
payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction, or money.
PROJECT: A particular Development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to System Improvements, shall mean site
improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service
for a particular Development Project and that are necessary for the use and
convenience of the occupants or users of the Project.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of System Improvements Costs determined
pursuant to I.C. § 67-8207 which reasonably relates to the service demands and
needs of the Project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Land, buildings, and equipment used for fire protection,
emergency medical, and rescue, and water supply production, storage, and
distribution facilities which have a useful life of ten (10) years or more.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
SERVICE AREA: The defined geographic area within the District as identified by
the approved Capital Improvements Plan within which specific Public Facilities
provide service to Development within the areas defined, on the basis of sound
planning or engineering principles or both.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of Development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of Capital Improvements. As specifically used in this
title, Service Units include dwelling units as defined in City ordinance and
square feet of nonresidential Development.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: Contrast to Project Improvements, shall mean Capital
Improvements to Public Facilities which are designed to provide service to a
Service Area. For the purpose of this title, System Improvements are for the
District's capital facilities.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of
System Improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering, and other
costs, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs described in
I.C. § 50-1702(h), as amended, to provide additional Public Facilities needed
to service new growth and development. For clarification, System Improvements
costs do not include:
   A.   Construction, acquisition, or expansion of Public Facilities other than
Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan; or
   B.   Improvements, repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new
capital; or
   C.   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing Capital
Improvements to serve existing Development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; or
   D.   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing Capital
Improvements to provide better service to existing Development; or
   E.   Administrative and operating costs of the District and/or the City
unless such costs are attributable to development of the Capital Improvements
Plan, as provided in IC § 67-8208, as amended; or
   F.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or
other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the
District to finance Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements
Plan. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ADVISORY COMMITTEE/CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN/SERVICE AREA
SECTION:
5B-3-1: City Of Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection District Development Impact
Fee Advisory Standing Committee
5B-3-2: Capital Improvements Plan
5B-3-3: Service Area
5B-3-4: Levels Of Service
5B-3-5: Methodology; Proportionate Methodology
5B-3-6: Proportionate Share Determination
5B-3-7: Review And Modification Of Capital Improvements Plan
5B-3-8: Capital Improvements Plan Error Discovery
5B-3-1: CITY OF PARMA/PARMA RURAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
FEE ADVISORY STANDING COMMITTEE:
The City of Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection District Development Impact Fee
Advisory Committee is established as a standing permanent committee of the City
pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the City of
Parma and Parma Rural Fire Protection District Intergovernmental and Joint
Powers Agreement for the Collection and Expenditure of Development Impact Fees
for Fire District Systems Improvements, and any amendment thereof, by and
between the City of Parma and the Parma Rural Fire Protection District. (Ord.
626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-2: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
   A.   The District has planned for the improvement of the District's Capital
Facilities in the Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system would enable the City to
accommodate new Development, and would assist the District in implementing the
Capital Improvements element of the Capital Improvements Plan.
   C.   In order to implement an equitable impact fee system for the District's
facilities, the City and District adopt, by resolution, the District's Capital
Improvements Plan. A qualified professional in fields related to finance,
engineering, planning, and transportation shall be hired by the District to
assist the Advisory Committee in the preparation of the study.
   D.   The methodology used in the Capital Improvements Plan, as applied
through this title, must comply with all applicable provisions of Idaho law,
including those set forth in I.C. §§ 67-8204(1), (2), (16) and (23), 67-8207
and 67-8209. The incorporation of the Capital Improvements Plan satisfies the
requirement in I.C. § 67-8204(16) for a detailed description of the methodology
by which the District impact fees are calculated, and the requirement in I.C. §
67-8204(24) for a description of acceptable levels of service for District's
System Improvements.
   E.   In determining the Proportionate Share of the District's System
Improvements Costs, the Capital Improvements Plan shall consider:
      1.   The cost of the existing System Improvements; and
      2.   How the existing System Improvements have been financed; and
      3.   The extent to which the new Development will contribute to System
Improvements Costs through taxation, assessment, or Developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to System Improvements Costs
through Developer or landowner contributions; and
      4.   The extent to which the new Development is required to contribute to
System Improvements Costs in the future; and
      5.   The extent to which the new Development should be credited for
providing System Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
Service Area or areas; and
      6.   Extraordinary Costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
Development; and
      7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      8.   The availability of other sources of funding System Improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, special taxation and a plan for alternative
sources of revenue. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-3: SERVICE AREA:
The Service Area is established by the City approving and adopting the Capital
Improvements Plan. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-4: LEVELS OF SERVICE:
District impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for
Public Facilities adopted in this title that are applicable to existing
Development as well as new growth and Development. The construction,
improvement, expansion, or enlargement of new or existing Public Facilities for
which District impact fees are imposed must be attributable to the capacity
demands generated by the new Development. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-5: METHODOLOGY; PROPORTIONATE METHODOLOGY:
The District impact fees shall not exceed a Proportionate Share of the cost of
the System Improvements determined in accordance with I.C. § 67-8207, as
amended. District impact fees shall be based on actual System Improvements
Costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. The amount of the District impact
fees shall be calculated using the methodology contained in the Capital
Improvements Plan. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-6: PROPORTIONATE SHARE DETERMINATION:
District impact fees shall be based on a reasonable and fair formula or method
under which the District impact fees imposed do not exceed a Proportionate
Share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the District in the provision
of System Improvements to serve the new Development. The Proportionate Share is
the costs attributable to the new Development after the District consider the
following:
   A.   Any appropriate credit, offset, contribution of money, dedication of
land or construction of System Improvements; and
   B.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a new
Development in the form of user fees and debt service payments; and
   C.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated by the District
for System Improvements; and
   D.   All other available sources of funding such System Improvements.
   E.   In determining the Proportionate Share of the cost of System
Improvements to be paid by the Developer, the factors in section
5B-3-2 E of this title shall be considered by the District and accounted for in
the calculation of District impact fees. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-7: REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
Unless the City Council and the Fire District Commissioners deem some other
period as appropriate, the City Council and the Fire District Commissioners
shall, at least once every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the
original adoption of the Capital Improvements Plan, review the Development
potential and update the Capital Improvements Plan in cooperation and in
accordance with the procedures set forth in I.C. § 67-8206, as amended. Each
update shall be prepared by the Administrator in consultation with the Advisory
Committee. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-3-8: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN ERROR DISCOVERY:
If the District discovers an error in the Capital Improvements Plan which
results in assessment or payment of more than a Proportionate Share of System
Improvements Costs on any proposed Development, the Administrator shall:
   A.   Adjust the District impact fee to collect no more than a Proportionate
Share; or
   B.   Discontinue the collection of any District impact fees until the error
is corrected by ordinance. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 4
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT AND OTHER AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
5B-4-1: Authority To Enter Into Intergovernmental Agreements
5B-4-2: City And District Intergovernmental Agreement
5B-4-3: District Governed By This Chapter
5B-4-4: Amendments To Intergovernmental Agreement
5B-4-5: Agreements Between Property Owners, The Idaho Transportation Department
(ITD), And Other Governmental Entities For Construction Or Installation Of
System Improvements
5B-4-1: AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The City is a governmental entity that is empowered by the Act to adopt
development impact fee ordinances and as such is authorized by I.C. § 67-8204A,
to enter into the Intergovernmental Agreement with the District for the purpose
of agreement to collect and expend District impact fees for System Improvements
as provided in this title. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-4-2: CITY AND DISTRICT INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
The City and the District have entered into the Intergovernmental Agreement
which is in full force and effect. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-4-3: DISTRICT GOVERNED BY THIS CHAPTER:
The Intergovernmental Agreement complies with this title and requires the
District to be governed by and to fully abide by the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-4-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
Any amendments of the Intergovernmental Agreement shall be implemented by
corresponding them to the relevant amendments of this chapter. These amendments
shall not apply to any District impact fees then not expended and currently
held in the Trust Fund. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-4-5: AGREEMENTS BETWEEN PROPERTY OWNERS, THE IDAHO TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT
(ITD), AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION OF
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private
agreements between property owners, Developers, the Idaho Transportation
Department, or any governmental entities in regards to the construction or
installation of System Improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements
for System Improvements Costs incurred by a Developer, including inter-project
transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for Project Improvements
which are used or shared by more than one (1) Development Project. (Ord. 626,
11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 5
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
5B-5-1: Imposition Of District Impact Fees
5B-5-2: District Impact Fees Schedule
5B-5-3: Developer's Election
5B-5-4: Impact Fee Collection Procedures
5B-5-5: Certification Of Impact Fees Due
5B-5-6: City and Administrator Powers To Require Payment Of Impact Fees
5B-5-7: Punishment
5B-5-8: Impact Fee Payment Mistake Or Misrepresentation
5B-5-9: Accounting Principles
5B-5-10: Payment And Receipt Of Fees
5B-5-11: Exemptions
5B-5-12: Exemption Claim Process
5B-5-13: Development Approved By The City Prior To The Effective Date Of This
Title Not Subject To Impact Fees
5B-5-1: IMPOSITION OF DISTRICT IMPACT FEES:
The District Impact Fees are hereby imposed on all new Development within the
City limits of the City. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-2: DISTRICT IMPACT FEES SCHEDULE:
   A.   The District Impact Fees shall be calculated in accordance with the fee
schedule set forth in the Capital Improvements Plan that provides for standard
fees based on the total number of dwelling units or square feet of
nonresidential space in the Development, unless:
      1.   The Fee Payer requests an individual assessment pursuant to section
5B-6-1 of this title; or
      2.   The City and the District find the Development will have an
Extraordinary Impact pursuant to section 5B-8-1 of this title. The methodology
for determining the costs per Service Unit provided for in the fee schedule is
set forth in the Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   Fire District Impact Fees:
 
Residential (per Single Family Dwelling Unit)         $1,984.00
Residential (per Multi-Family Dwelling Unit)          $825.00
Non-Residential (per 1,000 retail square feet)        $4,126.00
Non-Residential (per 1,000 office square feet)        $1,590.00
Non-Residential (per 1,000 industrial square feet)    $714.00
Non-Residential (per 1,000 Institutional square feet) $3,314.00
 
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-3: DEVELOPER'S ELECTION:
A Developer shall have the right to elect to pay a Project's Proportionate
Share of System Improvements Costs by payment of District impact fees according
to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the Development Project's
Proportionate Share of System Improvements Costs, except as provided in I.C. §
67-8214(3), as amended. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-4: IMPACT FEE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Building Permit. Upon submittal of complete Building Permit plans for
the Development to the City, the City shall calculate the District impact fees
for the Development in accordance with the District Impact Fee Schedule
(section 5B-5-2 B) unless the Fee Payer requests an individual assessment, is
the subject of a credit, or the Administrator determines that the Development
may have Extraordinary Impact.
   B.   Exemption. An exemption pursuant to section
5B-5-11 of this title must be claimed by the Fee Payer upon application for a
Building Permit or manufactured home installation permit. Any exemption not so
claimed shall be deemed waived by the Fee Payer. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-5: CERTIFICATION OF IMPACT FEES DUE:
After the District impact fees due for a proposed Development have been
calculated by the City pursuant to the District Impact Fees Schedule (section
5B-5-2 B) or by the Administrator using the individual assessment process, and
it is found there is a credit or extraordinary impact, the Fee Payer may
request from the City or the Administrator to certify the amount of District
impact fees due for that Development. Within thirty (30) days after receiving
such request, the City or the Administrator shall issue a written certification
of the amount of District impact fees due for the proposed Development. Such
certification shall establish the District impact fees so long as there is no
material change to the Project as identified in the individual assessment
application, or the impact fees schedule. The certification shall include an
explanation of the calculation of the District impact fees including an
explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code Section 67-8207 and shall
also specify the system improvement(s) for which the District impact fee is
intended to be used. If the impact fee is calculated by the City pursuant to
the fee schedule, the City shall provide the certification to the Fee Payer and
the Administrator. If the impact fee is determined by the Administrator
following an individual assessment of the fee, the Administrator shall provide
the certification to the Fee Payer and the City. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-6: CITY AND ADMINISTRATOR POWERS TO REQUIRE PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES:
When any District impact fee is due pursuant to this title or pursuant to the
terms of any written agreement between a Fee Payer and the District, and such
District impact fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the City or
Administrator on behalf of the District, may exercise any or all of the
following powers as applicable to their authority, in any combination, to
enforce the collection of the District impact fee:
   A.   Withhold Building Permits, manufactured home installation permits, or
other City permits related to the Development for which the District impact fee
is due until all District impact fees due have been paid, and issue stop work
orders, and revoke or suspend a Building Permit; and
   B.   Withhold utility services from the Development for which the District
impact fee is due until all District impact fees due have been paid; and
   C.   Add interest to the District impact fees not paid in full at the legal
rate provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104, as amended, plus five percent (5%)
beginning on the date at which the payment of the District impact fees was due
until paid in full; and
   D.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) interest on the total District
impact fee (not merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per
month beginning on the date at which the payment of the District impact fee was
due until paid in full; and
   E.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of I.C. § 67-8213(4) for
failure to timely pay District impact fees following the procedures contained
in Idaho Code Title 45, Chapter 5. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-7: PUNISHMENT:
Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to one (1) year in the county jail, and/or a one
thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Knowingly furnishing false
information to any official of the City or the District charged with the
administration of this title, including without limitation, the furnishing of
false information regarding the expected size, use or impacts from a proposed
Development, shall be a violation of this title. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-8: IMPACT FEE PAYMENT MISTAKE OR MISREPRESENTATION:
If District impact fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or
misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a Fee
Payer shall be refunded by the District within thirty (30) days after the
District's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal
rate provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid.
Any amounts underpaid by the Fee Payer shall be paid to the District within
thirty (30) days after the Administrator's acceptance of the recalculated
amount, with interest at the legal rate provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from
the date on which the fee was paid. In the case of an underpayment to the
District, the Administrator may request that the City withhold issuance of the
Building Permits or Development for the Project for which the District impact
fees were paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts owed to the
District are not paid within such thirty-day period, the Administrator may also
ask the City to revoke any Building Permits or Development Approval issued in
reliance on the previous payment of such District impact fees and refund such
fees to the Fee Payer. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-9: ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES:
The calculation of District impact fees shall be in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. A development impact fee shall not be deemed
invalid because payment of the fee may result in an incidental benefit to
owners or Developers within the Service Area other than the Fee Payer. (Ord.
626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-10: PAYMENT AND RECEIPT OF FEES:
The District impact fees shall be paid to the City at the following times:
   A.   If a Building Permit or Manufactured/Mobile Home installation permit is
required, then at the time before the permit is issued;
   B.   If no Building Permit or Manufactured/Mobile Home installation permit
is required, then at the time that construction commences;
   C.   At such other time as the Developer and the District have agreed upon
in writing with notice to the City;
   D.   All District impact fees paid to the City shall be delivered to the
Administrator on a once-a-month basis; or
   E.   In the event District Impact Fees are paid to the District, then the
Administrator shall immediately notify the City of said payment. (Ord. 626, 11-
1-2024)
5B-5-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title do not apply to the following:
   A.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction; or
   B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of Service Units;
   C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a Manufactured/Mobile Home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that, the number of
Service Units does not increase; or
   D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot; or
   E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of Service Units; or
   F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of System Improvements; or
   G.   The installation of a Modular Building, Manufactured/Mobile Home or
Recreational Vehicle if the Fee Payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either:
      1.   Modular Building, Manufactured/Mobile Home or Recreational Vehicle
was legally in place on the lot or space prior to the effective date of this
title; or
      2.   A District impact fee has been paid previously for the Modular
Building, Manufactured/Mobile Home or Recreational Vehicle on that same lot or
space.
   H.   Construction that would otherwise be subject to payment of the
development impact fee pursuant to this title if undertaken by a taxing
district, as defined in Section 63-201, Idaho Code, or by an authorized public
charter school, as defined in Section 33-5202A, Idaho Code, in the course of
carrying out its statutory responsibilities. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-12: EXEMPTION CLAIM PROCESS:
An exemption from District impact fees must be claimed on the application by
the Developer (Fee Payer) upon submitting their application for a Building
Permit or Manufactured Home Installation Permit. Any exemption not so claimed
shall be deemed waived by the Fee Payer. Applications for exemption shall be
determined by the Administrator within ninety (90) days of receipt of the claim
for exemption. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-5-13: DEVELOPMENT APPROVED BY THE CITY PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
TITLE NOT SUBJECT TO IMPACT FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, that portion of a Project
for which a complete application for a Building Permit has been received by the
City prior to the effective date of this title, shall not be subject to the
District impact fees imposed by this title. If the resulting Building Permit is
later revised or replaced after the effective date of this title, and the new
Building Permit(s) reflects an increase in Development density, intensity, size
or number of units more than ten percent (10%) higher than that reflected in
the original Building Permit, then the District impact fee may be charged on
the difference in Development density, intensity, size, or number of units
between the original and the revised or replacement Building Permit. (Ord. 626,
11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 6
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
5B-6-1: Individual Assessment Process
5B-6-1: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS:
   A.   In lieu of calculating the amount of District impact fees due pursuant
to section
5B-5-2 and the Capital Improvements Plan, a Fee Payer may file a request with
the City that the required amount of District Impact Fees be determined by the
Administrator through an individual assessment for the proposed Development. A
request for an individual assessment process shall involve consideration of
studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by the Fee Payer to
adjust the amount of District impact fees due. If a Fee Payer files a request
for the use of an individual assessment, the Fee Payer shall be responsible for
retaining a qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment that
complies with the requirements of this chapter, at the Fee Payer's expense. The
Fee Payer shall, at the Fee Payer's expense, bear the burden of proving by
clear and convincing evidence that the resulting individual assessment complies
with the requirements of this chapter. The Fee Payer shall bear the burden of
proving by clear and convincing evidence that the resulting individual
assessment is a more accurate measure of its Proportionate Share of the cost of
System Improvements, based on the District's adopted levels of service, than
the development impact fees that would otherwise be due pursuant to section
5B-5-2 and the Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   Each individual assessment shall be based on the same Level of Service
standards and unit costs for System Improvements used in the Capital
Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
   C.   A request for an individual assessment shall be delivered and filed
with the City at any time that the number of dwelling units in the proposed
Development and the types and amounts of Development in each non-residential
category identified in Section
5B-5-2 and the Capital Improvements Plan is known. Upon filing a request for
individual assessment, the City shall transmit the request to the Administrator
for review. The Administrator shall issue a written decision within thirty (30)
days following receipt of a completed request for individual assessment
together with all supporting information from the Fee Payer, so as not to
unreasonably delay the Developer's (Fee Payer's) subsequent applications to the
City for Building Permits.
   D.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the Administrator may
then be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by the Administrator
as the basis for calculating District impact fees. The criteria for acceptance,
rejection or acceptance with modifications shall be whether the individual
assessment is a more accurate measure of demand for System Improvements element
(s) created by the proposed Development, or the costs of those facilities, than
the applicable fee shown in the fee schedule attached to the Capital
Improvements Plan.
   E.   The decision by the Administrator on an application for an individual
assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of the District
impact fees, shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the District
impact fee is intended to be used, and shall include an explanation of those
factors identified in I.C. § 67-8207.
   F.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with modifications
by the Administrator, then the District impact fees due under this title for
such Development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment.
   G.   The Administrator shall provide notice of final determination of an
individual assessment to the Developer (Fee Payer) and the City. (Ord. 626, 11-
1-2024)
CHAPTER 7
CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
5B-7-1: Developer Credits And Reimbursement
5B-7-2: Credits Limitations
5B-7-3: Valuation Of Credit At Present Value
5B-7-4: When Credits Become Effective
5B-7-5: Credit Request Procedures
5B-7-1: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
When a Developer or their predecessor in title or interest has constructed
System Improvements of the same category as a District Capital Improvements
Element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of
System Improvements of the same category as a District Capital Improvements
Element, and the District has accepted such construction, contribution or
dedication, the District shall issue a credit, in accordance with the
provisions of this title, against the District impact fees otherwise due for
the same District Capital Improvements Element in connection with the proposed
Development. As set forth in this section, a credit shall be issued regardless
of whether the contribution or dedication to System Improvements was required
by the District as a condition of Development or was offered by the Developer
and accepted by the District in writing, and regardless of whether the
contribution or dedication was contributed by the Developer or by a local
improvement district controlled by the Developer. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-7-2: CREDITS LIMITATIONS:
Credits against a District impact fee shall not be given for:
   A.   Project Improvements; or
   B.   Any construction, contribution, or dedication not agreed to in writing
by the District prior to commencement of the construction, contribution, or
dedication. Credits issued for one Capital Improvements Element may not be used
to reduce the impact fee due for a different capital improvement. No credits
shall be issued for System Improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the
effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-7-3: VALUATION OF CREDIT AT PRESENT VALUE:
   A.   Land. Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the Fee Payer's
option, be valued at the Present Value of:
      1.   One hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for
such land as shown in the records of the county assessor; or
      2.   That fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable
to the District in an appraisal paid for by the Fee Payer.
   B.   Improvements. Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall be valued by the District at the Present Value of
such improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and
construction cost estimates submitted by the Fee Payer to the District. The
Administrator shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information
submitted, or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate or
unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable to
the District as a more accurate measure of the value of the offered System
Improvements to the District. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-7-4: WHEN CREDITS BECOME EFFECTIVE:
   A.   Land. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when
the land has been conveyed to the District in a form acceptable to the
District, at no cost to the District, and has been accepted by the District.
Upon request of the Fee Payer, the District shall issue a letter stating the
amount of credit available.
   B.   Improvements. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall generally become effective when:
      1.   All required construction has been completed and has been accepted
by the District;
      2.   A suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and
approved by the District; and
      3.   All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the District and the State of Idaho.
      Upon request of the Fee Payer, the District shall issue a letter stating
the amount of credit available. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-7-5: CREDIT REQUEST PROCEDURES:
   A.   Request. In order to obtain a credit against a District Impact Fee
otherwise due, a Fee Payer shall submit to the Administrator a written offer of
request to dedicate to the District specific parcels of qualifying land or a
written offer to contribute or construct specific System Improvements to the
District Capital Facilities in accordance with all applicable state or City
design and construction standards, and shall specifically request a credit
against the type of District impact fee for which the land dedication or System
Improvements is offered.
   B.   Review. After receipt of the written offer of request for credit, the
Administrator shall review the request and determine whether the land or System
Improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of providing District
Capital Facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of the credit. If
the Administrator determines that the offered credit satisfies the criteria and
will be acceptable to the Fire Fire District Commissioners, then the credit
shall be issued. The District shall complete its review and determination of an
application within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for credit.
   C.   Credits exceeding fee amounts due. If the credit due to a Fee Payer
exceeds the District impact fees that would otherwise be due from the Fee Payer
pursuant to this title (whether calculated through the fee schedule attached to
the capital improvement plan or through an independent assessment), the Fee
Payer may choose to receive such credit in the form of either:
      1.   A credit against future District impact fees due for the same System
Improvements; or
      2.   A reimbursement for District impact fees paid by future Development
that impacts the System Improvements contributed or dedicated by the Fee Payer.
Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the Fee Payer, the District shall
be under no obligation to use any District funds - other than District impact
fees paid by other Development for the same System Improvements - to reimburse
the Fee Payer for any credit in excess of the District impact fee that are due.
   D.   Written agreement required. If credit or reimbursement is due to the
Fee Payer pursuant to this section, the District shall enter into a written
agreement with the Fee Payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
contribution, dedication, or funding of the System Improvements giving rise to
the credit. The agreement shall provide the amount of credit or the amount,
time, and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10)
years.
   E.   The Administrator's determination on the written offer of request for
credit shall be provided to the Fee Payer and the City. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 8
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT
SECTION:
5B-8-1: Determinations Of Extraordinary Impact
5B-8-1: DETERMINATIONS OF EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT:
Determinations of extraordinary impact are made as follows:
   A.   The Administrator may notify the City and review, prior to Development
Approval, a Development application to determine whether or not the Development
will impose Extraordinary Impact.
   B.   The Administrator shall determine and notify the City and Fee Payer,
within thirty (30) days from the date of the Administrator commenced review, of
whether the proposed Development generates Extraordinary Impact that will
result in extraordinary Systems Improvements Costs. Such notice shall include a
statement that the potential impacts of such Development on System Improvements
are not adequately addressed by the Capital Improvements Plan, and that a
supplemental study, at the Fee Payer's expense will be required.
   C.   Circumstances that may lead to a determination of Extraordinary Impact
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   An indication the assumptions used in the Capital Improvements Plan
underestimate the level of activity or impact on District Capital Facilities
from the proposed Development or activity.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a Development with
Extraordinary Impact, the Administrator shall meet with the Fee Payer to
discuss whether the Fee Payer wants to:
      1.   Pay for the supplemental study necessary to determine the System
Improvements Costs related to the proposed Development; or
      2.   Modify the proposal to avoid generating Extraordinary Impact; or
      3.   Withdraw the application for certification, a Building Permit, or
Development.
   E.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed Development's Proportionate Share of System Improvements
Costs, then the District and the Fee Payer shall jointly select an individual
or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The Fee Payer shall
enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization to pay the
costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental study to be
completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement unless the Fee
Payer agrees to a longer time.
   F.   Once the study has been completed, the Fee Payer may choose to:
      1.   Pay the Proportionate Share of System Improvements Costs documented
by the supplemental study; or
      2.   Modify the proposed Development to reduce such costs; or
      3.   Withdraw the application.
   G.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay the System Improvements Costs documented
in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to writing between
the District and the Fee Payer prior to review and consideration of any
application for any Development or Building Permit related to the proposed
Development.
   H.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the Fee Payer to pay the Proportionate
Share of System Improvements Costs documented by the supplemental study,
nothing in this title shall obligate the City to approve Development that
results in an Extraordinary Impact to the District. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 9
DUTY TO REFUND
SECTION:
5B-9-1: Refundable Circumstances
5B-9-2: No Refund For Subsequent Reduction In Size Of Development Of Service
Unit
5B-9-3: Refund Interest
5B-9-4: Timing Of Refund Payment
5B-9-1: REFUNDABLE CIRCUMSTANCES:
District impact fees shall be refunded to the Fee Payer, or to a successor in
interest upon their application to the District for refund, in the following
circumstances:
   A.   Service is available but never provided; or
   B.   A Building Permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured home,
is denied by the City or has been abandoned or withdrawn by the Developer; or
   C.   The Fee Payer pays District impact fees under protest and a subsequent
review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment determines
that the fee paid exceeded the Proportionate Share to which the District was
entitled to receive; or
   D.   The District collected a District impact fee and the District failed to
Appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to section F and section F.1
below; or
   E.   Failure of the District to commence construction or encumber the funds
in the development impact fee capital projects Trust Fund.
   F.   Any impact fee paid shall be refunded if the District has failed to
commence construction of System Improvements in accordance with this title or
to Appropriate funds for such construction within eight (8) years after the
date on which such fee was collected by the District. Any refund due shall be
paid to the owner of record of the parcel for which the District impact fee
were paid. The District may hold District impact fees for longer than eight (8)
years if the District identifies in writing and in written notice to the owner
of record of the parcel. The District's written notice shall include:
      1.   A reasonable cause on why the fees should be held longer than eight
(8) years and an anticipated date by which the fees will be expended, but in no
event greater than eleven (11) years from the date they were collected. If the
District fails to commence construction of System Improvements or to
Appropriate funds for such construction on or before the date identified in
such writing, then in accordance with the written notice, any District impact
fees so identified shall be refunded to the Fee Payer. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-9-2: NO REFUND FOR SUBSEQUENT REDUCTION IN SIZE OF DEVELOPMENT OF SERVICE
UNIT:
After a District impact fee has been paid pursuant to this title and after a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City, no refund of any part of
such fee shall be made if the Project for which the fee was paid is later
demolished, destroyed, altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce
the size of the Project or the number of units in the Project. (Ord. 626, 11-1-
2024)
5B-9-3: REFUND INTEREST:
Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half the legal rate
provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was originally
paid. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-9-4: TIMING OF REFUND PAYMENT:
The District shall make a determination of whether a refund is due within
thirty (30) days after the receipt of a written request for a refund from the
owner of record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right to a
refund exists, the District shall send the refund to the owner of record within
ninety (90) days after the District determines that a refund is due. (Ord. 626,
11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 10
CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUND
SECTION:
5B-10-1: Development Impact Fee Capital Projects Trust Fund
5B-10-2: Deposits
5B-10-1: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUND:
The District shall establish the City of Parma/Parma Rural Fire Protection
District Development Impact Fee Capital Projects Trust Fund and this trust fund
will be maintained by the District for the purpose of ensuring that all
District impact fees collected, pursuant to this title, are used to address
impacts reasonably attributable to new Development for which the District
impact fees are paid. The Trust Fund shall be divided into the Accounts. All
funds in all Accounts in the Trust Fund shall be maintained in an interest-
bearing account. The interest earned on each account pursuant to I.C. § 67-8210
(1) shall not be governed by I.C. § 57-127, as amended, but shall be considered
funds of the account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of
funds as the fire District Impact Fees on which the interest is generated.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-10-2: DEPOSITS:
   A.   Deposit of District Impact Fees. All monies paid by a Fee Payer,
pursuant to this title, shall be identified as District impact fees and shall
be promptly deposited by the Administrator in the appropriate account of the
Trust Fund.
   B.   First-in/First-out. Monies in each account shall be spent in the order
collected, on a first-in/first-out basis.
   C.   Maintenance of Records. The District shall maintain and keep accurate
financial records for each account that shall show the source and disbursement
of all revenues, account for all monies received, ensure that the disbursement
of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the
provisions of Projects specified in the Capital Improvements Plan, and provide
an annual accounting for each District impact fee account showing the source
and amount of all funds collected and the Projects that were funded. (Ord. 626,
11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 11
IMPACT FEE EXPENDITURES
SECTION:
5B-11-1: Expenditure Eligibility
5B-11-2: Capital Improvements Plan Reimbursement - Surcharge
5B-11-3: Monies In Trust Fund Not Expended Carried Over From Fiscal Year To
Fiscal Year
5B-11-1: EXPENDITURE ELIGIBILITY:
Expenditures of District impact fees collected and deposited in the Trust Fund
shall be made only for System Improvements within the Service Area for which
the impact fee was collected in accordance with the Capital Improvements Plan.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-11-2: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN REIMBURSEMENT - SURCHARGE:
A portion of each impact fee collected shall be designated as a reimbursement
surcharge for the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan in accordance
with I.C. § 67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the Development's
Proportionate Share of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-11-3: MONIES IN TRUST FUND NOT EXPENDED CARRIED OVER FROM FISCAL YEAR TO
FISCAL YEAR:
Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific System
Improvements within such Capital Improvements Plan and not expended pursuant to
sections
5B-7-5 C or 5B-11-10 or refunded pursuant to section
5B-9-1 shall be retained in the same account until the next District' fiscal
year. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 12 CAPITAL BUDGET AND AUDIT
SECTION:
5B-12-1: Annual Capital Budget
5B-12-2: District Plan Of Alternative Sources Of Revenue
5B-12-3: Annual Audit Report
5B-12-1: ANNUAL CAPITAL BUDGET:
The District shall annually adopt a capital budget. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-12-2: DISTRICT PLAN OF ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF REVENUE:
The District shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue, which
shall include but not necessarily be limited to plans generated during the
District's annual budget process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing,
and implementation of user, administrative and regulatory fees, and other forms
of revenue. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-12-3: ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT:
   A.   As part of their annual audit process, the District shall prepare an
annual report:
      1.   Describing the amount of all District impact fees collected,
Appropriated, or spent during the preceding year by the category of public
facility; and
      2.   Describing the percentage of taxes and revenues from sources other
than the District impact fees collected, Appropriated, or spent for System
Improvements during the preceding year for District Capital Facilities for
which impact fees were collected by category of systems improvements. (Ord.
626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 13
APPEALS AND MEDIATION
SECTION:
5B-13-1: Appeals To The Fire District Commissioners
5B-13-2: Appeals To The City Council
5B-13-3: Payment Under Protest Retain Right To Appeal
5B-13-4: Mediation
5B-13-1: APPEALS TO THE FIRE DISTRICT COMMISSIONERS:
Any Fee Payer who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the Administrator in
applying this title, may appeal such decision to the Fire District
Commissioners.
   A.   The Fee Payer shall have the burden on appeal of demonstrating that the
decision was in error; and
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this sub-section, the Fee
Payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the Administrator within
thirty (30) days after the date of the Administrator's decision or the date on
which the Fee Payer submitted a payment of the Fire District Impact Fees under
protest, whichever is later. Such written notice of appeal shall include a
statement describing why the Fee Payer believes that the appealed decision was
in error, together with copies of any documents that the Fee Payer believes
support the claim; and
   C.   The Fire District Commissioners shall hear the appeal within sixty (60)
days after receipt of the written notice of appeal. The Fee Payer shall have
the right to be present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The
Administrator shall likewise have the right to be present and to present
evidence in support of their determination. The criteria to be used by the Fire
District Commissioners in considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the Administrator or
interpretation offered by the Fee Payer more accurately reflects the intent of
this title that new Development in the City pay its Proportionate Share of the
costs of System Improvements to Fire District facilities necessary to serve new
Development and whether the provisions of this title have been correctly
applied. The Fire District Commissioners shall issue a written decision
upholding, reversing, or modifying the decision being appealed within thirty
(30) days after hearing the appeal. The Fire District Commissioners' written
decision shall be the final administrative action on the Fee Payer's appeal.
(Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-13-2: APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
Any Fee Payer who is dissatisfied with a decision made on appeal by the Fire
District Commissioners in applying this title, may appeal such decision to the
City Council.
   A.   The Fee Payer shall have the burden of demonstrating that the Fire
District Commissioners' decision on appeal was in error.
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this sub-section, the Fee
Payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the Administrator within
thirty (30) days after the date of the Fire District Commissioners' decision.
Such written notice of appeal shall include a statement describing why the Fee
Payer believes that the appealed decision of the Fire District Commissioners
was in error, together with copies of any documents that the Fee Payer believes
support the claim. The Administrator shall within three (3) business days
deliver the notice of appeal together with copies of any relevant documents to
the City Clerk.
   C.   The City Council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after
receipt by the City Clerk of a written notice of appeal. The Fee Payer shall
have a right to be present and to present evidence in support of the appeal.
The Administrator shall likewise have the right to be present and to present
evidence in support of their decision. The criteria to be used by the City
Council in considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the Administrator and the
decision on appeal by the Fire District Commissioners, or the alternative
decision or interpretation offered by the Fee Payer, more accurately reflects
the intent of this title that new Development in the City pay its Proportionate
Share of the costs of System Improvements to District facilities necessary to
serve new Development and whether the provisions of this title has been
correctly applied. The City Council shall issue a decision upholding,
reversing, or modifying the decision being appealed within thirty (30) days
after hearing the appeal. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-13-3: PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST RETAIN RIGHT TO APPEAL:
A Fee Payer may pay a District impact fee under protest in order not to delay
in the issuance of a Building Permit by the City. A Fee Payer making a payment
under protest shall not be estopped from exercising the right to appeal
provided herein, nor shall such Fee Payer be estopped from receiving a refund
of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-13-4: MEDIATION:
   A.   Any Fee Payer that has a disagreement with the Administrator regarding
a District impact fee determination that is or may be due for a proposed
Development pursuant to this title, may enter into a voluntary agreement with
(depending upon the progress of the protest) the District to submit the
disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party acceptable to both
the Fee Payer and the District; and
   B.   The mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a
timely appeal pursuant to section
5B-13-1, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that the request for
mediation is filed no later than the last date on which a timely appeal could
be filed pursuant to section
5B-13-2; and
   C.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the Fee Payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in this section; and
   D.   If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be shared
equally by the Fee Payer and the District, (depending upon the progress of the
protest), and a written agreement regarding the payment of such costs shall be
executed prior to the commencement of mediation; and
   E.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues between the
District and the Fee Payer, the Fee Payer retains all rights to seek relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 14
CITY AND DISTRICT POWERS
SECTION:
5B-14-1: No Requirement Of The City To Approve Extraordinary Impact Development
5B-14-2: No Additional Right To Develop Created By This Title
5B-14-3: No Limit On City's Eminent Domain Authority
5B-14-4: Fire Codes And Other Rules Applicable To Project Improvements
5B-14-5: District Not Obligated To Approve Development That Reduces Levels Of
Service
5B-14-1: NO REQUIREMENT OF THE CITY TO APPROVE EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT
DEVELOPMENT:
Nothing in this title shall obligate the City to approve Development which
results in an Extraordinary Impact. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-14-2: NO ADDITIONAL RIGHT TO DEVELOP CREATED BY THIS TITLE: 
Nothing in this title shall be construed to create any additional right to
develop real property or diminish the City in regulating the orderly
development of real property within its boundaries. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-14-3: NO LIMIT ON CITY'S EMINENT DOMAIN AUTHORITY: 
Nothing in this title shall work to limit the use of the City's power of
eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures
authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general
obligation bond issues. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-14-4: FIRE CODES AND OTHER RULES APPLICABLE TO PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the District from requiring a Developer to
construct reasonable Project Improvements, as are required by the fire codes
and other rules that are adopted by the state fire marshal, in conjunction with
a Development. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
5B-14-5: DISTRICT NOT OBLIGATED TO APPROVE DEVELOPMENT THAT REDUCES LEVELS OF
SERVICE:
Nothing in this title shall obligate the District to approve any Development
request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in this title. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 15
LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCE
SECTION:
5B-15-1: Liberal Construction
5B-15-1: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this title shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Act may
be understood and the City Council and the Parma Rural Fire Protection Fire
District Commissioners may be fully carried out. (Ord. 626, 11-1-2024)
TITLE 6
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Short Title
6-1-2: Authority And Purpose
6-1-3: Application Of Provisions; Exceptions
6-1-4: Definitions
6-1-5: Fees
6-1-6: Permits
6-1-7: Inspection
6-1-8: Conflicting Provisions
6-1-9: Violation; Penalty
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be cited as the SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF PARMA. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
By authority of Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65 and title 50, chapter 13, as
amended, and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, these regulations
are adopted for the purpose of protecting and providing for the public health,
safety and general welfare of the city by providing for, but not being limited
to, the following:
   A.   Harmonious development of the area.
   B.   Coordination of streets, roads and other utilities within the
subdivision with other existing or planned streets, roads and other utilities.
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation.
   D.   Conservation of or provisions for adequate transportation, water
drainage and sanitary facilities.
   E.   Avoidance of population congestion and of scattered subdivision of land
as would involve danger or injury to health, safety or general welfare by
reason of:
      1.   Lack of water supply, drainage, transportation or other public
services; or
      2.   Unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds
for the supply of such services.
   F.   Requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections, or
other facilities shall be installed as conditions precedent to the approval of
final plats.
   G.   Manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
   H.   Administration of these regulations by defining the powers and duties
of approval authorities including procedures for the equitable and timely
review and approval of all plats of subdivisions covered by these provisions.
(Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
These regulations shall apply to the subdividing/development of land within the
corporate limits of the city including the property within Parma's area of
impact, or as mutually defined by both the city and county under the
requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6526, and shall include the following:
   A.   Filing Of Plat: The subdivision of a tract of land into two (2) or more
lots, parcels or sites for transfer of ownership or development, whether
immediate or future. Any subdivision of said tract will require the filing of a
plat in accordance with the provisions of this title. All of such lots, parcels
or sites created pursuant to this title shall front upon a public street unless
otherwise specifically approved by the council after recommendation of the
commission.
   B.   Dedication Of Streets Or Alleys: The dedication of any street or alley
through or along any tract of land, except where such dedication is initiated
at the request of a public body.
   C.   Resubdivision: The resubdivision of a parcel of land into more than one
parcel except as provided in the exceptions listed in subsection E of this
section.
   D.   Development Of Condominium Projects:
      1.   In condominium projects, as permitted by Idaho Code, the commission
and council may regulate and attach conditions to the design concepts and
location of buildings, the creation, shape and size of condominium units, the
provisions and maintenance of open space, and off street parking. Unless
excepted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the commission and council
shall require the installation of public improvements and utilities for
condominium projects as required under the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   For purposes of the administration of subdivision regulations, the
commission may consider a condominium development as a single building,
requiring one front yard, two (2) side yards, a rear yard and other regulations
pertinent to a given lot; and may grant such exceptions as are necessary to the
subdivision regulations to permit such development.
   E.   Exceptions: Exceptions to the regulations of this title shall include
the following:
      1.   A readjustment of lot lines which does not reduce the area, width,
depth or building setback lines below the minimum required.
      2.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate or a court
decree for the distribution of property thereunder with the stipulation that
the land may not be divided into more than four (4) parcels with a minimum size
per parcel to be five (5) acres.
      3.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as
defined and allowed in Idaho Code and when the dedication of a right of way for
public purposes is initiated by a public body.
      4.   The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency.
      5.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage. (Ord.
541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: a) the present
tense includes the past or future tense; b) the singular includes the plural,
and the plural includes the singular; c) the word "shall" is mandatory, "may"
is permissive, and the word "should" is preferred; and d) the masculine shall
include the feminine.
   BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land or group of lots within a subdivision that
is entirely surrounded by public streets, streams, railroads, parks or the
exterior boundary of the subdivision or a combination thereof.
   CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Comprehensive plan, or parts thereof, providing for
the future growth and development of the city and for the general location and
coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public
building sites, and other development, which shall have been duly adopted by
the city. A comprehensive plan may be further defined by Idaho Code.
   CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: An affirmative action by the commission indicating
that approval is given subject to certain specified stipulations.
   CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of: a) an undivided interest in common
real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any
combination thereof, together with b) a separate interest in real property, in
an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof 1 .
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city, hereinafter referred to as the
council.
   COUNTY COMMISSION OR COMMISSIONERS: The Canyon County board of
commissioners.
   COUNTY ENGINEER: The county engineer of the county.
   DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated when accepted by the city as a public
dedication, either by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes,
or by the recording of a plat showing such dedication.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any change or improvement to real property that involves a
street, sidewalk, public site, parking lot, traffic control device, water,
sewer, wastewater or storm water system, utility, or any changes to the type,
density or intensity of land use.
   DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (DMP): A preliminary master plan for the development
of a large, unusual or complicated land area, the platting of which is expected
in progressive stages. A DMP may be designed by the subdivider, planner or
engineer and shall be subject to approval of the commission, except that a DMP
does not fulfill the requirements of the preliminary platting process of this
title.
   EASEMENT: A grant by the owner of the use of a parcel of land by the public,
corporation or persons for specified use and purposes and so designated on a
plat or filed separately.
   ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
   ENGINEERING PLANS: Plans, profiles, cross sections and other required
details for the construction of public improvements, prepared by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and in
compliance with existing standards of design and construction.
   EXCEPTION, LAND: Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the
subdivision which is not a part of the subdivision.
   FINAL APPROVAL: Unconditional approval of the final plat as evidenced by
appropriate certifications on the plat; such approval constitutes authorization
to record a plat.
   FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream or watercourse or lake or other body of standing water, which has
been or may be covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The
floodplain includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe.
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow
from a river, stream, lake or other body of standing water.
Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway. Such
areas will include those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by
a flood of 100-year frequency.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/61ec97fb1b39ef8bc70be10ad320ecd348c6f373/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
 
   FUTURE ACQUISITION MAP: A map which may be adopted by the city designating
land proposed for acquisition.
   GREENBELT: A nonvehicular pathway corridor typically located alongside a
watercourse, topographic feature, or urban boundary maintained for public use
for walkers, bicyclists, joggers and similar recreationists. The greenbelt area
shall be permitted in open space calculations.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The state health or state district health department.
   HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision or that portion of a subdivision
located in terrain having an average slope exceeding ten percent (10%).
   IRRIGATION FACILITIES: Includes canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates,
pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of
irrigation water.
   LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot shall be:
   A.   If the side property lines are parallel, the perpendicular distance
between these side lines.
   B.   If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall
be the length between side lot lines at right angles to the axis of the lot
measured at mid distance between the front and rear lot lines.
   LOTS: A piece or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels as
shown on a recorded subdivision plat or by metes and bounds description for
purposes of sale, lease or separate use.
Corner Lot: A lot abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets where the
interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
Double Frontage Lot: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel
streets.
Interior Lot: A lot having but one side abutting on a street.
   MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit designed to be mounted
on a chassis running the length of the unit with the outer walls on
cantilevered supports extending from the chassis or supported by the chassis
rather than by a foundation running along the perimeter of the unit, and having
all the following characteristics:
   A.   Designed for long term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities
with plumbing and electrical connections for attachments to outside systems.
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on
flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels.
   C.   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete,
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location of foundation
supports, connection to facilities and the like.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN: A plan to guide the platting of remaining vacant parcels
in a partially built up neighborhood so as to make reasonable use of all land,
correlate street patterns, and achieve the best possible land use
relationships.
   OPEN SPACE: An area platted as a separate lot, provided within a recorded
easement, or dedicated to and accepted by the city. The area shall be
substantially open to the sky, exclusive of streets, buildings and other
covered structures, and shall be designated and intended as a usable and
convenient amenity to any proposed development. Unmaintained floodway areas,
protected wetland areas, and drainage, irrigation or other utility easements
subject to potential material modification by the holder of an existing
easement that can possibly impair the public use of the open space shall not be
considered as a part of the minimum area of open space required. Drainage
facilities shall only be classified as open space if it can be demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the city that they constitute a usable amenity.
   OPEN SPACE LAND: Any undeveloped or predominantly undeveloped land which may
be set aside for the following:
   A.   Park and recreation purposes.
   B.   Conservation of land and other natural resources.
   C.   Historic or scenic purposes.
   OWNER: The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title
as vendees under land contract, or holding any other title.
   PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right of way dedicated as a walkway entirely through
a block from street to street and/or providing access to a school, park,
recreation area or shopping center.
   PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by
the subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the
subdivider will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an
approved plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply
with the provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay
damages to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A residential, commercial and industrial use or
combination thereof planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of selling,
leasing or renting lots or estates, whether fronting on private or dedicated
streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings as governed by
the zoning regulations of the city. The requirements of this title may be
modified by the council upon recommendation by the commission to achieve the
best possible planned development for the specific site under consideration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/61ec97fb1b39ef8bc70be10ad320ecd348c6f373/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.png]
 
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The city planning and zoning commission,
hereinafter referred to as the commission.
   PLAT: A map of a subdivision.
Final Plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a registered
professional engineer or a registered land surveyor, in accordance with this
title and Idaho Code.
Preliminary Plat: A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a
proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with this title and
Idaho Code.
Recorded Plat: A final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval
required in this title and duly recorded in the county recorder's office.
   RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial street
and adjacent property, in either case, reserved or held in public ownership for
future street extension or widening.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A parcel of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way
which normally includes streets, sidewalks, utilities or other service
function.
   STANDARD DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS: A set of adopted regulations setting
forth the details, specifications and instructions to be followed in the
planning, design and construction of certain public improvements in the city
formulated by the city engineer, the district health department and/or other
city departments and approved by the city council.
   STREET: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, land, parkway, place, viaduct,
easement for access or other way which is an existing state, county or
municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way in a plat
duly filed and recorded within the right of way boundaries, whether improved or
unimproved, and may be comprised of pavement, shoulder, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
Alley: A public service way used to provide secondary vehicular access to
properties otherwise abutting upon a street.
Arterial Route: A general term including expressways, major and minor arterial
streets; and interstate, state or county highways having regional continuity.
Collector Street: A street that provides for traffic movement within
neighborhoods of the city and between major streets and local streets and for
direct access to abutting property.
Local Street: A street that provides for direct access to residential,
commercial, industrial or other abutting land for local traffic movements and
connects to collector and/or arterial streets.
   A.   Cul-De-Sac Street: A short local street having one end permanently
terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
   B.   Loop Street: A minor street with both terminal points on the same
street of origin.
   C.   Marginal Access Street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to an
arterial route and intercepts local streets and controls access to an arterial
route.
Private Street: A street that is not accepted for public uses or maintenance
which provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
   SUBDIVIDER: Shall be deemed to be the individual, firm, corporation,
partnership, association, syndication, trust or other legal entity having
sufficient proprietary rights in the property to represent the owner, that
submits the required subdivision application and initiates proceedings for the
subdivision of land in accordance with this title.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of any site, lot, tract or parcel of land, into
more than one part for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development,
whether immediate or future, and as more fully described in this title.
   SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE: A committee of the commission established to review
preliminary subdivision plats.
   SURVEYOR: Any person who is registered and certified in the state to engage
in the practice of land surveying.
   TOWNHOUSE: An arrangement of single-family dwellings separate or adjoined by
common walls of not more than two (2) opposite sides, with the uppermost story
being a portion of the same dwelling located directly beneath at the grade or
first floor level, and having exclusive individual ownership and occupant
rights of each dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, the land directly
beneath the dwelling.
   USABLE LOT AREA: That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal
uses made of residential property, excluding any area which may be covered by
water, is excessively steep, or included in certain types of easements.
   UTILITIES: Installations or facilities, underground or overhead, furnished
for use by the public, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, steam,
communications, water, drainage, irrigation, sewage disposal or flood control,
owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or
board duly authorized by state or city regulations. Utility or utilities as
used herein may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments or
boards as applicable herein.
   VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 55-101B.
6-1-5: FEES:
In the application of the fee structure, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Fees Established: Fees shall be as established by resolution of the
city council and shall be reasonably related to costs incurred by the city to
comply with its legal duties, including pertinent engineering, legal, planning,
and other professional service fees. Fees shall be paid before the city accepts
an application to which the fee applies. Engineering, legal, planning, and
other professional fees applicable to an application in process shall be
invoiced through the city to the applicant and paid by deduction from the
applicant's credit balance. If applicant's credit balance is exhausted,
applicant shall immediately pay a revised estimate of the remaining expected
fees upon request by the city.
   B.   Waivers: City may waive in whole or in part any fee when such a fee
would present a hardship. An applicant for a hardship waiver must present a
request in writing to the city council, detailing the hardship and, upon
finding that good cause exists to waive the fee, the council may decide to
waive the fee.
   C.   Guarantees: The applicant shall guarantee all improvements within the
public right of way and any other public dedication for a one year period
following the date of final inspection and acceptance by the city. Any defects,
repairs or maintenance during the one year guarantee period due to faulty
workmanship or materials shall be corrected at the applicant's expense.
   D.   Fees Applicable To Developments Outside City: Filing and processing
fees for any subdivision outside the city limits but within the area of impact
shall be paid prior to city officials signing the plat. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-6: PERMITS:
From the time of the effective date hereof, zoning, building, special use or
other permits or agreements shall be issued by the city to an applicant in
compliance with this code. Any license or permit issued by the city that is not
in compliance with this code shall be void. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-7: INSPECTION:
The applicant in the course of construction, installation or repair shall
request and the city shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, city approved
improvements such as buildings, fire hydrants, culinary and irrigation water
systems, sewage disposal systems, streets, curbs, gutters, drainage systems and
sidewalks. Excavations for fire hydrants and underground water, sewer and
drainage improvements shall not be covered or backfilled until such
construction and installations have been inspected and approved by the city. If
any such construction and installations are covered, or street base and course
is paved, before being inspected and approved, it shall, after notice to
uncover or remove has been issued by the city to the applicant, and at the
applicant's sole cost, be uncovered or removed and the proper procedure
followed. In such case, the applicant is responsible for the direct, incidental
and consequential damages that may arise from covering or backfilling or paving
prior to obtaining the required city inspection and approval. (Ord. 541, 2-26-
2007)
6-1-8: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
It is not intended by this title to impair or interfere with other regulations
of state or local law, or with private restrictions on the use of land,
improvements and structures. Where this title imposes greater restriction than
that imposed by other law or private restrictions, this title shall prevail.
(Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-1-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Compliance Required: No person shall subdivide any tract or parcel of
land located wholly or in part under the city's jurisdiction except in
compliance with the provisions of this title. No person shall knowingly
purchase, sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a
subdivision or a proposed subdivision submitted to the commission, nor offer
for recording in the office of the Canyon County recorder, any deed conveying
such parcel of land or any fee interest therein, unless such subdivision has
been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   B.   Offense Punishable: Violation of any of the provisions of this title or
failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The
landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
council or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or
Idaho Code. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 2
PLATTING AND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Preapplication
6-2-2: Preapplication Review
6-2-3: Preliminary Plat
6-2-4: Final Plat
6-2-5: Small Subdivisions; Combining Preliminary And Final Plats
6-2-6: Small Subdivisions; Record Of Survey Process
6-2-7: Development Site Plan Process
6-2-1: PREAPPLICATION:
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall submit to the city a conceptual plan and any supporting data of
the proposal to enable the city to review and comment. Such plans may be
generalized in content, and such submission shall not require an application or
fee. The conceptual plan shall include the following:
   A.   The general boundaries, layout and approximate dimensions of streets,
blocks and lots in sketch form.
   B.   The existing structures, features, utilities, easements and
characteristics of the land on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision site.
   C.   Future schools, parks and other public facilities.
   D.   Open space, parking and future land use information. (Ord. 541, 2-26-
2007)
6-2-2: PREAPPLICATION REVIEW:
   A.   The engineer and city staff shall review the conceptual plans and
supporting data as submitted and advise the submitter as to the general
conformance or nonconformance with this title. Such review may include comments
on policies and guidelines followed by the commission in the implementation of
various regulations as set forth in the comprehensive plan, this code and
similar plans or programs. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Application: Upon completion of the preapplication process, if the
subdivider elects to proceed with the platting process, he shall pay all fees
and he shall file with the city a completed subdivision application form as
prescribed by the city; fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat with data
as required in this section; and a deed or purchase agreement demonstrating the
applicant's ownership of, or legal interest in, land included in the
preliminary plat.
      1.   Form Of Presentation: The information hereinafter required as part
of the preliminary plat submitted shall be shown graphically or by note on
plans, or by letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements
or required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same
standard engineering scale, having not more than one hundred feet to an inch
(1" = 100'). Whenever practical, scales shall be adjusted to produce an overall
drawing measuring eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24"), but not
exceeding forty two inches by sixty inches (42" x 60").
      2.   Identification And Descriptive Data: The following shall be shown on
the preliminary plat or submitted separately:
         a.   Proposed name of subdivision and its location by section,
township and range; reference by dimension and bearing to a section corner,
quarter section corner, or recorded monument.
         b.   Name, address and phone number of property owner(s), subdivider,
engineer, planner or surveyor who prepared the plat, and any other professional
persons involved in the subdivision.
         c.   A development master plan of the entire area if the proposed
subdivision/development is part of a larger area of contiguous ownership.
         d.   Scale, north point and date of preparation including dates of any
subsequent revisions.
         e.   Vicinity map drawn to a maximum scale of one inch equals one
thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), clearly showing proposed subdivision configuration
in relationship to adjacent subdivisions, main arterial routes, collector
streets, and other important features.
         f.   Topography based on USGS datum shown on the same map as the
proposed subdivision layout. Contour lines shown at five foot (5') intervals
where land slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two foot (2')
intervals where land slope is ten percent (10%) or less, referenced to an
established bench mark, including location and elevation.
         g.   Location of water wells, streams, canals, irrigation laterals,
private ditches, washes, lakes or other water features; direction of flow; the
regulatory floodplain and floodway boundaries; and location and extent of known
areas subject to inundation.
         h.   Location, widths and proposed names of all platted streets,
arrows indicating direction of slopes, type of surface and existence of any
curb, gutter and/or sidewalks. Other important features such as railroads,
utility rights of way and easements of public record, public areas, permanent
structures to remain including water wells, and municipal corporation lines
within or adjacent to the tract.
         i.   Name, book and page number of any recorded adjacent subdivision
having common boundary with the tract.
         j.   By note, the existing zoning classification of the tract and
adjacent land, and any requested zoning changes.
         k.   By note, the acreage of the tract.
         l.   The subdivision boundary shall be based on an actual field survey
including professional stamp. Boundary problems shall be solved and
nonbuildable remnant parcels are prohibited. Certification and stamping of the
plan by the professional land surveyor are intended to pertain only to the
boundary survey. Show any public dedications of rights of way or easements.
If any area is not intended to be developed, it should be identified as "open
area", "common area", or noted if protected as environmentally sensitive such
as wetlands, natural habitats set aside or floodplain area. Note that
environmentally sensitive areas shall require completion of an environmental
impact assessment application available from the city.
         m.   Names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the subdivision in a format acceptable
to the city. Written notification shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the preliminary
plat is to be considered.
         n.   A statement as to whether or not any variance or waiver will be
requested with respect to any provision of this chapter, describing the
particular provision and the reasons for the request.
         o.   Storm drains and water supply mains within and immediately
adjacent to the tract.
         p.   Approximate location of existing sanitary sewers.
         q.   Street layout, including location, width and proposed names of
public streets, alleys, pedestrianways and easements; connections to adjoining
platted tract.
         r.   Typical lot dimensions to scale; dimensions of all corner lots
and lots of curvilinear sections of streets; each lot and block numbered
individually; total number of lots.
         s.   Location, width and use of easements.
         t.   Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use with purpose indicated.
         u.   If plat includes land for which multi-family, commercial or
industrial use is proposed, such areas shall be clearly designated together
with existing zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any.
         v.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, development within a designated floodplain, or hazardous and
unique areas of development.
         w.   The proposed off site improvements including streets, water
supply, sanitary sewer systems, storm water systems, fire protection facilities
and proposed utilities.
         x.   If grading or any other construction is to begin prior to final
plat approval, a grading plan or information on construction plans shall be
submitted and is part of the approval.
         y.   All subdivisions containing more than fifty (50) lots shall
provide a traffic impact analysis based on information that reflects current
traffic conditions. A traffic impact analysis may be required of any
development as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission on a case
by case basis.
      3.   Proposed Utility Methods:
         a.   Sewage Disposal: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
to furnish such evidence as may be required relative to the design flows within
the subdivision, and operation of the sanitary sewage facilities proposed. A
statement as to the type of facilities proposed shall appear on the preliminary
plat.
A soils and ground water study shall be required by the city engineer where
individual wells or septic tanks are proposed within the area of city impact.
The engineer's report, as required by the health department, shall be
submitted.
         b.   Water Supply: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
furnish such evidence as may be required relative to the design, operation,
volume and quality of the water supply and facilities proposed. A statement as
to the type of facilities proposed shall appear on the preliminary plat.
         c.   Storm Water Disposal: It shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider to furnish such evidence as may be required relative to the design
and operation of the storm water disposal system. A statement as to the type of
facilities proposed, and an indication of the area to be used for treatment/
disposal shall appear on the preliminary plat.
         d.   Irrigation System: A statement describing the proposed irrigation
system shall appear on the preliminary plat.
   B.   Public Hearing Agenda: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and all
required data as provided herein, a public hearing for review of said
preliminary plat shall therefore be placed on the commission agenda for
consideration at the next regular meeting.
   C.   Notification: The applicant shall provide the names and addresses of
all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries
of the proposed subdivision in a format acceptable to the city. Written
notification of the date, time and place of the commission hearing shall be
mailed to these property owners at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
planning and zoning commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be
considered. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent to all political
subdivisions of the state of Idaho that provide services within the planning
jurisdiction, and a like notice shall also be published in the official
newspaper or newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   D.   Posting: Notice shall also be posted on the premises not less than one
week prior to the commission hearing.
   E.   Review Required:
      1.   Staff Review: Plans shall be submitted to the city for distribution
and review by the city engineer, city attorney, and city staff, including
public works supervisor, no less than forty five (45) days before the meeting
at which the preliminary plat is to be considered. The city council may extend
this period for up to forty five (45) additional days for city staff review of
requirements of this chapter. Any response by city staff to the applicant must
be made in writing no less than seven (7) days before the meeting in which the
application is to be considered. The applicant must provide any reply or new
information no later than forty eight (48) hours before the commission hearing
in which the application is to be considered.
      2.   Agency Review:
         a.   The planning staff shall transmit one copy of the application to
agencies that have jurisdiction or an interest in the proposed subdivision for
their review and recommendations.
         b.   If no written reply is received from any of the notified agencies
within ten (10) days from the date of notification, approval of the preliminary
plat by such agency will be considered to be granted.
         c.   Some of the agencies which receive copies of the preliminary plat
may be as follows:
            (1)   Fire chief, Parma rural fire district;
            (2)   Superintendent of schools;
            (3)   State division of highways, if the subdivision abuts a state
highway;
            (4)   Utility companies: gas, power, telephone, cable TV;
            (5)   Other agencies as determined by the city;
            (6)   Irrigation and drainage companies or districts;
            (7)   Notus-Parma highway district; and
            (8)   Southwest district health.
   F.   Commission Action:
      1.   The commission shall, at a public hearing and based on findings and
conclusions, make a recommendation to the council to approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove the preliminary plat, or table the preliminary plat
for additional information before making a recommendation. If tabled, the
recommendation shall occur at the next regular meeting after the requested
information has been received by the commission.
The reason for action taken shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
         b.   The reasons for approval, conditional approval or disapproval.
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to gain
approval of the proposal.
      2.   Upon the commission's recommendation for approval, conditional
approval or disapproval, the preliminary plat, together with a complete copy of
the commission's findings and report of action, shall be transmitted to the
council.
   G.   Council Action:
      1.   The council shall act upon the report of the commission within ten
(10) days, or at its next regular meeting following receipt of the report. The
council may sustain, modify or reject the recommendations of the commission and
make such findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title
and Idaho Code. The reason for action taken shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial.
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to gain
approval of the proposal.
      2.   Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with preparation of the final plat and with engineering
plans and specifications for public improvements.
      3.   Approval is valid for twenty four (24) months from the date of
council action.
   H.   Phase Developments: Application for development of a proposed
subdivision in phases may be made if the subdivision is to include fifteen (15)
or more lots, parcels or sites.
      1.   In the event that the development of the proposed subdivision
approved in preliminary plat form is to be completed in more than one phase,
the subdivider may file and obtain certification of the acceptance of
successive final plats for continuous segments of the preliminary area without
reapplication for preliminary plat approval, provided that application for
final plat approvals are submitted in successive intervals of not more than one
year each, and provided that development standards adopted by the city
subsequent to preliminary approval are followed.
      2.   Filing of final plat(s) on phase developments may require
modification of the conditions as approved by council. Council reserves the
right to modify and/or add conditions to the final plat(s) to conform with
adopted policies and/or ordinance changes for each phase submitted after one
year following the preliminary plat approval.
      3.   All items in each phase shall be completed before council approval
will be given for any subsequent phases. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
Final plat submission shall include fifteen (15) sets of prints of the plans
and specifications for all proposed improvements as required by this title, and
a current deed or other evidence acceptable to the city showing proof of
ownership of the tract of land being platted.
   A.   Survey; Plat Preparation; Fee:
      1.   Survey And Final Plat Prepared: After approval or conditional
approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or
part thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
preliminary plat as approved.
      2.   Fee: At the time of submission of an application for a final plat, a
fee as established by resolution of the council shall be paid.
   B.   Method And Medium Of Presentation:
      1.   All plats to be offered for recording shall be in accordance with
Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, and with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   Copies of the record plat shall be reproduced in the form of blue
line or black line prints on a white background.
      3.   The plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale having not more than
one hundred feet to an inch (1" = 100') unless otherwise approved as to scale.
   C.   Content Of Final Plat:
      1.   A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location
by number of section, township, range and county.
      2.   Name, address and official seal of the registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the plat.
      3.   Scale, north arrow and date of the plat preparation.
   D.   Survey Data Required:
      1.   Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided fully balanced and closed,
showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the
field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
      2.   Any excepted parcel(s) within the plat boundaries shall show all
bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field. All
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
      3.   Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced.
   E.   Descriptive Data Required:
      1.   Name, rights of way lines, courses, lengths and widths of all public
streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements; all linear curves for
street centerlines and property lines shall include the following information:
         a.   Radii.
         b.   Central angle.
         c.   Arc length.
         d.   Points of tangency.
         e.   Long chord, length and bearing.
         f.   Tangent length.
Spiral curves should have essentially the same information except for radii and
tangent length.
      2.   All easements for access provided for public services or utilities
and any limitations of the easements. Construction within the easement shall be
limited to utilities, and wood, wire or removable section type fencing.
      3.   All residential lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers
throughout the plat. "Exceptions", "tract" and "private parks" shall be so
designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned.
      4.   Location, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs and central angles of
all sites to be dedicated to the public will be clearly indicated and the
intended use specified.
   F.   Dedication And Acknowledgment:
      1.   Dedication: Statement of dedication of all streets, alleys,
drainageways, pedestrianways and other easements for public use by the person
holding title of record and by persons holding title as vendees under land
contract. If lands dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the
plat.
      2.   Acknowledgment Of Dedication: Execution of dedication acknowledged
and certified by a notary public.
   G.   Required Certifications:
      1.   Certification by the registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor stating on the plat that the plat is correct and accurate, and
that the monuments described in it have been located as described.
      2.   Certification of plat approval by the city engineer.
      3.   Certification of plat approval by the council.
      4.   Certification of plat approval by the commission.
      5.   Certification of recordation by the county recorder.
      6.   Certification of paid taxes by the county treasurer.
      7.   Certification by the county surveyor.
   H.   Commission Action: The final plat, prepared in accordance with Idaho
Code and the provisions set forth herein, shall be submitted to the city. In
the event the final plat does not conform to the approved preliminary plat, the
city shall so inform the subdivider for revisions until the plat does conform.
Then the city will proceed to assign the final plat to the commission agenda
for its action.
   I.   Agency Review: The city shall transmit one copy of the final plat for
review by departments and agencies having jurisdiction, or others having an
interest in the proposed subdivision for their recommendations to ensure
compliance with the approved preliminary plat.
      1.   If no written reply is received from any of the notified agencies
within ten (10) days from the date of notification, approval of the preliminary
plat by such agency will be considered to be granted.
      2.   Some of the agencies which receive copies of the preliminary plat
may be as follows:
         a.   Fire chief, Parma rural fire district;
         b.   Superintendent of schools;
         c.   State division of highways;
         d.   Utility companies: gas, power, telephone, cable TV;
         e.   Other agencies as determined by the city;
         f.   Irrigation and drainage companies or districts;
         g.   Notus-Parma highway district; and
         h.   Southwest district health.
   J.   Council Action: Upon receipt of the final plat, and all other data as
required herein, the city shall thereafter place the final plat on the council
agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting.
      1.   The council, following receipt of the final plat, shall consider the
plat and any changes from the preliminary plat approved by the commission. As a
condition precedent to the approval of any final plat, the subdivider is
required to improve the streets and all other public improvements in accordance
with public improvement standards of the city. The subdivider may guarantee the
improvements as provided in section 6-4-1 of this title. If the final plat
conforms to the approved preliminary plat and requirements of this title and
Idaho Code, the council shall approve said plat.
      2.   At the time of approval of the final plat, the council shall accept
the dedications shown thereon. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-2-5: SMALL SUBDIVISIONS; COMBINING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS:
   A.   General: The city shall, upon request by the subdivider, process the
subdivision application as both a preliminary and final plat when:
      1.   The proposed subdivision has ten (10) or less lots.
      2.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved.
      3.   No material special development considerations as identified in
title 6, chapter 5 of this code are involved.
      4.   All required information, including necessary agency review or
approval for both preliminary and final plat, is complete and in an acceptable
form.
      5.   The public interest, including installation in accordance with
section
6-4-2 of this title of any required off site improvements, including, but not
limited to, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and street improvements, can be
properly met if the subdivision is approved.
      6.   All irrigation structures, lines and drain lines except street storm
drain lines shall be relocated out of the street right of way.
   B.   Decision: A decision on a short plat application for subdivision of a
parcel of land is made by the city council based on the recommendations of the
planning and zoning commission. The commission and council each shall have held
a public hearing to consider and make a decision on the preliminary plat, and
each shall have held a public meeting to make a decision on the final plat, and
sign it if approved. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-2-6: SMALL SUBDIVISIONS; RECORD OF SURVEY PROCESS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   Required: A subdivision application may be processed as a record of
survey, if all of the following exist:
         a.   The property is not a platted lot or the result of a previous
subdivision under the record of survey process;
         b.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed four (4) lots, each of
which complies with all zoning requirements and building regulations;
         c.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved; and
         d.   There are no negative impacts on the health, safety or general
welfare of the city, and the subdivision is in the best interests of the city.
      2.   Preapplication Conference: The applicant shall complete a
preapplication conference with the city prior to submittal of an application
for a small subdivision record of survey. The purpose of this meeting is to
discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of this title and the
criteria and standards contained herein.
      3.   Application Requirements: An application, record of survey map, and
fees shall be submitted to the city for review and approval if the record of
survey meets the city's requirements.
      4.   Resolution: Any disagreement between the city and the applicant
regarding whether a property qualifies for division under the record of survey
process shall be resolved by the planning and zoning commission or the hearings
examiner. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-2-7: DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN PROCESS:
   A.   Prior to any "development", as defined by section
6-1-4 of this title, that does not require a plat, the applicant shall file a
site plan with the planning and zoning administrator and with the city
engineer. The site plan shall be signed by a professional engineer, registered
in the state of Idaho, and shall provide sufficient information and detail to
explain and show, to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning administrator
and the city engineer, that the development will proceed in compliance with the
requirements of this code and other applicable law, including, without
limitation, the current "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction"
(ISPWC). The following procedure shall be followed:
      1.   The applicant shall submit the site plan, signed by a registered
professional engineer, to the planning and zoning administrator and the city
engineer.
      2.   The planning and zoning administrator and the city engineer will
determine whether the development, as planned, will be in compliance with the
requirements of this code, the ISPWC and other applicable law. If the planning
and zoning administrator and the city engineer approve the site plan, written
notice of that approval will be given to the applicant. If approval is denied,
written notice will be provided to the applicant with an explanation as to the
grounds for denial.
      3.   Once approval from the planning and zoning administrator and the
city engineer is obtained, the applicant may proceed in obtaining all necessary
permits and beginning construction of the development.
      4.   During the course of the development, the applicant will retain a
professional engineer, registered in the state of Idaho, to inspect and ensure
that the development was built and constructed in accordance with the site
plan, this code, ISPWC and other applicable law.
      5.   Once such approval is obtained from a registered professional
engineer, the applicant may submit a request to the planning and zoning
administrator for a certificate of acceptance, which, once provided, will
evidence that the requirements of this section were complied with. (Ord. 541,
2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
6-3-1: General
6-3-2: Streets
6-3-3: Block Requirements
6-3-4: Lot Requirements
6-3-5: Easements
6-3-6: Traffic Buffer Requirements
6-3-7: Public Sites, Natural Features, And Open Space
6-3-8: Area Of Impact
6-3-9: Storm Water Management
6-3-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Conform To Standards: Subdivisions/developments shall conform to the
standards of the adopted comprehensive plan, the zoning regulations of the city
and other ordinances and regulations of the city. Higher standards of
development which are officially adopted by other local, state and federal
jurisdictions shall prevail over those set forth herein in accordance with
prevailing laws.
   B.   Determination Of Unsuitable Lands: Land which the planning and zoning
commission determines to be unsuitable for subdividing/development because of
periodic flooding, poor drainage, excessively steep slopes or other features
likely to be harmful to the safety and general health and welfare of the future
residents, shall not be subdivided/developed unless adequate methods are
utilized to overcome these conditions.
   C.   Specifications Adopted: The city of Parma hereby adopts specifications
and details of the latest edition, or as adopted by resolution, of the "Idaho
Standards For Public Works Construction" as standards for construction within
the impact area and city limits. These standards are augmented by general
addenda, approved by resolution of the council as necessary, to ensure uniform
material selection and construction practice for those items specific to the
city of Parma. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-2: STREETS:
   A.   Street Design Requirements: Streets, including collectors as designated
by the city of Parma, shall be designed incorporating the principles of
balanced blocks, curvilinear layout, multiple access points, minimization of
cul-de-sacs, and connectivity to adjacent, undeveloped properties. Maximum
block perimeter shall be one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') defined at the
centerline of surrounding streets. Exceptions to the maximum block perimeter
length due to topographic constraints will be considered.
   B.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to public streets may
be permitted; provided, however, that the control and disposition of land
comprising such strips is placed within the jurisdiction of the city.
   C.   Frontage Streets: Where a subdivision/development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, railroad or limited access highway, the
city may require frontage streets, or such other treatment for the appropriate
use of the tract.
   D.   Half Street Dedication:
      1.   Half street dedications shall be discouraged; provided, however, the
city may accept a partial street dedication when such street forms the boundary
of the proposed subdivision and is deemed to be necessary for the orderly
development of the neighborhood, and provided the city finds it will be
appropriate to require the dedication of the remainder of the right of way when
the adjoining property is developed. When a partial street exists adjoining a
proposed subdivision, the remainder of the right of way shall be dedicated and
the street shall be treated in the same manner as a full street.
      2.   Whenever there is an existing half street right of way adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the developer shall be required to improve, as a
minimum, two (2) traffic lanes centered about at the proposed center of the
street and one parking lane contiguous with the curb and gutter and sidewalk.
   E.   Right Of Way Width:
      1.   Street right of way width is to be measured from property line to
property line. The minimum and maximum rights of way of streets so measured
shall be:
 
Street Classification Minimum       Maximum
                      R/W Widths    R/W Widths
Urbanizing area streets:
   Principal arteri      80      100 feet
   Minor arterial        66      80 feet
   Collector street      60      80 feet
   Local street          50      60 feet
 
      2.   Interior roads within a subdivision/development, which are
noncollectors and nonarterial roads, are allowed to have a fifty foot (50')
right of way provided that a ten foot (10') permanent utility easement is given
along each side of the right of way line. Roads with fifty foot (50') rights of
way shall have a right of way allowance for a minimum of twenty foot (20') curb
radii and pedestrian ramps at the intersections.
   F.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular
turnaround with a right of way radius of at least fifty feet (50'). The city
may approve an equally convenient form of turning space where extreme
conditions justify. The maximum length shall be six hundred feet (600') from
the entrance to the center of a turnaround, with the following exceptions:
      1.   Alternative types of turnarounds for cul-de-sacs which will provide
access to less than thirteen (13) dwelling units may be permitted by the city
if approved by the fire department and highway district having jurisdiction.
      2.   In zoning districts which prohibit densities greater than one
dwelling unit per two (2) acres, cul-de-sac streets up to a maximum of one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') in length may be permitted by the city if
approved by the fire department and the highway district having jurisdiction.
No more than twenty (20) dwelling units shall be permitted on said cul-de-sac.
      3.   In zoning districts which prohibit densities greater than one
dwelling unit per five (5) acres, cul-de-sac streets up to a maximum of two
thousand eight hundred feet (2,800') in length may be permitted by the city if
approved by the fire department and highway district having jurisdiction. No
more than twenty (20) dwelling units shall be permitted on said cul-de-sac.
   G.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets will not be approved except in
locations designated by the city as necessary to future extensions in
development of adjacent lands. In any case, a dead end street serving more than
four (4) lots shall provide by easement a temporary turning circle with a fifty
foot (50') radius or other acceptable design to accomplish adequate access.
   H.   Loop Streets: Loop streets shall be limited to a maximum length of one
thousand two hundred feet (1,200') measured along the centerline of the street
from centerline intersection to centerline intersection.
   I.   Street Intersections And Alignments:
      1.   Streets shall be planned to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, but in no event at less than seventy degrees (70°).
      2.   Where any street deflects at an angle of ten degrees (10°) or more,
a connecting curve shall be required having a minimum centerline radius of
three hundred feet (300') for arterial and collector streets, or the minimum
required by the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) or the Idaho transportation department (ITD), and one hundred twenty
five feet (125') for local streets.
      3.   Streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five
feet (125') shall be avoided.
      4.   A tangent at least one hundred fifty feet (150') to two hundred feet
(200') long shall be provided between reverse curves on arterial and collector
streets, and/or the minimum provided for by AASHTO or ITD requirements, if more
stringent.
      5.   Street intersections with more than four (4) legs and Y type
intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be avoided.
   J.   Street Grades And Widths: Street grades shall not exceed nine percent
(9%) nor less than five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) on local and collector
streets. The grades for all other streets shall be as approved based on
individual conditions and safe engineering practices. Minimum street width for
a local road shall be forty feet (40'), back to back of curbs. All other road
width shall be determined by traffic use and volume.
   K.   Street Names: The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
      1.   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name except
where a new street is a continuation of an existing street; street names that
may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing streets shall not be
used.
      2.   All new streets shall be named as follows: Streets having a
predominantly north-south direction shall be named "avenue" or "road"; streets
having a predominantly east-west direction shall be named "street" or
"highway"; meandering streets shall be named "circle", "court", "way", "place"
or shall conform to local customs. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-3: BLOCK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Block Lengths And Design:
      1.   Block lengths shall not exceed six hundred sixty feet (660') as
measured along the street centerline from centerline intersection to centerline
intersection.
      2.   Block design shall provide for two (2) tiers of lots except under
special conditions where this is not feasible or practical, or along
subdivision boundaries, collectors or arterials.
   B.   Pedestrianway: Pedestrianways with right of way widths of ten feet
(10') or greater may be required where essential for circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community
facilities. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-4: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Design: The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and
minimum setback lines shall comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning
regulations of the city.
   B.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots shall be avoided wherever
possible. Double fronted lots along major collector or arterial streets shall
conform to the traffic buffer requirements (see section
6-3-6 of this chapter). (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-5: EASEMENTS:
   A.   A general utility and access easement of not less than ten feet (10')
in width shall be dedicated on all front lot lines.
   B.   Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than ten feet
(10') in width shall be dedicated on each side of all rear lot lines and five
feet (5') on each side of side lot lines for proper utility maintenance or
construction. In cases where side setbacks have been reduced to less than the
minimum easement width herein required, the easement shall be equal to the side
setback.
   C.   Easements for greenbelt pathways shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') in width.
   D.   The extension of all power and other transmission lines requiring new
easements in and across city park properties shall be underground. (Ord. 541,
2-26-2007)
6-3-6: TRAFFIC BUFFER REQUIREMENTS:
To protect the privacy of residential zones, to improve safety, reduce visual
impacts and mitigate noise awareness, a combination of the following shall be
used: a) fence; b) berm; and c) landscaping with irrigation and maintenance
stipulated care. The object is to screen the sights and sounds of designated
collector and arterial roadways from an individual standing at the rear doorway
of his or her residence.
   A.   Screening: Screening shall be accomplished by a combination of berm
(varying height: minimum 3 feet, maximum 5 feet; 2.5:1 side slopes) and fence
(varying height) to a total height of not less than six feet (6') or greater
than eight feet (8') in a twenty four foot (24') (minimum) easement dedicated
for traffic buffer area. Screening shall be harmonious with adjacent screening
techniques, materials, and colors.
   B.   Alignment: Alignment shall be curving or patterned, and mixed with
designated landscaping to mitigate visual impact. For each portion of three
hundred thirty feet (330') along right of way, breaks featuring landscaped
cutouts (200 square feet) may be employed to alter linear visual effects.
   C.   Gates: No vehicular gate or access shall be permitted onto a collector
or arterial street from the rear yard of a lot.
   D.   Setbacks: Rear setbacks may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') from the
buffer easement line.
   E.   Maintenance: Maintenance of the public side of buffer area shall be by
the subdivision homeowners' association; use and maintenance of the private
side of the buffer area shall be by the abutting lot owner. This shall be
provided for in the protective covenants. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-7: PUBLIC SITES, NATURAL FEATURES, AND OPEN SPACE:
Public sites, natural features and open space area designations shall conform
to the following standards:
   A.   Public Areas: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use as shown on a future acquisition map, as authorized
by Idaho Code, is located in whole or in part within a proposed subdivision,
the planning and zoning commission shall notify the appropriate public agency
concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of the
date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend
consideration on the proposed subdivision for sixty (60) days. However, if an
agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days, the commission shall resume
consideration of the subdivision.
   B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features, which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets), shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision or development, unless waived by
the city council when considering the preliminary plat application.
   C.   Special Development: In the case of planned unit developments, and
large scale developments, the open space area requirement shall be a minimum of
ten percent (10%) of the gross area and shall not include strips of land less
than fifteen feet (15') in width unless designed to accommodate a water feature
such as a pond or stream.
   D.   Open Spaces:
      1.   The minimum percentage of the gross area that must be set aside in
the first phase of development for open space in new noncommercial subdivisions
or planned unit developments shall be ten percent (10%) unless waived by the
city council when considering the preliminary plat.
      2.   Open spaces shall be in building lot size increments and at least
sixty percent (60%) shall be in a single tract having width to length ratios no
greater than three to one (3:1) unless designed to accommodate a water feature
such as a pond or stream. When designed around a water feature, the length to
width ratio may be waived. Open space includes the area designed for greenbelt
or storm water retention facilities.
      3.   Open spaces shall include at least one 3-inch caliper tree for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of surface area. Such trees shall be
selected from the choice of species provided in
title 5, chapter 8 of this code, and shall comply with both the spirit and
letter of that chapter, as appropriate, regarding placement and compatibility
with existing and future anticipated subsurface, surface and overhead uses at
the site, including sidewalks, streets, overhead utilities, underground
utilities, traffic and pedestrian sightlines, etc.
   E.   Maintenance Of Open Space, Common Area, And/Or Greenbelt: The council
and city attorney shall review the homeowners' agreement or initiate an
agreement with the developer for maintenance of common and/or open space areas
within the subdivision or development by the homeowners' association.
   F.   Greenbelts: Greenbelts, or easements for future greenbelts, are
required along floodplains and permanent drainageways. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-8: AREA OF IMPACT:
   A.   Annexation: New subdivisions which are contiguous to the city limits
and meet the criteria for annexation as set forth in Idaho Code section 50-222,
shall be annexed and developed to city standards.
   B.   Streets: Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots
(such as when large lots are approved for septic tanks), the parcels shall be
divided, where feasible, to allow for future division into smaller parcels. Lot
arrangements shall allow for the ultimate extension of adjacent streets through
the middle of wide blocks. Whenever such future subdividing, developing or lot
splitting is contemplated, the plan thereof shall show proposed extension of
streets and be approved by the commission and council prior to the taking of
such action.
   C.   Utilities:
      1.   Water: New subdivision developments which are platted in less than
five (5) acre lots that do not connect to public water facilities shall provide
a central water system (dry lines may be required), designed to city standards,
so at the time of annexation, connecting to the public water system will be
more cost effective and easily accomplished.
      2.   Sewer: Unless otherwise provided for herein, new development shall
provide a sewer utility system or a dry line system which is equivalent to the
public sewer system so, at the time of annexation, connecting to the public
sewer system will be more easily accomplished. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-3-9: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A storm water management plan shall be prepared addressing both construction
and postconstruction control of storm water. The introductory comments, general
storm water requirements, control method requirements, storm water best
management practices, and all appendices contained in the city of Boise "Storm
Water Management Design Manual", are incorporated herein by reference and shall
be used for the development and review of storm water plans for subdivisions
and development. References to the city of Boise shall be read as if references
to the city of Parma. References to the Ada County highway district (ACHD) may
be deleted as appropriate. Checklists and other references shall be
incorporated and used for the city of Parma.
   A.   When possible, retention and detention facilities should be designed as
open surface facilities for multi-use. The inlet shall be located within a
narrow neck containing the outlet and emergency overflow to minimize mixing of
first flush (high pollution concentration) storm water with that from longer
duration flows.
   B.   A plan for operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the
facility shall be prepared and submitted to the city for approval. Oil/water
separators and catch basin inserts shall not be used alone to treat storm water
runoff, but rather in combination with other BMPs to improve water quality. For
grease and sediment traps, sand filters and other maintenance intensive
facilities, a life cycle cost including cost of replacement shall be submitted
and will be considered by the city as a part of the process of deciding on
acceptance or nonacceptance of that option. Generally, for facilities requiring
city maintenance, an option with least postconstruction life cycle cost will be
preferred.
   C.   Retention facilities which incorporate absorption trenches and
subsurface infiltration elements for storm water management shall conform to
Idaho Code title 42, chapter 39, and to the Idaho department of water resources
rules for waste disposal and injection wells.
   D.   All developments and/or subdivisions which are required by the
environmental protection agency to provide a "storm water pollution prevention
plan", shall submit a copy of said plan to the city prior to commencing any
construction activity. Preconstruction erosion and sedimentation control
methods must be installed or otherwise in effect prior to any site disturbance.
(Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 4
STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
6-4-1: General
6-4-2: Required Improvements
6-4-3: Water Line Extension Credits
6-4-4: Sewer Line Extension Credits
6-4-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Responsibility Of Subdivider/Developer:
      1.   All improvements such as streets, curb, gutter, sidewalks, alleys,
easements and other facilities which are required as a condition to plat
approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider/developer and shall meet
city specifications and standards of construction; provided, however, that a
subdivider/developer may be allowed to meet the requirements by participation
in an improvement district approved by the city.
      2.   Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by an
engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
   B.   Irrigation Supply And Distribution Systems: Prior to the time of
recording the final plat, the subdivider shall file with the administrator
evidence that the irrigation water appurtenant to the land within the plat to
be recorded has had an adequate system designed and assurance of the necessary
improvements provided, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Response from the irrigation district or public agency having
authority in the area regarding treatment of irrigation water in the proposed
development.
      2.   Copies of the plans of the proposed distribution system for the lots
and areas to be served in the proposed development. Said distribution system
must be a closed system.
      3.   Copies of the homeowners' association or similar organization's
documents which may be required precedent to the establishment of an irrigation
distribution system within the proposed development.
   C.   Construction Drawings Required: Prior to the time of recording of the
final plat, the subdivider shall file with the administrator construction
drawings for all improvements required in the portion of the subdivision
contained in the final plat.
   D.   One Year Guarantee: The owner/subdivider shall guarantee all
improvements within the public right of way and any other public dedication for
a one year period following the date of final inspection and acceptance by the
city. Any defects, repairs or maintenance during the one year guarantee period
due to faulty workmanship or materials shall be corrected at the expense of the
owner/subdivider.
   E.   Financial Guarantee:
      1.   Before recording the final plat, the subdivider shall construct all
required improvements and secure a certification of completion from the city
engineer; or, shall provide to the city a certified check, irrevocable letter
of credit, or other acceptable guarantee in a form approved by the city
attorney in an amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated cost of improvements to be installed, to ensure actual construction
of such improvements; or, shall execute a written agreement with the city
setting forth phases of development, anticipated schedules for construction and
a certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or other acceptable guarantee
in a form approved by the city attorney, for each phase of construction. The
improvements, when covered by a certified check, irrevocable letter of credit,
or other acceptable guarantee in a form approved by the city attorney, shall be
constructed within six (6) months from the date of recording of the final plat;
provided, however, the council may extend the period an additional six (6)
months upon showing of just cause by the subdivider.
      2.   The building official shall not issue building permits until
evidence has been provided that all necessary improvements have been installed
and accepted and an inspection and certification that cleanup has been done or
a certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or other acceptable guarantee
in a form approved by the city attorney in an amount of one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the cost has been filed with the city.
      3.   Before the certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or other
acceptable guarantee in a form approved by the city attorney in the amount of
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of improvements is
returned to the developer, the city requires as built drawings be submitted and
accepted by the city engineer. Amounts of less than sixty thousand dollars
($60,000.00) will not be released until all the work has been completed,
inspected, and accepted by the city.
      4.   All weather driving surfaces, functional water and sewer, and street
signs shall be fully complete and accepted before the city will consider a
guarantee for the balance of improvements. The city may consider a guarantee
for the balance of improvements only when extenuating circumstances exist, such
as adverse weather conditions or shortages in necessary materials.
      5.   A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until any damage to
the subdivision improvements by the homebuilder is repaired.
   F.   Record Plans And Specifications:
      1.   Prior to acceptance by the council of any improvements installed by
the subdivider, two (2) sets of prints of the approved "record" plans and
specifications, along with a digital copy of the approved "record" plans and
specifications in a format usable by the city, shall be certified by the
subdivider's engineer and filed with the administrator.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after completion of improvements and submission
of "record" plans in accordance with council specifications, the council or its
designated representative shall certify the completion and acceptance of the
construction and shall transmit a copy of the said certification to the
subdivider. If a surety agreement has been executed by the subdivider, the same
shall be forwarded to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall thereafter
release said surety or guarantee upon application by the subdivider.
   G.   Certificate Of Occupancy: Construction of all required improvements for
the subdivision or phase of development shall be completed and accepted by the
city and any other approving agency prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy within the subdivision or phase. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-4-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Improvements: It shall be the responsibility of the owner or
subdivider to construct in accordance with city standards and specifications
the following minimum improvements for the subdivision/development:
      1.   Curbs And Gutters: Curb and gutters shall be installed on both sides
of all roads. All functionally classified roads shall include six inch (6")
straight curbs. Other local streets may have three inch (3") rolled curbs upon
approval by the city engineer. Other variations may be approved if deemed
appropriate by the city council.
      2.   Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks on both sides of the street may be
adjacent to the curb or may be meandering, with a landscape strip between
sidewalk and street. Except as where otherwise provided for below, all such
sidewalks shall have pavement at least five feet (5') wide along functionally
classified streets, and at least four feet (4') wide along local streets. Where
a configuration involving a landscape strip is implemented, the developer shall
ensure that the subdivision's covenants, conditions and restrictions provide
that either the homeowner, or the homeowners' association, if more appropriate,
maintain the landscape strip. For areas encompassed and affected by
title 5, chapter 9, "Gateway Street Beautification", of this code, all
specifications and requirements relating to sidewalks will be governed by the
requirements and provisions found therein.
      3.   Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkways, when required and/or
provided, shall have easements at least twenty feet (20') wide and pavement at
least seven feet (7') wide. All developments shall provide safe pedestrian and
bicycle access throughout the development that connects with existing and
proposed pedestrian and bicycle routes as shown in the Parma comprehensive
plan.
      4.   Storm Water Disposal: The management of storm water shall conform
with the city of Parma's storm water management policy (section
6-3-9 of this title).
      5.   Utilities: The extension of utilities shall be at the developer's
expense and shall have the capacity and placement necessary to serve land
located farther out. Such utilities include underground power, telephone and
street lighting. Concerning the provision of extension for water and sewer
lines, unless waived by council in favor of another plan which substantially
accomplishes the goals of this section, water and sewer lines shall be extended
and accounted for in accordance with the provisions of sections
 6-4-3 and
6-4-4 of this chapter, respectively.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer System: Connection to city sewer is required.
Approval of the subdivision shall be based on treatment capabilities, such as
density requirements, the need for entirely new systems and other treatment
possibilities that are in harmony with officially recognized practices of the
city.
      7.   Domestic Water System:
         a.   Connection to city water is required. Water hookups shall be
allowed only within the city limits unless approved by the council upon
recommendation of the city engineer.
         b.   If the city requires a larger water main to accommodate future
development than the size of line required by the city for the subdivision/
development, the developer shall install the larger line size required by the
city. If the developer is required to install a well under this provision, and
when appropriate, the city may waive the development's hookup fees up to the
cost of the well.
         c.   Four inch (4") blowoffs for water lines (city standard) shall be
required at the terminus of all dead end main lines unless a standard fire
hydrant is available.
      8.   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code
section 50-1303. Monuments shall be placed at all section and quarter corners,
and elsewhere as required by the city engineer. All monuments located in paved
streets, alleys or sidewalks will be encased in protective boxes approved by
the city engineer. For each subdivision phase or development, any portion of
which is located within a regulated floodplain, one elevation monument setting
forth the elevation and datum shall be located within a monument box and shall
be filed as a corner perpetuation record, as well as identified on the record
drawings. The location of the monument shall be approved by the city engineer.
      9.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider in
locations specified by the city, every three hundred feet (300'), or as
determined by the uniform fire code and the Parma rural fire district.
      10.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the
appropriate locations at each street intersection. Cost of street signs shall
be the responsibility of the developer and the signs shall be installed to city
specifications.
      11.   Streetlights: Streetlights shall be required to be installed by the
subdivider/developer at the intersections, along adjacent roadways and/or where
the city deems necessary throughout the subdivision/development. All costs to
install streetlights and poles shall be borne by the developer. All ongoing
cost for maintenance and operation shall be borne by the city.
      12.   Service Connections: All service connections for sanitary sewer,
domestic water and natural gas installed to the property line before placing
base gravel for the street.
      13.   Irrigation Improvements: For any new subdivision or PUD, to be
provided with a public water system and containing more than four (4) lots, a
pressure irrigation system shall be provided. All irrigation structures, lines
and drain lines except street storm drain lines shall be located out of the
street right of way. Except as where provided for below, city water may not be
used for irrigation purposes.
         a.   The requirement for installation of a pressurized irrigation
system may be waived by the city council when the applicant has established
that any of the following situations exist (the sale or transfer of an existing
water right shall not be grounds for requesting a waiver pursuant to this
provision):
            (1)   Where a sufficient surface irrigation water right does not
exist for the property. The lack of surface irrigation water right shall be
documented in writing by the appropriate irrigation district or canal company
and the department of water resources and shall be submitted with the
subdivision preliminary plat. In this case a waiver shall only be granted for
that portion of the subdivision that cannot be served.
            (2)   Where an existing surface water right cannot be delivered to
the property by an irrigation district or canal company due to current delivery
capacity or scheduling. In these situations the city council may still require
the installation of the pressure irrigation system, provided water rights can
be made available to the property and delivery system modifications can be made
so irrigation water can be supplied within two (2) years.
            (3)   Where the applicant has provided for another means of
delivery such as flood irrigation, if approved by the city engineer. The
applicant shall present the proposed alternative delivery system to the city
engineer at the time the waiver is requested.
            (4)   That due to the specific circumstances surrounding a new
subdivision, the cost of obtaining water rights, reestablishing water rights or
developing the system would impose an undue economic hardship on the developer.
For purposes of this section an undue economic hardship shall consist of a
showing that the cost per lot to develop the pressurized irrigation system
would be twenty five percent (25%) higher than the cost per lot for providing a
pressurized irrigation system to subdivisions of similar size and density
constructed in the city within the previous two (2) years; or the cost per lot
of the pressurized irrigation system would exceed five percent (5%) of the
expected per lot market value of the subdivision.
The developer shall bear the burden of providing documentation, acceptable to
the city engineer and city council, demonstrating and supporting the estimated
costs of construction of the pressurized irrigation system, and the cost per
lot for irrigation systems in those subdivisions built in the last two (2)
years as noted above, and the expected market value of the subdivision lots.
For phased developments, costs will be analyzed over all phases of the
development rather than the first phase only.
         b.   Should installation of a pressurized irrigation system be waived
by the city engineer, as outlined herein, compliance to Idaho Code section 31-
3805 is still required.
         c.   Requests for waivers shall be submitted to the city with the
preliminary plat, small subdivision or development application and shall be
accompanied by an irrigation report, prepared by a licensed Idaho registered
professional engineer, stating the location and availability of surface
irrigation water and documenting the basis for the waiver request. If
applicable, the irrigation report shall be accompanied by a letter from the
irrigation district or canal company stating that water rights and/or a
delivery system are not available to the property.
      14.   Off Site Improvements: Off site improvements of any of the above
where it is deemed necessary to properly serve the proposed development or
protect the integrity of the usefulness of existing off site improvements or
utilities.
      15.   Required Features: Common areas, open spaces, greenbelt, irrigation
or drainage easements along waterways. When such features have been required as
conditions of approval, the designated areas shall be designed, landscaped,
planted to lawn or a suitable ground cover, and maintained throughout the
warranty period in a manner appropriate to the described use. Unless otherwise
described, at a minimum, this shall include irrigation, weed control, and
periodic mowing. When these areas abut a water feature, the design and
maintenance shall include all lands to the water's edge.
   B.   Inspections:
      1.   The owner and/or subdivider shall retain a full time licensed
professional engineer or licensed construction manager who shall supervise the
construction inspection, certify that all improvements were constructed in
accordance with the approved improvement drawings and city standards and
furnish the city two (2) sets of the as built improvement drawings and
construction logs complete with ties to all water valves and service
connections, along with a digital copy of said documents in a format usable by
the city. The city or city engineer will make observations at their discretion.
Such observations, if performed shall be paid for by developer.
      2.   The city shall be notified when construction begins on any of the
improvements listed and prior to performing utility line pressure tests. Any
improvements deemed unsatisfactory by the city engineer shall be corrected at
the subdivider's expense.
   C.   Amended Plats: Amended plats must be filed as per the original. In the
event a plat of a subdivision has been recorded and major changes have been
made which change the subdivision materially, an amended plat shall be filed in
accordance with the regulations established in this chapter. Any change in
street location shall require an amended plat for that portion that is
affected. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-4-3: WATER LINE EXTENSION CREDITS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the following term shall have this
meaning:
   OFF SITE WATER FACILITY: Any water facility (including main lines, wells,
storage tanks, booster pump stations, pressure reducing valves, and related
facilities) which is located beyond the boundary of the development, and has
the capability of providing water service beyond the boundary of the
development. Water facilities located within existing roadways adjacent to the
new development boundary are not considered off site water extensions unless
they are requested by the city specifically to serve adjoining property.
Oversized facilities within the boundary of the development, excluding main
lines, may be considered off site if the city requires said facilities to have
excess capacity.
   B.   Methods Of Computing Credits:
      1.   Oversized Water Mains: Credits for oversized mains shall be based
upon the actual materials cost of the oversized main minus the materials cost
of an equivalent eight inch (8") diameter main. Reimbursement of the credits
shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      2.   On Site Stub Out: Credits for on site stub outs shall be based upon
the actual construction cost of the main line stub outs. Reimbursement of the
credits shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Off Site Water Facility: Credits for off site water facilities shall
be based on either subsection B3a or B3b of this section, as recommended by the
city engineer subject to approval by city council as part of the credit
agreement.
         a.   Credits for off site oversized facilities shall be based upon the
actual materials cost of the oversized facility minus the materials cost of an
equivalent facility to serve the new development. Reimbursement of the credits
shall be done in accordance with subsection C2 of this section.
         b.   Alternatively, credits for off site water facilities shall be
based upon the actual construction cost of the water facility prorated on a
percent of capacity utilized basis. A map shall be prepared which shows the
estimated eligible service area of the water facility which shall serve as the
basis for all calculations. The total credit due the developer shall be
calculated based upon the following equation:
 
                                    total service area (acres) - total
credit = actual construction cost  development area (acres)            
                                    total service area (acres)
 
For purposes of the credit calculation the total development area shall include
all area within the subdivision boundary including road right of way, open
area, common area, etc. Reimbursement of the credits shall be done in
accordance with subsection C3 of this section.
         c.   The capacity for off site water facilities shall be determined as
follows:
            (1)   The capacity of a water main extension shall be calculated by
the city engineer based on the total number of acres which can be serviced by
the main line. Total acreage which can be serviced by any off site main line
extension shall be based upon the actual total acreage of the proposed
development, plus the total acreage of land adjoining the water main located
within six hundred sixty feet (660') either side of the centerline of the main
line extension or as otherwise determined by the city engineer to define
property benefited.
            (2)   The baseline capacity for well construction or water supply
reimbursement shall be the water demands of the development at peak hour flow
plus the requisite fire flow.
            (3)   Additional capacity for such items as booster pump stations,
storage tanks, and pressure reducing valves shall be eligible for reimbursement
after the baseline water demands of the developer requesting reimbursement are
satisfied.
   C.   Credit Agreement: Upon final inspection and acceptance of the potable
water facility which is eligible for construction credits, a letter outlining
the total dollar amount of credits shall be issued to the developer by the city
engineer. The developer shall then execute a credit agreement with the city.
The credit agreement shall establish the payment terms:
      1.   On Site Oversizing And Stub Outs: For all on site oversizing or stub
outs, which are constructed at the request of the city, the amount of the
credit due to the developer will be paid from connection fees collected from
his development as they are collected at the time of building permit
application. All connection fees collected shall be placed in a separate
account. The developer shall then receive quarterly disbursement from the
dedicated credit account until the credit is satisfied.
      2.   Off Site Oversizing: For all off site oversizing, which is
constructed at the request of the city, the credit due to the developer will be
paid from connection fees collected from his development as they are collected.
All connection fees collected shall be placed in a separate account. The
developer shall then receive quarterly disbursement from the dedicated credit
account.
      3.   Off Site Water Facilities:
         a.   For all off site water facilities, which are constructed and paid
for by the developer, the city shall establish a "latecomer's fee" which shall
be charged to all property indicated by the service area boundary shown on the
service area map which receives benefit from the extension and did not
participate in financing the original construction. Seventy five percent (75%)
of the total service area shall be used for purposes of calculating the
latecomer's fee to account for potentially undevelopable property within said
service area. The fees collected shall be placed into a separate interest
bearing account. The developer shall then receive payments from this account on
a quarterly basis.
         b.   Payments shall be made for the principal plus interest until the
credit agreement is paid in full, or a period of ten (10) years, whichever is
sooner. The developer may request a five (5) year extension on the
reimbursement period within six (6) months of the period's expiration, and may
request a second five (5) year extension within six (6) months of the first
extension's expiration, for a total reimbursement period not to exceed twenty
(20) years, with each extension request subject to approval by city council.
Interest rate paid shall be established in the credit agreement. The city shall
charge a fee for administration of the "latecomer's" account which shall be
established in the credit agreement.
         c.   The latecomer's fee shall be calculated by the following
equation:
 
                             credit + administration fee
latecomer's fee ($/acre) =  (75%) (total service area – total development  
                             area)
 
      4.   Method Of Collecting Latecomer's Fees: All fees shall be based upon
gross development area and shall be collected by the city at the time of
preliminary plat application, final plat application, and/or building permit
application as directed by resolution of city council. Fees may be further
subdivided for collection purposes on an individual basis as follows:
         a.   For commercial and/or industrial developments the fees shall be
based upon the commercial lot area plus a percentage of any right of way and/or
common area as applicable.
         b.   For residential developments the fees shall be based upon a per
equivalent single-family dwelling basis based upon the total fee established on
the gross area of the subdivision divided by the number of equivalent single-
family dwellings. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-4-4: SEWER LINE EXTENSION CREDITS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the following term shall have this
meaning:
   OFF SITE SEWER FACILITY: Any sewer facility (including main lines, manholes,
pump stations, force mains, and related facilities) which is located beyond the
boundary of the development, and has the capability of providing sewer service
beyond the boundary of the development. Sewer facilities located within
existing roadways adjacent to the new development boundary are not considered
off site sewer extensions unless they are requested by the city specifically to
serve adjoining property. Oversized facilities within the boundary of the
development, excluding main lines, may be considered off site if the city
requires said facilities to have excess capacity.
   B.   Methods Of Computing Credits:
      1.   Oversized Gravity Sewer Main: Credits for oversized mains shall be
based upon the actual materials cost of the oversized main minus the materials
cost of an equivalent eight inch (8") diameter main. Reimbursement of the
credits shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      2.   Oversized Force Main: Credits for oversized force mains shall be
based upon the actual materials cost of the oversized line minus the materials
cost of an equivalent length of four inch (4") diameter pipe. Reimbursement of
the credits shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Oversized Lift Station: Credits for oversized lift stations shall be
based upon the actual materials cost of the oversized lift station minus the
materials cost of lift station equipment sized to meet the peak flow demands of
the development. Reimbursement of the credits shall be done in accordance with
subsection C1 of this section.
      4.   On Site Stub Out: Credits for on site stub outs shall be based upon
the actual construction cost of the main line stub outs. Reimbursement of the
credits shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      5.   On Site Over Depth: Credits for on site over depth shall be based
upon the actual bid amount for over depth excavation. In order to be eligible
for over depth reimbursement the project must be bid with an item for trench
excavation on an incremental basis for depths below eight feet (8.0') as
applicable for the specific project. Reimbursement of the credits shall be done
in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
      6.   Off Site Sewer Facility: Credits for off site sewer facilities shall
be based on either subsection B6a or B6b of this section, as recommended by the
city engineer subject to approval by city council as part of the credit
agreement.
         a.   Credits for off site oversized facilities shall be based upon the
actual materials cost of the oversized facility minus the materials cost of an
equivalent facility to serve the new development. Reimbursement of the credits
shall be done in accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
         b.   Alternatively, credits for off site sewer facilities shall be
based upon the actual construction cost of the sewer facility prorated on a
percent of capacity utilized basis. The capacity of the sewer facility shall be
calculated by the city engineer based upon the total number of acres which may
be serviced by the facility. A map shall be prepared which shows the estimated
eligible service area of the sewer facility which shall serve as the basis for
all calculations. The total credit due the developer shall be calculated based
upon the following equation:
 
                                    total service area (acres) - total
credit = actual construction cost  development area (acres)            
                                    total service area (acres)
 
For purposes of the credit calculation the total development area shall include
all area within the subdivision boundary including road right of way, open
area, common area, etc. Reimbursement of the credits shall be done in
accordance with subsection C1 of this section.
   C.   Credit Agreement: Upon final inspection and acceptance of the sewerage
facility which is eligible for sewer construction credits, a letter outlining
the total dollar amount of credits shall be issued to the developer by the city
engineer. The developer shall then execute a credit agreement with the city.
The credit agreement shall establish the payment terms.
      1.   On Site Oversizing And Stub Outs: For all on site oversizing or stub
outs, which are constructed at the request of the city, the credit due to the
developer will be paid from connection fees collected from his development as
they are collected at the time of building permit application. All connection
fees collected shall be placed in a separate account up to the full amount due
to the developer. The developer shall receive a quarterly disbursement from the
dedicated credit account for up to the full amount of the credit due.
      2.   Off Site Oversizing: For all off site oversizing, which is
constructed at the request of the city, the credit due to the developer will be
paid from connection fees collected from his development as they are collected
at the time of building permit application. All connection fees collected shall
be placed in a separate account up to the full amount due to the developer. The
developer shall receive a quarterly disbursement from the dedicated credit
account for up to the full amount of the credit due.
      3.   Off Site Sewer Facilities:
         a.   For all off site sewer facilities, which are constructed and paid
for by the developer, the city shall establish a "latecomer's fee" which shall
be charged to all property indicated by the service area boundary shown on the
service area map which receives benefit from the extension and did not
participate in financing the original construction. Seventy five percent (75%)
of the total service area shall be used for purposes of calculating the
latecomer's fee to account for potentially undevelopable property within said
service area. The fees collected shall be placed into a separate interest
bearing account. The developer shall then receive payments from this account on
a quarterly basis.
         b.   Payments shall be made for the principal plus interest until the
credit agreement is paid in full, or a period of ten (10) years, whichever is
sooner. The developer may request a five (5) year extension on the
reimbursement period within six (6) months of the period's expiration, and may
request a second five (5) year extension within six (6) months of the first
extension's expiration, for a total reimbursement period not to exceed twenty
(20) years, with each extension request subject to approval by city council.
Interest rate paid shall be established in the credit agreement. The city shall
charge a fee for administration of the "latecomer's" account which shall be
established in the credit agreement.
         c.   The latecomer's fee shall be calculated by the following
equation:
 
                             credit + administration fee
latecomer's fee ($/acre) =  (75%) (total service area – total development  
                             area)
 
      4.   Method Of Collecting Latecomer's Fees: All fees shall be based upon
gross development area and shall be collected by the city at the time of
preliminary plat application, final plat application, and/or building permit
application as directed by resolution of city council. Fees may be further
subdivided for collection purposes on an individual basis as follows:
         a.   For commercial and/or industrial developments the fees shall be
based upon the commercial lot area plus a percentage of any right of way and/or
common area as applicable.
         b.   For residential developments the fees shall be based upon a per
equivalent single-family dwelling basis based upon the total fee established on
the gross area of the subdivision divided by the number of equivalent single-
family dwellings.
         c.   Fees will only be collected from benefited development. (Ord.
541, 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose
6-5-2: Hillsides
6-5-3: Planned Unit Development; Condominium Development
6-5-3-1: Planned Unit Development
6-5-3-2: Condominium Development
6-5-4: Subdivision Within Floodplain
6-5-5: Subdivision For Cemetery
6-5-6: Areas Of Critical Concern
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify various types of special
developments that normally pose special concern to the planning commission and
the city council when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests.
Therefore, this chapter outlines requirements and design standards that shall
be taken into consideration when acting on special developments. The provisions
of this chapter are in addition to other applicable requirements of this title.
Required information shall be submitted to the administrator with the
preliminary plat. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-5-2: HILLSIDES:
   A.   Appearance And Preservation: In order to preserve, enhance and promote
the existing and future appearance and resources of hillsides, maximum
retention of natural topographic features and qualities of the following shall
be considered in subdivision review processes:
      1.   Skyline and ridge tops.
      2.   Rolling grassy landforms, including knolls, ridges and meadows.
      3.   Tree and shrub masses, grass, wildflowers and topsoil.
      4.   Rock outcroppings.
      5.   Streambeds, draws and drainage swales, especially where tree and
plant formations occur.
      6.   Characteristic vistas and scenic panoramas.
   B.   Hillside Development Evaluation:
      1.   All hillside development proposals shall take into account current
application of desirable land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering
geology, hydrology, civil engineering, environmental and civic design,
architecture and landscape architecture. Such current application includes, but
is not limited to:
         a.   Planning of development to fit the topography, soils, geology,
hydrology and other conditions existing on the proposed site.
         b.   Orienting development to the site so that grading and other site
preparation is kept to a minimum.
         c.   Shaping of essential grading to complement the natural landforms
and to minimize padding and terracing of building sites.
         d.   Division of large tracts into smaller workable units on which
construction can be completed within one construction season so that large
acreages are not left bare and exposed during the winter/spring runoff period.
         e.   Completion of paving as rapidly as possible after grading.
         f.   Allocation of areas not well suited for development because of
soil, geology or hydrology limitations for open space and recreation uses.
         g.   Minimizing disruption of existing plant and animal life.
         h.   Consideration of the view from and of the hills.
      2.   Areas having soil, geology or hydrology hazards shall not be
developed unless it is shown that their limitations can be overcome; that
hazard to life or property will not exist; that the safety, use or stability of
a public way or drainage channel is not jeopardized; and that the natural
environment is not subjected to undue impact.
   C.   Required Data: The developer shall retain professional expertise to
obtain the following information when requested by the commission, and all of
the following reports shall identify the specified area of building location:
      1.   Soil Reports: For any proposed hillside development a soil report
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The report shall include data
regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soil, conclusions
and recommendations for grading procedures, design criteria for corrective
measures and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be
developed.
      2.   Geology Report: For any proposed hillside development, a geology
report shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include
an adequate description of site geology and an evaluation of the relationship
between the proposed development and the underlying geology and recommendations
for remedial actions.
      3.   Hydrology Report:
         a.   For any proposed hillside development, a hydrology report shall
be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include an adequate
description of the hydrology, conclusions and recommendations regarding the
effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinions and
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed.
         b.   Flood frequency information shall be provided for the area
proposed for development.
   D.   Grading Plan:
      1.   A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted with each hillside
preliminary plat proposal and shall include the following information:
         a.   Approximate limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to
be achieved by the grading, including all cut and fill slopes, proposed
drainage channels and related construction.
         b.   Preliminary plans and approximate locations of all surface and
subsurface drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs
and other protective devices to be constructed.
         c.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from the grading site, including the location of
the disposal site.
      2.   A final grading plat shall be submitted with each final plat and
shall include the following information:
         a.   Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved
by the grading, including all proposed cut and fill slopes and proposed
drainage channels and related construction.
         b.   Detailed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface
drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs and other
protective devices to be constructed.
         c.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be
completed, including the total area of soil surface which is to be disturbed
during each stage together with estimated starting and completion dates. In no
event shall the existing ("natural") vegetative ground cover be destroyed,
removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to grading.
   E.   Development Standards:
      1.   Soils:
         a.   Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material, such
as vegetation and rubbish, and any other material which is determined by the
soils engineer to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not
conducive to stability.
         b.   Cuts and fills shall be designed to provide safety, stability and
adequate setback from property lines in accordance with city standard drawings
and specifications.
      2.   Roadways:
         a.   Road alignments should follow natural terrain and no unnecessary
cuts or fills shall be allowed.
         b.   One-way streets shall be permitted and encouraged where
appropriate for the terrain and when public safety would not be jeopardized.
         c.   The width of the graded section shall extend three feet (3')
beyond the curb back or edge of pavement on both the cut and fill sides of the
roadway. If sidewalk is to be installed parallel to the roadway, the graded
section shall be increased by the width of the sidewalk plus one foot (1')
beyond the curb back.
         d.   Standard concrete curb and gutter shall be installed along both
sides of paved roadways.
         e.   A pedestrian walkway plan shall be required.
      3.   Driveways And Parking: Combinations of collective private driveways,
cluster parking areas and on street parallel parking ways shall be used to
attempt to optimize the objectives of minimum soil disturbance, minimum
impervious cover, excellence of design and aesthetic sensitivity.
   F.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
      1.   The subdivider shall submit a slope stabilization and revegetation
plan which shall include a complete description of the existing vegetation, the
vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal, the vegetation to be
planted and slope stabilization measures to be installed. The plan shall
include an analysis of the environmental effects of such operations, including
the effects it may have on slope stability, soil erosion, water quality and
fish and wildlife.
      2.   Vegetation sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on
all disturbed areas as each stage of grading is completed. Areas not contained
with lot boundaries shall be protected with perennial vegetal cover after all
construction is completed. Efforts shall be made to plant those species that
tend to recover from fire damage and do not contribute to a rapid rate of fire
spread.
      3.   The subdivider shall be fully responsible for any destruction of
native vegetation proposed and approved for retention. He shall carry the
responsibility both for his own employees and for all subcontractors from the
first day of construction until the notice of completion is filed. The
subdivider shall be responsible for replacing such destroyed vegetation in kind
or its equivalent.
   G.   Maintenance: The owner of any private property on which grading or
other work has been performed pursuant to a grading plan approved or a building
permit granted under the provisions of this title shall continuously maintain
and repair all graded surfaces and erosion prevention devices, retaining walls,
drainage structures or means, and other protective devices, plantings and
ground cover installed or completed.
   H.   Utilities: All new service utilities shall be placed underground. (Ord.
541, 2-26-2007)
6-5-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT; CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT:
6-5-3-1: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose And Intent:
      1.   The planned unit development (PUD) process provides an opportunity
for land development that preserves natural features, allows efficient
provision of services, and provides common open spaces or other amenities not
found in traditional lot by lot development. The procedure may allow a
combination or variety of residential, commercial, office, technical and
industrial land uses. It also provides for the consistent application of
conditions of approval for the various phases of the planned unit development.
      2.   A planned unit development is intended to:
         a.   Permit greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative
design for development than generally is possible under conventional zoning
regulations;
         b.   Retain and preserve natural scenic qualities and topographic
features of open spaces; promote aesthetics; prevent disruption of natural
drainage patterns;
         c.   Promote the creation and efficient use of open space and park
area;
         d.   Provide a harmonious variety of neighborhood development and a
higher level of urban amenities.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit Required: Every planned unit development
requires a conditional use permit and shall be subject to all conditional use
permit application procedures as well as to procedures specified in this
chapter. When a PUD includes mixed land uses (zoning deviation) or is intended
to be subdivided for sale to separate ownerships upon completion, the
conditional use permitting procedure shall require two (2) public hearings, one
before the planning and zoning commission and one before the council.
   C.   Other Requirements: A PUD shall be subject to applicable development
requirements as set forth in
title 4, chapter 4 of this code; chapter 1 of this title; and sections
 6-5-4 and
6-5-6 of this chapter.
   D.   Ownership:
      1.   An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property
owner or a person having an existing interest in the property to be included in
the PUD. The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the
recorded owner or owners of property included in the development. However, the
application may be filed by the holder(s) of an equity interest in such
property.
      2.   Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire
project shall be under single or corporate ownership or control, and proof of
legal title must be presented with the final development plan.
   E.   Zoning Conformance: A PUD may be allowed by conditional use permit in
any zoning district when it is in substantial conformity with the underlying
zone and upon taking the following items into consideration:
      1.   The proposed uses shall not be detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses; nor shall they be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the public. The suitability of the proposal will be
considered for the location and specific site.
      2.   The density of the planned unit development considered as a whole
shall be in substantial conformity with the density of the underlying zoning
district.
      3.   Any variation from the basic zoning district requirements must be
warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the preliminary and final
development plan.
      4.   The final development plan must be in conformance with the
preliminary plan.
      5.   The planned unit development must meet the general objectives of the
comprehensive land use plan.
      6.   Existing and proposed streets and utility services must be suitable
and adequate for the proposed development.
      7.   An agreement may be required between the developer and the city that
delineates commitments of the developer to the city and of the city to the
developer.
   F.   Use Regulations: Any permitted or conditional uses shown in section
5-2-2 of this code, allowed in an underlying zoning district may also be
allowed in the planned unit development.
   G.   Use Exceptions: In the case of planned unit developments greater than
two (2) acres in size, the commission may authorize specified uses not
permitted or conditionally permitted by the use regulations of the zoning
district in which the development is located, provided the commission shall
find:
      1.   That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development; and
      2.   That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature
or so located as to be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood; and
      3.   That the development is phased so that the approval to construct the
exceptioned use or uses is coordinated with the construction of all or a
proportionate phase of the permitted use; and
      4.   That no more than twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the
planned unit development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the
exception; and
      5.   That the uses permitted by such exception are shown to contribute to
a coherent living style and sense of community; and
      6.   That the use exceptions will be located and so designed as to
provide direct access to a collector or arterial street without creating
congestion or traffic hazards.
   H.   Developer Benefits: Planned unit developments are intended to provide
certain benefits to the public and to the developer. The installation of public
improvements (streets, water, sewer, streetlights, etc.) and two (2) or more of
the amenities set forth herein, ensure a public benefit. To provide the
developer with an incentive to utilize the planned unit development process,
the following allowances may be incorporated into the proposal:
      1.   A variety of housing types may be included in residential projects
including attached units, detached units, single-family units and multiple
units.
      2.   Private streets may be utilized within the project subject to the
same standards for public streets set forth in section
6-3-2 of this title, and subject to approval by the city council based on
recommendations from the city planner, city engineer, public works supervisor
and fire chief.
      3.   Setbacks for buildings within the interior of the project may be
less than required in the zoning district. A distance of ten feet (10') shall
be maintained between all detached buildings unless greater separation is
required by fire or building codes.
      4.   The conditions of approval applied to a large planned unit
development concept plan shall be applied consistently to each subsequent phase
unless otherwise agreed to by both the applicant and the council.
      5.   Buildings may be clustered to preserve as open space those areas
considered to be environmentally sensitive, such as river areas, floodways,
foothills, and wetlands. Clustering of dwelling units, commercial and
industrial uses, is encouraged as long as buffer yards, open space and
emergency access are adequately planned. Buffer yards shall be required to
separate different uses in order to eliminate or minimize potential
interference and nuisances on adjacent properties.
      6.   Uses which are not allowed within the zoning district may be allowed
as part of the planned development subject to the twenty percent (20%)
exception requirements.
   I.   Development Standards: The development proposal shall be preplanned in
its entirety and be characterized by a unified site design. Approval of a
planned unit development shall substantially conform to the zoning district in
which the development is located unless otherwise provided herein and based on
the following:
      1.   Residential Density: The number of dwelling units allowed in a
planned unit development shall be calculated by taking the gross area, less the
area set aside for nonresidential excepted uses, less open spaces, churches,
schools, and public roadways, and dividing by the minimum lot area per dwelling
unit required by the zone in which the site is located. An increase in the
computed allowable maximum density, not to exceed twenty five percent (25%),
may be permitted upon recommendation of the commission that the increased
density is justified in terms of the relationship to open area, service demand
and the total quality and character of the project.
      2.   Yards: Along the periphery of the planned unit development, yards
shall be provided as required by regulations of the district in which the
development is located, unless an exception is provided. Where development
already exists at the periphery, the yards shall be matched, where practical
(e.g., side yards should be provided adjacent to side yards, rear yards
adjacent to rear yards and front yards opposite front yards).
      3.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall comply with the parking
requirements of the underlying zone. No common parking or maneuvering areas
shall be allowed within twenty feet (20') of the boundary of the PUD. All
common parking or maneuvering areas shall be buffered from adjacent properties.
The buffer area must be landscaped, screened, or protected by natural features
with the objective of minimizing adverse impacts to surrounding properties. In
addition to the above requirements, where on street parking is prohibited, at
least one-half (1/2) additional parking space per dwelling unit shall be
provided either in approved parking bays along the street or in an off street
parking area.
      4.   Signs: Signs shall comply with the signage ordinance (
title 5, chapter 10 of this code).
      5.   Storm Water Management: The management of storm water shall conform
with the city storm water management policy (section
 6-3-9 of this title).
      6.   Open Space/Common Areas/Amenities: For purposes of this chapter, the
following shall apply:
Unless otherwise approved, not less than ten percent (10%) of the total gross
area of a residential PUD shall be retained as permanent open space and shall
not include strips of less than fifteen feet (15') in width unless designed to
accommodate a water feature such as a pond or stream. A minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of land area of a PUD devoted to multiple-family residential use
shall consist of open space. Of this required open space, portions may be
"common area" used for recreational or other collective enjoyment by occupants
of the development, privately owned properties dedicated by easements to assure
that open space will be permanent, and lands developed as active recreational
areas or preserved in their natural state when such areas contain unique
natural assets such as groves of trees, ponds, rivers or streambeds. If ponds
are considered as part of the required open space, no more than fifty percent
(50%) of the open space shall be comprised of the ponds.
         a.   Dimension: In order to be functionally usable, open space should
exist in quantities of some minimum dimension. Therefore, the areas of each
parcel of open space to be used for active recreational use shall have a size
and shape consistent with the planned use.
         b.   Location: Open spaces shall be distributed within projects in
locations near the dwelling units of the people they are intended to serve.
         c.   Open Space: Land indicated as open space, common areas, amenities
(tennis courts, playgrounds, swimming pool, etc.), streets and sidewalks shall
be shown on the preliminary plan and provide on the plan that they be
permanently maintained as such either by a homeowners' association which
provides private covenants, an agreement with the developer or, if suitable and
mutually agreeable, by public dedications.
      7.   Easements: Easements for pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance
with the city's greenbelt/bike/pathway master plan.
      8.   Amenities: Amenities shall be provided as a part of each planned
unit development greater than one acre in size. The number of amenities
(minimum of 2) shall be proportionate to the size of the development and may
include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
         a.   Private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool, tennis
court, barbecue area or playground of a size appropriate to meet needs of the
development.
         b.   Provision for public access to any public open space, park or
river greenbelt.
         c.   Publicly dedicated land in a PUD for facilities such as school,
fire station, well site, public park, public recreational facility.
         d.   Additional open space for parkways, boulevards, or other features
designed to mitigate vehicle/traffic impact.
         e.   Other amenities as approved by the planning and zoning commission
and council.
      9.   Landscaped Open Space: All residential planned unit developments on
less than one acre shall provide each dwelling unit with a minimum of one
hundred (100) square feet of private, landscaped open space. The planning and
zoning commission should evaluate each project on its own merits and allow
variations to the open space standard where it can be shown that the provided
space meets the intent and purpose of this section.
      10.   Required Setbacks: Attached structures may be permitted in planned
unit developments. The minimum separation between detached buildings shall be
ten feet (10') unless greater separation is required by fire or building codes.
      11.   Industrial Uses: Industrial and technological uses shall be
developed in park like surroundings including landscape as buffers to screen
lighting and parking areas.
      12.   Private Streets: Private streets may be utilized within the project
subject to the same standards for public streets set forth in section
6-3-2 of this title when the following requirements are met:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission, after recommendation of the
fire chief, county sheriff, public works supervisor and city engineer, finds
that the design of the proposed streets, pedestrianways and off street parking
is adequate to protect public health, safety and welfare and shall adequately
accommodate anticipated uses within the development.
         b.   Private streets shall be owned by a homeowners' association, and
all future repair and maintenance costs, including reconstruction, shall be
borne by the homeowners.
   J.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Preapplication: Prior to the filing of an application for approval
of a planned unit development, the developer shall submit to the city a
conceptual plan of the development proposal to enable review and comment. Such
plan may be generalized in content and such submission shall not require the
official filing of an application and fee. The conceptual plan shall include
the following:
         a.   The general layout of the development showing at a minimum the
location of buildings, open space, types of landscaping, proposed uses.
         b.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed development site.
         c.   Information on plans for water, sewer, streets, drainage, and
other major components of infrastructure.
      2.   Preapplication Review: The engineer, fire chief, and city staff
shall review said plans and data as submitted and advise the developer as to
the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposed development with this
section.
      3.   Preliminary Development Plan/Conditional Use Permit: Upon completion
of the preapplication review, if the developer elects to proceed with the
planned unit development process, he shall pay all fees and file with the city
an application for a conditional use permit, preliminary development plan and
any other required application with the following required information:
         a.   All necessary information as specified for a conditional use
permit, plus necessary information on other applicable permits.
         b.   Fifteen (15) copies of preliminary development plan which shall
consist of drawings and supplementary written material adequate to provide the
following information:
            (1)   Statement of how the purpose and intent of subsection A of
this section will be achieved by the planned unit development, including
sketches or illustrations of the proposed character of the development, a
description of how the planned unit development will relate to surrounding land
uses and identify key neighborhood features, if any, and whether a zone change,
comprehensive plan amendment, variance, floodplain permit, preliminary plat is
also requested.
            (2)   An outline of the proposed planned unit development stating:
a) land use allocation by type, including the amount of land for housing, b)
density, c) open spaces, d) roadways and parking, e) the number and type of
housing units, and f) how necessary services will be provided and whether
services are publicly or privately owned and operated.
            (3)   Preliminary drawings at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'). The preliminary drawings shall display the following:
               (A) The name of the proposed planned unit development.
               (B) Date, north point and scale of drawing.
               (C) Legal description of the planned unit development, other
than metes and bounds, sufficient to define its location and boundaries.
               (D) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners,
designer of the PUD, and engineer, planner and surveyor, if any, and the date
of the survey.
               (E) Appropriate identification of the drawing as a preliminary
plan.
            (4)   Fifteen (15) copies of a natural features map showing an
inventory of existing site features including:
               (A) Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two foot (2')
intervals or less.
               (B) General soil types as documented by a soils engineer or
engineering geologist, if necessary.
               (C) Fish and wildlife habitats, if any.
               (D) Proposed and existing storm water facilities.
               (E) Water features, such as ponds, wetlands and watercourses.
               (F) Areas subject to flooding.
               (G) Natural features, such as trees, watercourses, historic
spots, and similar irreplaceable amenities.
               (H) Existing on site or abutting sanitary sewer, storm drainage
and water supply facilities. If such facilities are not on or abutting the
site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest ones.
               (I) Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of
record on and/or abutting the site.
               (J) Information on land areas contiguous and adjacent to the
proposed planned unit development and existing adjacent areas, including zoning
classifications, land uses, densities, circulation systems, public facilities,
unique natural features of the landscape, and approximate locations of nearby
structures.
            (5)   Fifteen (15) copies of a proposed site plan showing:
               (A) The locations of dwelling units and/or individual lots.
               (B) Location of major streets.
               (C) The proposed yard requirements or locations of single-family
homes for individual lots, if any.
               (D) The existing and proposed traffic circulation system serving
the planned unit development including: 1) off street parking and maneuvering;
2) points of access to existing public rights of way, and 3) a plan notation or
descriptive narrative outlining ownership of streets and parking areas.
               (E) The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation
system.
               (F) Conceptual plans for all necessary services including their
location and whether the services will be publicly or privately owned and
maintained. Location of utilities as would tie into the project.
               (G) Proposed location and treatment of any public or private
common areas or structures including open spaces, park or recreation areas, and
school sites.
               (H) The general treatment proposed for the periphery of the
site.
               (I) The approximate amount, location and type of buffering and/
or landscaping.
               (J) Proposed architectural styles.
            (6)   Environmental assessment, traffic study, grading plan or
other study necessary for the proposed site.
            (7)   If the applicant is requesting preliminary subdivision plat
approval concurrently with the preliminary PUD approval, a preliminary
subdivision plat shall be submitted.
            (8)   A development schedule indicating to the best of applicant's
knowledge the approximate date on which construction of all phases of the
entire project can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of development,
and completion date. The schedule, if approved by the planning and zoning
commission, shall become a part of the final development plan and shall be
adhered to by the owner of the property in the planned unit development and his
successors in interest.
            (9)   Any additional information required by the staff, engineer or
commission.
      4.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review: The commission shall review
the plans for conformance with this section and may set the date for a public
hearing. When a preliminary plat is to be considered as a part of the planned
unit development, the public hearings may be combined to fulfill subdivision
ordinance requirements. After such public hearing, the commission shall
recommend to the city council approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the conditional use permit and planned unit development and
preliminary plat if applicable.
      5.   Council Review: The council shall hold a second public hearing when
a PUD includes mixed land uses (zoning deviation). The council shall approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the conditional use/planned unit
development application. The council shall also approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove a preliminary plat at this time, where applicable.
Council approval of the plan shall be subject to the findings of this section.
      6.   Final Development Plan: Within one year after approval of the
preliminary development plan, the applicant shall submit to the city a final
development plan for the entire planned unit development or a final development
plan for the first phase of development if the PUD has been approved for phased
development. The applicant shall submit final development plans for any
subsequent phases within the time limit specified in the approval of the
preliminary development plan.
The final development plan may be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission upon approval by the city engineer of detailed improvement plans,
including private street construction, utility locations, drainage, dedications
of easements and public facilities, along with a proposed schedule for phasing.
Any necessary agreements for maintenance, etc., shall be prepared and submitted
for review and approval at this time.
Items that shall be included in the final development plan are:
         a.   Drawings And Information: The final development plan shall be
drawn in clear and legible form on good quality tracing paper or Mylar drafting
film at a reasonable size and scale to clearly show all required information.
Ten (10) prints of the plan made from this drawing shall accompany the
application.
         b.   Information Required On Plan: In addition to that required by the
preliminary development plan, or otherwise specified by law, the following
information shall be shown on the plan:
            (1)   Reference points of identified existing surveys related to
the PUD plan by distances and bearings and referenced to field book or map,
including stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and used to
determine the boundaries of the PUD.
            (2)   The location and width of streets and easements intercepting
the boundary of the tract.
            (3)   Easements and storm water drainage facilities clearly
identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. The width of
the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the
easement with respect to the PUD shall be shown. If the easement is being
dedicated by the plan, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's
certificates of dedication.
            (4)   Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose,
public or private.
            (5)   Other plans and studies as required at preliminary approval
such as a grading plan, soils engineer report, traffic study, detailed
landscaping and buffering plans where required.
         c.   Additional Certificates Or Drawings: The following may be
combined where appropriate:
            (1)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having
any recorded title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and
recording of the PUD.
            (2)   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating
the land intended for public use, if any.
            (3)   A certificate with the seal of and signed by the surveyor
responsible for the survey.
            (4)   A title report issued by the title insurance company
verifying ownership by the applicant of real property that is to be dedicated
to the public.
            (5)   A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the PUD.
         d.   Detailed Design Plan: A detailed design plan for the PUD site
including:
            (1)   The location of proposed buildings and structures, parking
and maneuvering areas and/or the location of allowable building areas of
individual lots, if any.
            (2)   Building setback lines, if any, that are to be made part of
the PUD restrictions.
            (3)   The location and type of proposed buildings, structures or
improvements in common open space areas.
            (4)   The location and detailed information for all proposed
streets, with approval by the city engineer for public streets and fire marshal
for private streets.
            (5)   A plan for water mains and fire hydrants.
            (6)   A plan for sanitary sewer approved by the city engineer.
            (7)   A plan for storm water drainage with approval by the city
engineer.
            (8)   Plans for additional improvements such as pedestrianways,
street lighting, public utilities, street trees, etc.
         e.   Landscaping And Buffering Plan: A landscaping and buffering plan
for common open space areas, the periphery of the PUD and other required
locations. The plan shall show areas to remain in natural vegetation; and, in a
clear manner, the area, sizes, numbers and general types of plant and other
materials to be used; revegetation of common open space areas and periphery
areas disturbed during the construction of services, dwellings or other
facilities; proposed schedule, if cannot be completed prior to occupancy of
dwellings or as otherwise required by the conditions of approval; and, an
improvement guarantee of a sufficient amount shall be required to assure timely
completion.
      7.   Commission Recommendation: The planning and zoning commission shall
recommend to the council approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval
of the final development plan.
      8.   Council Action: The council shall approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the final planned unit development plan and the
final subdivision plat or phasing proposal, where applicable. Approval of the
final plan shall constitute the requirements for the land in the planned unit
development. Any subsequent changes from the final plan shall be subject to
approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council.
   K.   Improvement Guarantees:
      1.   Prior to issuance of building permits for structures, the applicant
shall either install and complete all private service improvements, including
streets, pedestrianways, utilities, landscaping and buffering, or file an
improvement guarantee for these items.
      2.   The improvement guarantee is an agreement between the applicant and
city specifying a development schedule setting forth when service improvements
will be made.
      3.   The agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney,
and shall be filed with the city clerk.
      4.   The applicant shall file with the agreement one of the following to
assure his full and faithful performance:
         a.   A certified check or checks;
         b.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state of Idaho.
         c.   Other surety acceptable to the city.
         d.   Assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for the
amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated costs of
improvements approved by the city engineer, including related engineering and
city inspections.
         e.   At the discretion of the city, the improvement guarantee may be
in the form of separate bonds or checks covering individual portions or
specific types of improvements, rather than one bond or check covering the
work.
         f.   Occupancy permits shall not be issued unless all improvements and
conditions of approval have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the building
official or the applicant has filed an improvement guarantee for all such
items.
         g.   The building official shall not authorize the city clerk to
return the improvement guarantee or guarantees until the improvements related
to the guarantee are completed to the satisfaction of the building official.
   L.   Extension: The applicant may request one extension of the one year time
limit not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the
preliminary development plan one year limit.
   M.   Amendments:
      1.   Any subsequent amendment to the final development plan changing
location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by
the commission without additional public hearings, if required by engineering
or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. In
no case shall the commission authorize changes which may cause any of the
following:
         a.   A change in the use or character of the development.
         b.   An increase in overall coverage of structures.
         c.   An increase of the intensity of use.
         d.   An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public
utilities.
         e.   A reduction of off street parking and loading space.
         f.   A reduction in required pavement widths.
      2.   All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks and building
tracts, or in the provision of common open spaces and changes other than those
listed above which constitute substantial alteration of the original plan shall
require a public hearing before the commission and approval by the council.
(Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-5-3-2: CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Required: Every condominium project requires a
conditional use permit application and shall be subject to all conditional use
procedures. In addition, all city codes relating to plats, recording,
subdivisions and zoning shall apply to condominium developments.
   B.   Condominium Property Act: "Condominium", defined in Idaho Code section
55-101B, as an estate consisting of: 1) an undivided interest in common in real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with; 2) a separate interest in real property, in an interest
or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof, shall be
developed in accordance with Idaho Code section 55-1501, the "condominium
property act". (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-5-4: SUBDIVISION WITHIN FLOODPLAIN:
   A.   Flood Areas:
      1.   No construction shall occur in a floodway. When construction is
approved near the floodway, all buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from the floodway line to provide an access strip for emergency
construction equipment. Any deviation from this requirement must be approved by
the city engineer.
      2.   For any proposed subdivision that is located within a floodplain,
the subdivider shall provide the commission with a development plan of adequate
scale and supporting documentation that will show and explain at least the
following:
         a.   Location of all planned improvements.
         b.   The location of floodways and the floodway fringe in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
         c.   The location of the present water channel.
         d.   Any planned rerouting of waterways.
         e.   All major drainageways.
         f.   Areas of frequent flooding.
         g.   Means of floodproofing buildings.
         h.   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
         i.   Provide permanent elevation bench marks.
      3.   To give additional guidance in approving any proposed subdivisions
within a floodplain, the commission shall review proposed developments
considering that new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to one foot (1') or higher or above the level of the 100-
year flood; and, for new construction or substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be
elevated to one foot (1') or higher or above the level of the 100-year flood
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be
floodproofed up to the level of the 100-year flood.
   B.   Justification For Development: Upon determination that buildings are
planned within the floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated
within the floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the subdivider
shall demonstrate conclusively that such development will not present a hazard
to life or limb, hazard to property, adverse effects on the safety, use or
stability of a public way or drainage channel and not have an adverse impact on
the natural environment.
   C.   Appropriateness Of Subdivision:
      1.   In determining the appropriateness of subdivision for land located
within a floodplain, the commission and city shall consider the objectives of
this title, and at least the following:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to the increased flood
heights or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads and intended uses.
         b.   The danger that intended uses may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
         c.   The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and
the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions under flood conditions.
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damages and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         f.   The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location.
         g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed subdivision and land uses.
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         i.   The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive
plan and any floodplain management program for the area.
         j.   The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in
times of flood.
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
         l.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      2.   No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills,
structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually
or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If only
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, development shall be
limited to that part and the council shall require development to proceed
consistent with the determination.
   D.   Floodproofing Plans: Floodproofing plans must be individually approved
by the city upon recommendation from the commission before such uses are
constructed. Floodproofing may include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
      2.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or similar
methods of closure.
      3.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressure.
      4.   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
      5.   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
      6.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
      7.   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
      8.   Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface
drainage systems to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood
pressures.
      9.   Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris.
      10.   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm
waters into buildings or structures.
      11.   Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits and
electrical appliances so that they are protected from inundation by the
regulatory flood.
      12.   Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids or other toxic materials which could be hazardous
to public health, safety and welfare at elevations above the height associated
with the regulatory protection elevation; or design of such facilities to
prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage containers which
could result in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters. (Ord. 541, 2-
26-2007)
6-5-5: SUBDIVISION FOR CEMETERY:
   A.   Function: The developer shall provide the planning commission with
written documentation that will sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery
will be used for either human or animal remains and the functions that are
anticipated on the property.
   B.   Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural platting requirements
and management requirements that are outlined in Idaho Code title 27. (Ord.
541, 2-26-2007)
6-5-6: AREAS OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
   A.   General: The development of any hazardous or unique areas that have
previously been designated as areas of critical concern by the city upon
recommendation by the commission, or so designated by the state, shall demand
that special consideration be given by the subdivider to assure that the
development is necessary and desirable in the public interest in view of
existing unique conditions. Examples of land areas that may be designated as an
area of critical concern are as follows:
      1.   Unstable soils.
      2.   Unique animal and wildlife habitat.
      3.   Unique plant life habitat.
      4.   Scenic areas.
      5.   Historically significant areas.
      6.   Floodplains.
      7.   Other areas of critical concern.
   B.   Plan Submission: The subdivider shall prepare and submit an
environmental impact statement for those areas as above noted and designated
along with the preliminary plat application.
   C.   Content Of Environmental Impact Statement: The content of the
environmental impact statement shall usually be prepared by a team of
professionals that will provide answers to the following questions:
      1.   What environmental impacts will probably occur (i.e., wildlife,
plant life, social, economic, physical, etc.) as a result of the proposed
development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative plans could be developed so as
not to cause significantly detrimental environmental impact?
      3.   What adverse effects of the proposed development cannot be avoided?
(Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 6
VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Application Procedure
6-6-2: Action On Request
6-6-1: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Required: Any property owner desiring to have an existing subdivision,
public right of way or easement vacated, or desiring to dedicate a street right
of way or easement, shall complete and file an application with the
administrator and also file such other applications as are otherwise required
by law. These provisions shall not apply to any street right of way or easement
to be shown on a recorded plat of a subdivision.
   B.   Placed On Planning Commission Agenda: Upon receipt of the completed
application and other information as may be required, the administrator shall
affix the date of application acceptance thereon. Said application shall then
be placed on the agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting of the
planning commission. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-6-2: ACTION ON REQUEST:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommendations: The commission shall review the
request and any agency response and make a recommendation to the city for
approval, conditional approval or denial.
   B.   City Action:
      1.   When considering an application for vacation procedures, the city
shall establish a date for public hearing and give such public notice as
required by law. The city may approve or deny the application. Whenever public
rights of way or lands are vacated, the city shall provide adjacent property
owners with appropriate assurances in the form of a quitclaim deed or other
documents for said vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed
by law.
      2.   When considering an application for dedication, the city may approve
or deny the application. When a dedication is approved, any required street
improvements shall be constructed or a bond furnished assuring construction,
prior to acceptance of the dedication. To complete the acceptance of any
dedication of land, the owner shall furnish to the city a deed describing the
lands to be recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 7
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Waivers
6-7-2: Amendments
6-7-1: WAIVERS:
   A.   Justification: Where the planning commission finds that compliance with
this title would cause unusual hardship because of exceptional and unique
conditions of topography, access, location, shape, size, drainage or other
physical features of the site, the minimum requirements of this title may be
modified to mitigate the hardship, provided that the development is in keeping
with the purposes of this title. No such modifications may be granted if it
would have the effect of nullifying the purpose of the zoning regulations of
the city, the comprehensive plan or this title.
   B.   Economic Gain Alone Not Sufficient: The fact that an owner could
realize a greater financial return from his property by subdividing said
property contrary to these regulations is not a sufficient reason for hardship.
Hardship cannot be proved where it can be shown that property was purchased
with the knowledge of existing restrictions, nor can hardship be claimed in
terms of prospective sales or potential customers. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
6-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
The council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations
and provisions of this title in the following manner:
   A.   Planning Commission Hearing: The planning commission, prior to
recommending an amendment, supplement or repeal of this title, shall conduct at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity
to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the
time and place and a summary of the proposed amendment, supplement or repeal to
be discussed shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction. The commission shall also make available a
notice to other papers, radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction
for use as a public service announcement. Following the commission hearing, if
the commission makes a material change in the regulations of this title, other
than that published for the present hearing, further notice and hearings shall
be provided before the commission forwards its recommendation to the council. A
record of the hearings, findings made and actions taken shall be maintained.
   B.   Council Hearing: The council, prior to adoption of an amendment,
supplement or repeal of this title, shall hold at least one public hearing
using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission. The council
shall not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing or take
action on a proposed amendment until recommendations have been received from
the commission. Following the hearing of the council, if the council makes a
material change in this title, other than that published for the present
hearing, further notice and hearings shall be provided before the council
adopts the amendment, supplement or repeal. (Ord. 541, 2-26-2007)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Streets and Alleys in City Additions
7-1-2: Removal of Snow and Ice
7-1-3: Defacing Street Signs
7-1-4: Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
7-1-1: STREETS AND ALLEYS IN CITY ADDITIONS:
Streets and alleys laid out in any addition to the City shall be continuous
with and correspond in directions and width to the streets and alleys of the
City to which they are in addition. (1959 Code §9-401)
7-1-2: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE:
   A.   Any and all persons owning or occupying premises abutting or adjoining
any sidewalk in the City must keep all snow and ice removed from such sidewalk
at all times. (1959 Code §9-201, amd. Ord. 599, 2-11-2020)
   B.   No person shall deposit snow or ice into City streets or alleys. (Ord.
599, 2-11-2020)
   C.   Abatement; Assessment of Costs: Should any person fail, neglect or
refuse to remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk in front of his premises for
a period of twelve (12) hours, then, in that event, the said snow or ice, or
both, may be removed at the expense of the City and the expense thereof will be
assessed as a tax. Such assessment shall be certified to the County Assessor or
other proper County official having charge of the making of the assessment role
and such assessment shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the
same manner as other City taxes are collected. (1959 Code §9-202, amd. Ord.
599, 2- 11-2020)
   D.   Violations; Penalties: In addition to the abatement provisions of this
Section for removal of snow at the owner's expense, a violation of subsections
(A) or (B) above shall be an infraction punishable as set forth in Section 1-4-
1 of this Code. (Ord. 419, 2-27-89, amd. Ord. 599, 2-11-2020)
7-1-3: DEFACING STREET SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to mutilate or deface in any way any of the
street signs belonging to the City. (Ord. 54, 1912; 1990 Code)
7-1-4: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Construction Specifications: All sidewalks hereafter constructed within
the Municipality shall be five feet (5') in width, unless a different width be
approved by the Council, and shall be constructed of cement to a depth of four
inches (4") at a ratio of five (5) parts gravel to one part cement, broomed
finished and sloping from the inside toward the street at a grade level of not
more than one-half inch (1/2") to five feet (5').
   B.   Maintenance and Repair: All sidewalks within the Municipality shall be
kept in a good state of repair and in a safe condition for the use of
pedestrians, such repair and maintenance to be the responsibility of the owner
of the property in front of which a sidewalk is located.
   C.   New curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed at the expense of
the property owner in conjunction with any new construction or modifications of
existing buildings on any property which abuts a public street, road, avenue,
boulevard, highway or other public street, road, avenue, boulevard, highway or
other public way. New curb, gutter and sidewalk will not be required under the
following conditions:
      1.   If, in the opinion of the proper authority, the existing curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk is in good repair and to an acceptable line and grade
which conforms to the line and grade of the connecting curb, gutter and/or
sidewalk in the same area, it may be retained.
      2.   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall not be required or allowed to be
constructed or may be deferred if, in the opinion of the proper authority, the
improvement would create a traffic hazard or an unusual drainage problem.
      3.   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks are not required for minor
modifications and improvements to existing buildings when the modifications and
improvements do not constitute more than twenty percent (20%) of the square
footage of the existing building.
   D.   Any person altering, removing, replacing, repairing or installing any
portion of sidewalks and/or curbs and gutters shall first obtain a permit from
the city’s building department. A nonrefundable permit fee as set by resolution
Council shall be paid to the city at the time the permit is obtained. All
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, corners, and/or approach and access ramps shall
be installed in compliance with the current edition of the “Idaho Standards For
Public Works Construction (ISPWC) Technical Manual” and the Americans with
disabilities act (ADA) both of which may be reviewed on the city of Parma
website with the following conditions:
      1.   When placing new curbs, gutters and sidewalks any damaged sections
of the existing asphalt or concrete street must be replaced. If the
construction of new curbs, gutters and sidewalks does not meet the edge of the
existing street, the street must be widened to the new curb. This additional
paving must meet all city standards and must be graded to drain as required and
built at owner expense.
      2.   Failure to comply with this article may result in rejection of all
or a part of any work completed and reconstruction at the expense of the owner.
   E.   No person shall place any obstruction on any sidewalk within the City
of Parma that interferes with the movements of any person or persons upon the
sidewalk.
   F.    In the event the owner of the property in front of which a sidewalk is
located does not repair nor put in a safe condition such sidewalk within thirty
(30) days after written notice by the Council or its representative, the
Council may cause such repairs to be made or such sidewalk to be removed and
replaced with an adequate sidewalk and assess the cost thereof against such
private property, such assessment to be certified by the Clerk to the County
Assessor or Auditor and such assessment to be placed on the assessment roll and
collected for the City in the same manner as other Municipal taxes are
collected. (1959 Code §§ 9-501 - 9-503; amd. Ord. 621, 2-13-2024)
CHAPTER 2
AIRPORT CODE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Short Title
7-2-2: Conflicting Regulations
7-2-3: Definitions
7-2-4: Airport Manager
7-2-5: Application Of Provisions; Compliance Required
7-2-6: Application For Use Of Airport
7-2-7: Aircraft Operators
7-2-8: Regulations Involving Aircraft
7-2-9: Fueling Rules And Regulations
7-2-10: Business And Commercial Operations
7-2-11: Flying Clubs
7-2-12: Lease Rates And Other Charges
7-2-13: Prohibited And Restricted Acts And Conditions
7-2-14: Authority To Remove Property
7-2-15: City Jurisdiction
7-2-16: Zoning Purpose
7-2-17: Airport Zones
7-2-18: Airport Zone Height Limitations
7-2-19: Use Restrictions
7-2-20: Permits
7-2-21: Enforcement
7-2-22: Appeals
7-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited and shall be known as the AIRPORT CODE. (Ord. 391, 5-
24-1982)
7-2-2: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
When a provision in this chapter conflicts with another provision in this code,
the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
definitions apply:
   AIRCRAFT: A vehicle used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air
such as: airplane, rotorcraft, lighter than air craft, glider or any other
flying machine now known or hereafter invented.
   AIRPORT: The Parma municipal airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet from sea level, i.e., two thousand two hundred twenty eight
feet (2,228').
   APPROACH SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
section
7-2-18 of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES: These zones are set
forth in section
7-2-17 of this chapter.
   BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: The use of the airport by any "person", as
defined herein, as a base for the conducting of commercial activities such as,
but not limited to, the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or
mail, for paid instruction in aviation or any aviation related field; for the
sale of fuels, aviation supplies and materials; for aircraft rental, sales,
maintenance or service, or for any aviation or nonaviation activity including
the sale of refreshments or any commodity or service.
   CONICAL SURFACE: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
   FAA: The federal aviation administration of the United States of America, as
defined in the federal aviation act of 1958, as same now exists or hereafter be
amended.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION: An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: The areas of the primary surface coincides in size
and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This
surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport
elevation.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above
the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
   LANDING AREA: The public use runway system of the airport maintained by the
city for landing and taking off, and the necessary clearance areas.
   NONCONFORMING USE: Any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land
that is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and exists at the time
the inconsistent provision is adopted.
   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
   OPERATIONAL AREAS: Any place on the landing area of the airport and shall
also include the public use taxiways and ramps and the necessary rights of way
and clearance areas therefor, but shall not include any such areas under lease
to a tenant or lessee on the airport.
   OPERATOR: One who operates aircraft.
   OWNER: The registered and/or legal owner of an aircraft according to the
files and records of the FAA.
   PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRIMARY SURFACE: A two hundred fifty foot (250') wide surface longitudinally
centered on a runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface,
the primary surface extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that
runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard
surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface is set forth in section
7-2-17 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is
the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RAMP: An area designated as a ramp and used for the parking and maneuvering,
loading and unloading and servicing of aircraft while they are on the ground.
   ROAD: All areas designated as public use roads or streets for the exclusive
use of ground vehicles but shall not include any such areas under lease to a
tenant or lessee on the airport.
   RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   SERVICING OF AIRCRAFT: Only minor repairs thereof.
   TAXIWAYS: All areas designated as public use taxiways and used for the
exclusive use of aircraft movement while on the ground, but shall not include
any such areas under lease to a tenant or lessee on the airport.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES: Surfaces extending outward at ninety degree (90°)
angles from the runway centerline, and the runway centerline extended, at a
slope of seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides
of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surface, extend a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured horizontally
from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety degree (90°) angles to the
extended runway centerline.
   UNDEVELOPED AREAS: All the land on the airport except that defined as
operational areas and roads and except land legally used by and under lease to
a tenant or lessee.
   UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight and less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-4: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The airport manager shall be appointed by the mayor upon the advice and consent
of the city council, based upon the recommendations of the airport committee 1
, and shall hold said office on a yearly basis terminating December 31 of each
year. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. 1990 Code; Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
7-2-5: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   The rules and regulations hereinafter set forth, and all orders,
instructions, rules and regulations promulgated under authority herein
prescribed, shall apply to and be in full force and effect upon the city
airport as it is now or may hereafter be constituted, and all persons using the
facilities of the airport shall observe the same, and such observance shall be
a condition under which all persons may use such facilities.
   B.   All aeronautical activities at the airport shall be conducted in
conformity with current provisions of the civil air regulations issued by the
federal aviation administration, and the state of Idaho aeronautical regulatory
agency. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
   C.   The city council may approve by resolution additional rules that,
together with local, state, and federal laws, govern the use of airport
property. The city shall mail a copy of airport rules to persons that have
leased airport property. All persons using the facilities of the airport shall
be governed by the rules and regulations herein prescribed and by the
provisions of the laws and ordinances. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-6: APPLICATION FOR USE OF AIRPORT:
An application of any flying club, business or commercial operation or general
aviation operator for license or lease of airport property, including rental of
a tie down, shall provide the following: (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552,
3-9-2009)
   A.   Proof of current, adequate insurance policies including public
liability and property damage liability, each with a hold harmless agreement in
favor of the city, its officers and employees, in the following minimum
amounts:
 
Public liability, per person   $1,000,000.00
Public liability, per accident 2,000,000.00
Property damage                1,000,000.00
 
(Ord. 395, 5-23-1983; amd. 1990 Code; Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
   B.   Description of type of license and type of operation to be conducted at
the airport.
   C.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
   D.   Statement agreeing to comply with all applicable standards as set forth
herein.
   E.   Other such informational items as determined by the city council. (Ord.
391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-7: AIRCRAFT OPERATORS:
Operators of aircraft entering or leaving the traffic pattern of the airport or
using the runways or movement areas for the purpose of landing or taking off
shall be the holders of a valid current, private pilot or commercial pilot
certificate with ratings appropriate to the type of aircraft operated and
conditions under which they are operating. Reciprocal certificates issued by
foreign governments are acceptable if the authorizations contained in the
certificates are comparable to the domestic certificates mentioned and are so
accepted by the FAA. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-8: REGULATIONS INVOLVING AIRCRAFT:
   A.   Operation And Maintenance:
      1.   No person shall navigate, land, fly, service, move, maintain or
repair any aircraft or conduct any aviation activities upon, on or from the
airport other than in conformity with current FAA rules and regulations
established under federal authority, including all current air traffic rules
established by the airport and FAA.
      2.   No person shall taxi an aircraft until he is certain, after visual
inspection, that there will be no danger of collision with any person or
object. All aircraft shall be taxied at a slow and reasonable speed.
   B.   Storage And Repairs: Aircraft shall be stored and repairs shall be made
only on the leased sites or tie down areas designated.
   C.   Securing Of Unattended Aircraft: No aircraft shall be left unattended
on any part of the airport, including leased premises, unless properly secured.
The securing of aircraft shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or
operator of the aircraft, and the city and its officers, employees and agents
shall be in no way held responsible.
   D.   Parking Of Aircraft: Parking of aircraft shall be permitted only in
designated areas.
   E.   Junked, Wrecked Aircraft: Unairworthy aircraft, wrecks, junkers or
parts thereof shall not be parked or stored anywhere on the airport or leased
sites unless stored completely inside an enclosed hangar or awaiting bona fide
scheduled repairs by a bona fide commercial aviation business on the air
terminal.
   F.   Immediate Notice of Accidents, Collisions, and Crashes Required:
      1.   When an aircraft is involved in an accident, collision, or crash at
the Parma City Airport, resulting in injury to or death of any person, or
damage to any property, the pilot shall, after rendering any aid necessary,
immediately report such occurrence to the Police Department of the City of
Parma.
      2.   If the pilot or co-pilot of an aircraft which is involved in an
accident, collision, or crash at the Parma City Airport is incapacitated or
otherwise incapable of giving immediate notice of such occurrence to the Parma
Police Department, any other person or persons involved in such occurrence
shall, after rendering any aid necessary, give or cause to be given notice of
the occurrence to the Parma Police Department.
   G.   Violations and Penalties: Violations of this Section shall be a
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009; Ord. 600, 7-
1-2019)
7-2-9: FUELING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   No aircraft shall be fueled or drained of fuel while the engine is
running.
   B.   No person in or upon areas where fueling or defueling is being
conducted shall do or fail to do any act if the doing or omission thereof
endangers or is likely to unreasonably endanger persons or property.
   C.   No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch
electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling.
   D.   During fueling, the aircraft and the fuel dispensing apparatus shall
both be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential.
   E.   Persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft shall exercise
care to prevent overflow of fuel.
   F.   Fueling hoses and defueling equipment shall be maintained in a safe
condition.
   G.   Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of personnel
engaged in fueling and defueling operations. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord.
552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-10: BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS:
   A.   License Required: No business of any kind shall be conducted in an
airport building or in or on hangars, flying fields, ramps, buildings,
structures, runways, loading areas and/or physical facilities under the
control, management and operation of the airport, including any of the
approaches thereto, except by express license from the city council. The
invasion of any of said areas by any person soliciting or conducting business
of any kind, except under license from the city council, is hereby declared to
be a trespass and an offense. The display by any person upon said areas of any
commercial advertising, banners, signs, insignia or solicitation of business by
any means, without such license, is hereby declared to be a trespass.
   B.   Conditions Of License And Lease: Before any business or commercial
operation may be conducted, said operation shall secure a license and a lease
of airport land from the city council under the following conditions:
      1.   Provide proof of ownership and possession of current FAA licenses
and permits for said business or commercial operation. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982;
amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
      2.   Furnish proof of adequate insurance, including hangar keeper's
liability, public liability and property damage liability, each with a hold
harmless agreement in favor of the city, its officers and employees in the
following minimum amounts:
 
Public liability, per person            $1,000,000.00
Public liability, per accident          2,000,000.00
Property damage                         1,000,000.00
Hangar keepers' liability, per accident 500,000.00
 
and furnish proof of adequate vocational and occupational insurance required by
state and federal law. (Ord. 395, 5-23-1983; amd. 1990 Code; Ord. 552, 3-9-
2009)
      3.   Provide a building which meets all city and state building codes 1 .
      4.   If involved in crop dusting, meet and continually comply with all
rules and regulations of the Idaho department of agriculture relating to aerial
application of pesticides, fertilizers and other chemicals and employ pilots
who have appropriate and current FAA pilot and approved medical certificates.
   C.   Buildings For Business Or Commercial Activities:
      1.   Buildings used for commercial activities may not be used for the
storage of anything other than material or products needed and used for said
specific activity. The airport manager may inspect the buildings and contents
at any time to enforce compliance. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-
2009)
      2.   All buildings placed upon the airport by a lessee shall be located
on areas designated by the airport manager. Such buildings must be removed upon
the expiration or earlier termination of any lease term or said buildings will
automatically revert to the city. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §39-4101 et seq. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
7-2-11: FLYING CLUBS:
   A.   Purpose: A flying club must be organized as a nonprofit corporation
under the laws of the state of Idaho or of the United States for the purpose of
fostering flying for pleasure, developing skills in aviation and developing an
awareness and appreciation of aviation requirements and techniques in the
general public.
   B.   Roster Of Officers And Directors: A current certified roster of
officers and directors and their addresses must be filed annually with the
airport manager. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-12: LEASE RATES AND OTHER CHARGES:
   A.   General Aviation Lease: Designated areas may be leased for a term of up
to a maximum of twenty (20) years for a payment of eight cents ($0.08) per
square foot per year, or at such rate as may be set from time to time by
resolution of the city council. In addition to rates set by the city council,
rent is automatically adjusted annually effective January 1 each year according
to the percentage increase of the consumer price index (bureau of labor
statistics) using the western urban reported previous twelve (12) calendar
months. All annual lease payments are due and payable, in advance, to the city
on January 1. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
   B.   Tie Downs: The fee for use of an airport tie down shall be five dollars
($5.00) per month per tie down or any part of a month over one day for less
than twelve (12) months, payable in advance. The yearly tie down fee shall be
charged for a single day use of any tie down.
   C.   Charges For Moving Disabled Aircraft: Should pilot, owners or agents
authorize airport employees to remove disabled aircraft from runways, ramps,
taxiways or other operational or undeveloped areas on the airport, charges will
be made for equipment and labor at currently established prices and rates.
(Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 542, 7-9-2007; Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-13: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Restricted Areas: No person or surface vehicle, other than those
persons in aircraft operating on the airport or in vehicles authorized to
service or support such aircraft, shall enter the operational area unless with
approval of the manager of the airport.
   B.   Conduct Of Business; Soliciting: No person may solicit, offer for sale
or hire for sale or engage in any business or commercial or noncommercial
activity of any nature on or from the airport except from a fixed place of
business or operation and in conformance with an appropriate lease or permit.
   C.   Garbage And Refuse Disposal: No person shall deposit substances on the
airport which may cause damages or be a nuisance or a hazard to persons or
property. No person shall place, dispose or deposit in any manner trash,
garbage or refuse in or upon the operational areas, undeveloped areas or roads
except at such places and under such conditions as the airport manager may from
time to time prescribe.
   D.   Damage To Property: Any and all airport property destroyed, injured or
damaged shall be paid for by the person or persons responsible for such
destruction, injury or damage thereto.
   E.   Use Of Liquor And Drugs: No pilot or any other member of the crew of an
aircraft in operation on the airport, nor any person directly attending or
assisting in said operation on the airport, shall be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or any drug to a degree which renders him incapable of
safely performing his duties, nor shall any passenger thereof be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug to a degree which would endanger
the safety of any person using the airport, as more fully set forth in the FAA
regulations. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-14: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE PROPERTY:
The airport manager or his authorized representative may remove from any area
of the airport, including leased premises, any motor vehicle, aircraft or
property which causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or
constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the
persons using the airport or a significant portion thereof. The expenses of
such removal and any storage fees shall become a lien chargeable to the owner
of said motor vehicle, aircraft or other property. Said owner shall be notified
of the removal and storage of said motor vehicle, aircraft or other property by
certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return requested, sent to the
owner's address as known to the airport manager or his authorized
representative within three (3) days of said removal or storage. (Ord. 391, 5-
24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-15: CITY JURISDICTION:
The city neither has nor claims any jurisdiction over the control or flight of
aircraft outside of the boundaries of the airport and expressly consents that
the entire traffic pattern of the airport shall be in accordance with the
traffic pattern at any time prescribed by any appropriate federal agency. (Ord.
391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-16: ZONING PURPOSE:
   A.   An obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property
of users of the Parma municipal airport and property or occupants of land in
its vicinity; an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach
minimums of the Parma municipal airport; and an obstruction may reduce the size
of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Parma municipal airport and the
public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
      1.   That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Parma municipal airport;
      2.   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public
safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions
that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
      3.   That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to
the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power, without
compensation.
   B.   The prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air
navigation; the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to
air navigation; or the marking and lighting of obstructions, are public
purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds
and acquire land or interests in land. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-17: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical
surfaces as they apply to the Parma municipal airport. Such zones are shown on
the Parma city zoning map. An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
   A.   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty
feet (250') wide. The approach expands outward symmetrically to a width of one
thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
   B.   Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two
hundred fifty feet (250') wide. This approach zone expands outward
symmetrically to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a horizontal distance
of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
   C.   Transitional Zone: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
   D.   Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of
five thousand feet (5,000') radii from the centerline of each end of the
primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach
and transitional zones.
   E.   Conical Zone: The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-18: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. The following height limitations apply to the
zones:
   A.   Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand feet
(5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
   B.   Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes twenty
feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
   C.   Transitional zones: Slope seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation which is two thousand three hundred seventy
eight feet (2,378') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there
are established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the
precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface, and extending a horizontal distance of ten thousand feet (10,000')
measured at ninety degree (90°) angles to the extended runway centerline.
   D.   Horizontal zone: Established at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
airport elevation or at a height of two thousand three hundred seventy eight
feet (2,378') above mean sea level.
   E.   Conical zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred
fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation, or two thousand five hundred
seventy eight feet (2,578') above mean sea level. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-19: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use within any zone
established by this chapter shall interfere with, or create an interference
with, communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other objects, result in glare
in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-20: PERMITS:
   A.   Future Uses: Except as specifically provided in subsections A1, A2, and
A3 of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created, unless a conditional use permit therefor
shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for
a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless
a variance has been approved.
      1.   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
      2.   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred feet (4,200')
from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such approach zones.
      3.   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour,
or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such transition zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any
structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter except as approved by conditional use permit.
   B.   Variance: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the city for a
variance from such regulations. The city shall render findings and conclusions
regarding the following, in addition to other criteria stated in this code. The
application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the
aviation administration having jurisdiction as to the effect of the proposal on
the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of
navigable airspace. Such variances shall be approved where it is found that: 1)
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship, and 2) relief granted: will not be contrary to the public
interest; will not create a hazard to air navigation; will do substantial
justice; and will be harmonious with the purposes described in this chapter.
   C.   Obstruction Marking And Lighting: An owner of a structure or tree in an
airport zone shall, at the owner's sole expense, install, operate and maintain
necessary markings and lights. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
7-2-21: ENFORCEMENT:
Unless otherwise specified, violations of this Chapter shall be an infraction
punishable as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 391, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 552, 3-9-2009; Ord. 600, 7-
1-2019)
7-2-22: APPEALS:
Any written decision made by the airport manager or airport committee
(subcommittee of the city council) shall become final unless within fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date of the decision a person aggrieved by the
decision files a notice of appeal with the city. Any written decision made by
the planning and zoning commission shall become final unless within fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date of the decision a person aggrieved by the
decision files a notice of appeal with the city. The city council shall
consider all appeals. (Ord. 552, 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 3
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Park Regulations
7-3-2: Liquor Prohibited
7-3-3: Violation And Penalty
7-3-1: PARK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Hours Of Operation: All Municipal parks of the City, exclusive of the
swimming pool area, shall be opened daily to the public during the hours of
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., except for the park
adjacent to the City Hall, which shall be opened to the public during the hours
of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, and it shall be
unlawful for any person (other than City personnel conducting City business
therein) to occupy or to be present in said parks during any hours which said
parks are not opened to the public. (Ord. 415, 6-27-1988; amd. Ord. 479, 5-25-
1998)
Park hours shall not apply to duly registered overnight campers who have paid
the necessary fees and who do not violate any of the laws of the State or the
City to camp overnight in the Old Fort Boise Park of the City. (Ord. 407, 4-17-
1986; amd. Ord. 479, 5-25-1998)
   B.   Camp Regulations:
      1.   Definitions:
   CAMP: Temporary occupancy for sleeping or other residential purposes as
allowed by this Code, State and Federal laws, as long as done within an
enclosed tent or recreational vehicle designed for occupancy on a temporary
basis.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit primarily designated as temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel which either has its own
power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are:
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home.
   SENIOR CITIZEN: One individual fifty five (55) years of age or older for
each tent or trailer unit.
      2.   Old Fort Boise Park: Old Fort Boise Park is the only park available
for overnight stays up to the number of parking spaces so designated.
      3.   Fees: The fees to be assessed and collected in advance for each tent
or recreational vehicle shall be as set by resolution of the Council.
      4.   Maximum Stay: No person, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or
tent may camp in Old Fort Boise Park more than seven (7) days, whether
consecutive or not, in any twenty eight (28) day period.
      5.   Failure To Pay Fee: Fees must be paid in advance. Should a tent or
recreational vehicle remain in said park forty eight (48) hours without payment
of fees in advance, the City shall post on said tent or trailer a notice to
remove within twenty four (24) hours. Should said tent or trailer remain in
said park in excess of twenty four (24) hours, the City is given permission and
is authorized to remove said tent or recreational vehicle to a storage facility
of the City's choosing at the sole expense of the owner thereof.
      6.   Additional Rules: The City Council may set other rules and
regulations pertaining to said occupancy by resolution. (Ord. 587, 10-9-2018)
7-3-2: LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
Except when otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the City Clerk, it shall
be unlawful for any person to have in said person's possession, custody or
control any alcoholic beverage whether beer, wine or liquor in whole or in part
of any kind whatsoever. Permits to be issued pursuant to this section shall be
made on a form and under the conditions, including payment of fees, prescribed
by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 407, 4-17-1986; amd. Ord. 610, 5-11-
2021)
7-3-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, any such person shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned in the Canyon County Jail for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord.
407, 4-17-1986)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Connection To Public Utilities Required
7-4-1: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC UTILITIES REQUIRED:
The owners of each and every piece or parcel of real estate abutting upon any
street, avenue or alley in the city shall connect their several premises,
whether vacant or not, with all water and gas mains, sewer and other conduits
in such street, avenue or alley, whenever said street, avenue or alley is to be
paved, and when required to do so by the order of the council and notice from
the clerk, which order and notice shall be served upon the owner of said
property by any police officer of said city, personally, if a resident of the
city and if a nonresident of said city, by registered mail to the last known
address of such owner. If said owner shall fail, neglect or refuse within the
time indicated in such order and notice to comply with the requirements of such
order, the city may contract for and make connections aforesaid, at such
distances, under such regulations and in accordance with such specifications as
may be prescribed by the city, and the whole costs of such connections shall be
assessed and collected against said property in the same manner as other city
taxes. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986)
ARTICLE A. WATER USE AND SERVICE
(Rep. by Ord. 495, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE B. SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-4B-1: Definitions
7-4B-2: Supervision
7-4B-3: Use of Public Sewers Required
7-4B-4: Building Sewers and Connections
7-4B-5: Use Restrictions; Prohibited Substances
7-4B-6: Sewer Service Rates and Charges
7-4B-7: Excavations
7-4B-8: Sewer Connections Outside City
7-4B-9: Liability for Sewer Service
7-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms
used in this Article shall be as follows:
AVERAGE      Said discharge shall be based on the most recent U.S. Census Bureau data for
HOUSEHOLD    the City, relating to population by households. This average will be multiplied
BOD          by two-tenths (0.2) pounds BOD per person per day multiplied by three hundred
DISCHARGE:   sixty five (365) days divided by twelve (12) months.
BOD
(Denoting    The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
Biochemical  under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) C,
Oxygen       expressed in milligrams per liter.
Demand):
             The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received
BUILDING     the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
DRAIN:       building and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (5') (1.5
             meters) outside the inner face of the building walls.
BUILDING     The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
SEWER:       disposal.
CITY:        The City of Parma, Canyon County, Idaho.
EPA:         The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EQUIVALENT   The usage or discharge from a typical residential unit, defined by the City of
RESIDENTIAL  Parma as four thousand (4,000) gallons of water per month.
UNIT (ERU):
GARBAGE:     Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
             dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
             The monitoring station may be required by the City to determine the
INDUSTRIAL   contribution of the industry to the public sewer system. Monitoring equipment
WASTEWATER   may include refrigerated sampler, recording pH meter and recording flow meter.
MONITORING   The City shall provide plans and specifications for the construction of the
STATION:     station. Cost of the construction of the station may be at the industry's
             expense. Maintenance and upkeep may be at the industry's expense.
             The liquid wastes from any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment
             works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
             of Manual and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following
             divisions:
             A.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
INDUSTRIAL   B.   Division B - Mining
WASTES:      C.   Division D - Manufacturing
             D.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
             Services
             E.   Division I - Services
             A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will
             introduce primary segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
             conveniences.
NATURAL      Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
OUTLET:      ground water.
PERSON:      Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH:          The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
             liter of solution.
PROPERLY     The wastes from the preparation of food that have been shredded to such a
SHREDDED     degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
GARBAGE:     normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
             inch (1/2") (1.2 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC       A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is
SEWER:       controlled by public authority.
SANITARY     A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are
SEWER:       not intentionally admitted.
             A holding tank which receives either human excreta, liquid or solid waste from
SEPTIC TANK: one or more premises. Included within the scope of this definition are privies
             or chemical type toilets.
             A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
SEWAGE:      institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface
             and storm water as may be present.
SEWAGE
TREATMENT    Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
PLANT:
SEWAGE       All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
WORKS:
SEWER:       A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
             Each separate house, residence, apartment building, structure, trailer house
SEWER USER:  and/or mobile home, hotel, motel, commercial and/or industrial building,
             fraternal and/or religious building or structure and educational building or
             structure connected to or discharging into the City sewerage system.
SHALL/MAY:   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
             Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of
SLUG:        any given constituent or in quality of flow, exceeds, for any period or
             duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than four (4) times the average
             twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
             and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERVISOR:  The Public Works Supervisor1 of the City or his authorized deputy, agent or
             representative.
SUSPENDED    Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
SOLIDS:      sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
TC:          A measurement of the total carbon content of the wastewater.
TOC:         The measurement of the total organic carbon content of the wastewater.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
             intermittently. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986; Ord. 603, 10-1-2019)
 
7-4B-2: SUPERVISION:
The construction, repair and maintenance of all sewer drains, whether public or
private, shall be under the supervision and control of the City. It shall be
unlawful for any person to open or break any sewer line of the City except in
the presence and with the approval of the City. The City may adopt such rules
and regulations pertaining to such opening or breaking and connection of such
lines as it may deem necessary to protect the City sewers and provide for
proper connection. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986)
7-4B-3: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City, or in any area under jurisdiction of the City, any human excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Article.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage. In any property where septic tanks
presently exist, septic tanks shall not be hooked into the City sewer system
and no septic sewer tank waste will be discharged into the City sewer system.
Any abandonment or cessation of use of an existing privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
shall be in accordance with then existing State of Idaho regulations.
   D.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in sanitary or combined sewer
of the City, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this Article, and keep such facilities in
proper repair at all times. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986; Ord. 603, 10-1-2019)
7-4B-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
      2.   Classification of Permits:
         a.   For residential service, and
         b.   For service to commercial or industrial establishments producing
industrial wastes pursuant to subsection
7-4B-6 E of this Article.
      In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application to the
City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent to the judgment of the City.
   B.   Separate Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building, residential and commercial; except, where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole shall be as two (2)
building sewers. Industrial wastes shall enter the public sewer at as many
points as may be required by the industrial facility. Each point of entry may
have an industrial monitor station at that point.
   C.   Use of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination or test
by the City, to meet all requirements of this article.
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, material or construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code in the state of Idaho 1 , the Idaho Standards
for Public Works Construction, or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
      2.   No drain or sewer pipe shall be less than four inches (4") internal
diameter, and all sewers and drains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate
any property they are intended to drain. The owners of each and every parcel of
real property within the city which has a toilet, bath or sink located greater
than three feet (3') below the natural ground shall install backflow preventers
or check valves on the drains and sewers located on said owner's property 2 .
      Failure on the part of any owner to properly maintain the backflow
preventer or check valve or to cause an installation to be made will relieve
the city from all responsibility for any and all damages suffered by said owner
as a result of backflow of sewage onto said owner's real property and
appurtenant structures.
   E.   Connection To Public Sewer; Fees:
      1.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code of the state of
Idaho or other applicable rules and regulations of the city 3 , or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF manual
of practice no. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and material must be approved by
the city before installation.
      2.   All connections to the city sewer main shall be made by the
applicant under the supervision of the city water supervisor at the applicant's
expense.
      3.   The initial connection to the city sewer by a user of said system as
defined in this article shall be set by resolution of this city council.
   F.   Surface Water Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
surface runoff or of groundwater to the building sewer or building drain which
in turn is connected to a public sanitary sewer. If the City determines that
surface water as described above is being routed to the sewerage system, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner to disconnect and reroute to a
separate runoff facility at the owner's expense.
   G.   Inspections: The city may adopt such rules as it may deem necessary to
provide for proper inspection of the work, and no work shall be covered until
it shall have been approved by the city, who will endorse a certificate of
final inspection upon the permit issued for that particular work or connection.
   H.   Liability Of Owner: All costs and expenses incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or
indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 405, 3-
24-1986; amd. Ord. 497, 10-23-2000; Ord. 603, 10-1-2019)
 
Notes
1    I.C. §54-2601 et seq.
2    See section 7-5-21 of this title.
3    I.C. §54-2601 et seq.
7-4B-5: USE RESTRICTIONS; PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Discharge Of Effluent: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the city. Industrial cooling waters may be discharged on approval
of the City to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters and wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not
limited to, cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l or CN in the wastes as
discharged to the public sewer.
      3.   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
or personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewer works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, entrails and
paper dishes, cups and milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   C.   Materials Under Special Review: No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged the following substances, materials, waters or wastes if it
appears likely, in the opinion of the City, that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances described are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)/ sixty-five degrees Celsius(65° C).
      2.   Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)/ zero
degrees Celsius (0°C) and sixty-five degrees Celsius (65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation of
any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated solutions, whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the City for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes as may exceed limits established
by the City in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any water or wastes having a pH of 9.5 or less than 6.0.
      9.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert or suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate.
         b.   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as herein defined.
      10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   D.   City Options: If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to
be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in this Section and which, in the
judgment of the City, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
      1.   Reject the wastes,
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers,
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
Section
7-4B-4 of this Article pursuant to subsection 7-4B- E hereof.
      If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the City and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   E.   Industrial Wastes: When required by the City, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install an
industrial wastewater monitoring station together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such stations, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the City. The station shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. All industrial users shall be under contract with the City.
   F.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amount or any flammable wastes,
sand or any harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall
be cleaned at the expense of the owner. In the event that interceptors are not
cleaned, the City may perform maintenance necessary to protect the City system,
with all costs of such maintenance borne by and billed to the owner.
   G.   Preliminary Treatment: Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
expense.
   H.   Measurements, Tests and Analyses: All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
Article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association and shall be determined at the station provided.
Sampling shall be carried out by an approved composite sampling device. The
composite sample shall be uses to determine BOD and suspended solids values.
The pH values shall be taken from a continuous recording pH meter. Total
organic carbon values may be substituted for BOD values if the City so desires.
A continuous recording flow meter shall be provided to monitor the flow.
   I.   Special Agreements: No statement contained in this article shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and an industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment therefor
by the industrial concern. All industrial users shall be under contract with
the city. (Ord. 405, 3-24-86; amd. Ord. 603, 10-1-2019)
7-4B-6: SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Rates Established: Owners of all premises not served by the sanitary
sewer of the city and all premises to be furnished sewer service by the
sewerage collection system shall pay the rates as set by resolution of the city
council. The cost of collecting and treating city wastewater is based upon the
volume and strength of wastewater discharged into the City of Parma's
wastewater system. The volume of wastewater discharged into the City's system
is calculated based upon the number of water ERUs and actual usage by the
customer.
   B.   Bills For Service; Delinquencies:
      1.   Rendition Of Bills: Charges for sewer service shall be made in
advance each month of the calendar year. All bills are to be rendered as of the
tenth day of the month for which charges are made and shall be due and payable
on the date of rendition thereof.
      2.   Delinquencies Of Payments; Lien: In the event the charges for sewer
service are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for
such service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the
real estate for which such service is supplied, and the city clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Canyon County, Idaho, and filing of such
statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service.
      3.   Discontinuance Of Service For Nonpayment: Fees shall be carried on
the water bills, wherever applicable, and the water department is authorized
and directed to discontinue services to any premises where the entire water and
sewer service bill is not paid, in the same manner that services are
discontinued for nonpayment of water bills5. Delinquency disconnections and
liens shall be collected as set forth in section
7-5-13 of this title.
   C.   Responsibility For Payment: The rates and charges herein established
shall be collected from the owners of the premises within the city from and
after the effective date hereof.
   D.   Disposition Of Funds: All fees and charges herein provided for, when
collected, shall be placed in the utility fund of the city and paid into the
sewer fund of the city. All charges and expenses for operation and maintenance
of the sewer system and sewage treatment and disposal plant and all payments
required to be made shall be made from said sewer fund of the city. The council
may, from time to time hereinafter, establish within the sewer fund a reserve
for operation, maintenance, replacement and depreciation of such works and
reserve for improvements to such works any authorized expenditures from such
fund for such purposes.
   E.   Alternate Sewer Charge: In cases where an industrial, commercial, or
other user whose volume of discharge into the sewer systems exceeds the ERU
quantity specified under the user's connection permit, the sewer billing shall
be for the actual volume discharged, at a rate set by resolution of the
council, and shall be in addition to any other fees for pretreatment, or other
fees or conditions imposed pursuant to resolutions of the council, Section 7-4-
B5 of this code, or industrial user contract. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986; amd. Ord.
497, 10-23-2000; Ord. 603, 10-1-2019)
7-4B-7: EXCAVATIONS:
All trenches and refills shall be accomplished in accordance with
specifications provided by the city. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986)
7-4B-8: SEWER CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY:
There shall be no sewer lines outside the city connected to the city sewer
lines, except by special permission of the council. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986)
7-4B-9: LIABILITY FOR SEWER SERVICE:
When this chapter becomes effective, a copy thereof, properly certified by the
city clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Canyon
County, Idaho, and it shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
their liability for sewer service supplied to any occupant or user of such
service on their property. (Ord. 405, 3-24-1986)
ARTICLE C. WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS; SINGLE UNIT USER FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 485, 1-25-1999)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-5-1: Title
7-5-2: Purpose
7-5-3: Definitions
7-5-4: Applicability
7-5-5: Administration And Management Of Water System
7-5-6: Authority To Turn Off Water; Nonliability Of City; Hold Harmless
7-5-7: Water System Funds
7-5-8: Use Of City Water Required
7-5-9: Water Connection Requirements And Construction Regulations
7-5-10: Extension Of City Water Mains
7-5-11: Water System Connection Fees
7-5-12: Water Service Charges
7-5-13: Billing, Delinquency And Disconnection
7-5-14: Water Service Installation And Water Meters
7-5-15: Dedication Of Water, Fire Hydrant Water Lines, And Water Systems To The
City
7-5-16: Illegal Connections
7-5-17: Prohibited Acts
7-5-18: Penalties
7-5-19: Saving Clause
7-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth the city's authority to own, operate and maintain its
municipal water system and its authority to acquire, construct, upgrade,
relocate, reconstruct, improve, better, extend and to manage such system for
the health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the
city. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter are set forth below. The city's reasonable interpretation of
the following terms and the municipal water system ordinance is controlling.
   AUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person making authorized and proper use of the
municipal water system and/or the water delivered thereby and who has made
application for water service and such application has been granted and has
paid for such service, water and all fees required. An authorized water user
may be an owner, tenant by lease or rental, a developer, or similar agent.
   CITY: The city of Parma, Idaho.
   CITY WATER SYSTEM OR MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM (A.K.A. WATER SYSTEM): All
components and facilities of the city's public water system, including, but not
limited to, its real property and easements, water source, water storage
facilities, booster pump stations and distribution system up to and including
the individual meter, and related infrastructure and equipment that are owned,
operated and/or maintained by the city.
   CONNECTION: Each structure, facility, or single-family residence which is
connected to the water system, and which is or could be used for domestic,
commercial, agricultural or industrial purposes, is considered a single
connection.
   CONNECTION FEE: A fee calculated and based upon a formula, including, but
not limited to, the replacement value of water system infrastructure, the
system capacity, cost to deliver service, well and storage capacity, other
parts of the water infrastructure and bond indebtedness, governmental
regulatory compliance fees, and required for each equivalent dwelling unit.
Such fee is set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is
actually connected or potentially can be connected with any other water supply
system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or
other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, or other
waste or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of
introducing contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow.
   DEQ: The state of Idaho department of environmental quality ("DEQ").
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: The collection of water mains, or a part of the
capacity thereof, designed or used to distribute water for fire protection and
domestic use within a given territory served by the city.
   ISPWC: "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction".
   MASTER WATER OR FACILITY PLAN: A plan that describes the overall water
system, which may include a comprehensive planning document describing existing
infrastructure, defining service areas and future infrastructure and service
areas of the system, including upgrades and additions thereto and in
conformance with applicable local, state and federal law. A facility plan shall
be prepared by or under the supervision of an Idaho licensed professional
engineer and shall bear the imprint of the engineer's seal and approval by DEQ.
   MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, various
types of developments which have common or joint ownership areas such as
apartments, condominiums, townhomes, mobile home parks or courts, shopping
centers, professional offices, multiple uses and/or strip malls.
   OFF SITE WATER FACILITY: Any water system facility (including, but not
limited to, main lines, wells, storage tanks, booster pump stations, pressure
reducing valves, and related facilities) located beyond the boundary of a
development which does or has the capability of expanding water service beyond
the boundary of the development, excluding facilities located within existing
roadways adjacent to the new development boundary unless such facilities are
approved by the city specifically to serve adjoining property.
   OVERSIZED MAIN: Any water main which has an inside diameter greater than
eight inches (8") and is required to have a larger inside diameter than is
necessary, based on the estimated flow of the service area for which the main
is being installed. The requirement for oversized lines shall be based on the
city's master water plan and/or recommendations of the city engineer.
   OWNER: Refers to the owner of the real property connected to or which
desires connection to the municipal water system.
   PERSON: A human being, municipality, or other governmental or political
subdivision or other public agency, or public or private corporation, any
partnership, firm, association, society, or other organization, any receiver,
trustee, assignee, agent or other legal representative of the foregoing or
other legal entity.
   PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION: A separate and independent connection to
the municipal water main connected to a fire hydrant, fire suppression system
or fire control device that has been, or is to be, installed in any building
solely for the purpose of fire suppression or fire control.
   PRIVATE WATER SERVICE LINE: The individual water service line, whether
privately or publicly owned by a person other than the city that is installed
past the water meter setter and serves an authorized water user.
   PROPERTY: Refers to all property, whether privately or publicly owned,
within the service limits of the municipal water system excluding therefrom
lands that have been dedicated for public street or highway rights of way.
   SWDH: Southwest district health.
   SERVICE AREA: The area served by the municipal water system, including all
property within three hundred feet (300') of a system water main which has
water service available from the system.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The point of connection of a noncity owned water service
line to the city's water supply facilities, typically from the meter to the
property.
   SUPPLY MAIN: A water main or a part of the capacity thereof designed or used
for the purpose of transporting water to a distribution main.
   UNAUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person who makes any unauthorized or illegal
use of the municipal water system or the water delivered thereby, or who causes
damage or injury to said system in any fashion.
   UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE: The most currently adopted edition of the uniform
plumbing code by the state of Idaho.
   UNIT OF SERVICE: The incremental unit of measure used to calculate water
usage for assessing the water use fee on the monthly billing statement, set at
one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   USER: See definition of Authorized Water User.
   VOLUMETRIC RATE: The fee set to cover variable operations and maintenance
expenses related to producing and delivering a quantity of water through the
system for use or consumption.
   WATER MAIN: The principal pipe or conduit laid in a street or right of way
through which water is transported or distributed by the city.
   WATER METER SETTER: The meter setter (yoke) and primary water shutoff valve
assembly for mounting the water meter within the water meter vault.
   WATER METER VAULT: The in ground structure with removable surface lid to
protect and house the water meter setter and water meter. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the
city and any lot, parcel, premises, or building outside of the corporate limits
of the city that is connected to the municipal water system. (Ord. 574, 3-9-
2015)
7-5-5: ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Exclusive Management And Control: The city shall have exclusive control
and management of the municipal water system and shall have the exclusive
management and control of the supply and distribution of water to the
inhabitants of the city. The city may make such rules and regulations as are
necessary for the complete management, control, distribution and supply of
water within and without the city.
   B.   Powers And Authority Of City: The city through its authorized
representative bearing proper identification shall be permitted at proper and
reasonable hours of the day to enter all properties, premises or buildings to
which water is furnished from the water system for any purpose necessary for
the proper administration of the water system. The city through its authorized
representative shall also be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds an easement for any purpose necessary for the maintenance
of any portion of the water system lying within said easement. The public works
supervisor or other designee is vested with authority to manage the water
system in the best interest of the city, which includes authority to approve
reasonable modifications of time lines or other requirements provided in this
chapter.
   C.   Waiver By City Council: The city council retains discretion to waive
any of the requirements of this chapter upon a finding that such waiver will
not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare and will not cause
the city to be in violation of its financial obligations under existing or
future bonds. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-6: AUTHORITY TO TURN OFF WATER; NONLIABILITY OF CITY; HOLD HARMLESS:
   A.   Authority: In order to provide needed tests and/or maintenance and/or
for the protection of health and safety, the city shall have the authority at
any time to shut off the water supply from mains and pipes of the system
without notice and without liability therefor.
   B.   Nonliability Of City:
      1.   The city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property
caused in any manner by the use of water beyond the water meter setter along
the service line to the property, as that is the point of delivery to the
authorized water user.
      2.   The city shall not be held liable for damage to any person or
property by reason of stoppage or other interruption of the water supply,
caused by groundwater depletion or fluctuation, lack of pressure, accident or
break in works or mains, alterations, additions, construction or repairs or
other unforeseen or unavoidable water service damages or interruptions.
      3.   All service pipes and fixtures on private property are the
responsibility of the property owner and shall be kept in good repair and
protected from freezing at the property owner's expense. The property owner
shall be responsible for all damages resulting from leaks or breaks in service
pipes and fixtures. Water will not be furnished to a water service where there
is a leak in the service piping or in a fixture, and when a leak is discovered,
the water service may be discontinued immediately. If water service has been
discontinued and there is a leak, it shall not be turned on until all leaks
have been repaired.
   C.   Hold Harmless: All persons receiving city water service are deemed to
accept and consent to such conditions of pressure and service, including meter
location at the service line and hold the city harmless from any damages
arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions of
service. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-7: WATER SYSTEM FUNDS:
There is hereby created the "Parma domestic water system fund" into which all
fees and charges received and collected under the authority of this chapter
shall be deposited and credited to funds designated as a restricted enterprise.
The accounts of said fund shall show all receipts and expenditures for the
maintenance, operation, upkeep, repair and capital outlay of the water system,
including the payment of bonds issued to finance such capital outlay. When
budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the Parma
domestic water system fund shall be available for the payment of the
requirements for the maintenance and operation, repairs, upkeep and improvement
of the water system, and to the extent legally available, for payment into a
sinking fund established for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on
any water bond indebtedness of the city which shall from time to time be
outstanding. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-8: USE OF CITY WATER REQUIRED:
   A.   Connection To City Water System: The owner of any house, building or
property used for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or
recreational use, or any other purpose, situated within the city which is
abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley,
easement or right of way in which there is located a city water line is hereby
required at his expense to connect such building directly with the municipal
water system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of official notice from the city to do
so; provided, however, that said city water is within three hundred feet (300')
of any property line where said building to be served is located.
   B.   Disconnection Of Private System Required: At such time as the municipal
water system becomes available to the property served by an existing private
water system, and the owner or tenant connects his property to the municipal
water system as required, it is mandatory that the private water supply is not
connected or cross connected in any way to the water lines served by the
municipal water system. The disconnection of the private water supply line
shall be inspected and approved by the public works supervisor.
   C.   Connection To City Water System Outside City Limits: All extensions of
water service outside the city limits shall first be approved by the city
council before service may be made. Said extensions of service shall be granted
only when in the best interest of the city. The extension of service made
outside the city limits is a privilege and not a right.
      1.   In determining whether to allow an extension of water service, all
of the following criteria shall be considered:
         a.   Whether water connection fees in place at the time the city
council approves the application for service will be paid.
         b.   Whether connection would create an adverse impact upon existing
water system facilities and/or create economic burdens for future operation and
maintenance of the water system.
         c.   Whether the connection will be economically feasible. Water mains
shall be adequately sized for future growth, as determined by the city
engineer.
         d.   Whether the water system has adequate capacity to serve existing
development and the proposed development for which the extension is requested
and all probable development within the city and between the city and the
proposed development outside the city limits.
      2.   In the event the city council grants the application for extension
of water service, it shall include as a condition that the legal owner(s) of
the parcel(s) consent to the annexation of the parcel(s) serviced; such
agreement shall be written and recorded. The city council may also impose such
other conditions of granting the application as are reasonable to assure that
the proprietary funds of the municipal water system are not used for the
extension and/or enlargement of the system.
      3.   The property owner(s) of the parcel(s) receiving water service is a
user and subject to this chapter and all rules and regulations promulgated by
the city. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-9: WATER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Separate Connections Required: Each separate building shall be
connected with the water main through a city water service line, which includes
a meter. The city's portion of the water service line ends at the meter.
Subsequent to investigation by the city engineer, the city council may grant
permission for a single meter to serve more than one water user. Upon granting
of an exemption under this section, the base water rate shall be adjusted to
reflect the number of water consumers on a single meter.
   B.   Application Required: Any person desiring or required to obtain a
supply of water from the municipal water system shall first submit an
application to the city for service and agree to be governed by such rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be prescribed by the
mayor and city council for control of the water supply. Only the benefiting
property owner, or his duly authorized agent, may initiate water service,
provided that a tenant or lessee may initiate service upon approval of the
property owner. The procedure for initiating service, disconnecting service,
billing of accounts and processing of delinquent accounts shall be in
accordance with policies established by resolution approved by the city
council.
   C.   Contents Of Application: Each applicant for water service shall sign an
application for the service desired.
      1.   New Construction: The applicant must state the location, type of
building and uses therein, and fully and truly state the purpose for which the
water is to be used, and shall furnish a set of floor plans showing all water
uses and a site plan if the water is to be used for irrigation. The applicant
may indicate a preferred location for the water meter vault location on the
property. If the application is granted, the public works supervisor may
authorize the extension, at the expense of the applicant, and at no expense to
the city, the service pipe and meter vault, meter valve setter, lid curb stop
and any other fittings that are necessary to install service at the point most
convenient to the city for supplying the applicant.
      2.   Existing Water Service: In the case of an existing water service
connection, if the real property or improvement is sold or otherwise
transferred, the property owner shall make application to the municipal billing
department to transfer the account, and shall supply the city clerk with all
information requested by the city.
   D.   Meters Property Of The City: All meters shall be and remain the
property of the city.
   E.   Private Water Service Line: All materials and workmanship used in the
installation of private water service lines shall conform to city
specifications and codes. The furnishing of all labor and materials shall be
the sole responsibility of the owner.
   F.   Private Fire Service Connection: The installation of a private fire
service connection shall comply in all respects to the requirements for a city
water service line, and the owner or his agent will be required to pay for all
costs for connection and extension of the facility from the city water main.
   G.   Construction Methods And Materials: The materials and methods used for
construction of city water service lines, private water service lines, water
mains or water system appurtenances shall conform to the requirements of all
codes and specifications as may be adopted by the city council. The city may
reject any materials or workmanship for cause, and upon such order, the
rejected materials shall be removed and replaced with approved material.
   H.   Permit Requirements: No connections to a city domestic water supply
main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24) hours'
notice having been given to the public works supervisor and the fee charged by
the city for such connection as set forth herein shall be paid at the time of
application. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-10: EXTENSION OF CITY WATER MAINS:
   A.   Compliance With City Specifications: All proposed extensions of the
city water mains to service undeveloped areas within the existing corporate
limits or newly annexed areas shall comply with existing policies,
specifications, master plans, or requirements established by the city engineer.
The plans for all extensions to the city water mains shall be prepared under
the direction of and signed by a registered professional engineer as per the
licensing requirements of the Idaho Code, and three (3) copies of said plans
shall be filed with the city. In approving a plan for extension to the city
water mains, the city reserves the right to stipulate other requirements such
as a special permit fee, rights of way limits, sequence of construction, time
limits for having existing service disrupted, the filing of a financial
guarantee and other similar measures as may be required to protect the public.
No work shall commence on any such extension of the city water mains until the
extension project has been approved by the city council and a written permit
has been issued. A permit shall not be issued until all applicable fees have
been paid.
   B.   Construction At Expense Of Landowner Or Developer: All water main
extensions and appurtenances made for the purpose of serving the development
shall be constructed at the expense of the landowner and/or developer by a
qualified contractor in accordance with city specifications and subject to
conditions and fees which may be established by the city.
   C.   Credits For Oversized Mains: All oversized water mains shall be
furnished and installed by the landowner and/or developer. The landowner and/or
developer shall be eligible for credits on oversized mains greater than eight
inches (8") in diameter. The credit shall be computed and given in accordance
with policy established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Construction Certification: The city has the authority to require the
landowner and/or developer responsible for major line extensions to supply the
city with a statement from a licensed engineer certifying that the materials
and construction were installed and tested in conformance with city
specifications.
   E.   Guarantee: Following final inspection and acceptance by the city of an
extension of the city water system it shall become the property of the city.
The landowner and/or developer shall guarantee all materials and workmanship
for a one year period and shall make any repairs, adjustments or replacements
due to faulty materials or workmanship without any cost to the city. (Ord. 574,
3-9-2015)
7-5-11: WATER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEES:
There is hereby established an equitable system of charging new customers for
the impact on water system capacity utilized whenever an existing water service
is enlarged or a new water service is connected to the existing wells, storage
tanks, pumps, outbuildings, and appurtenances of the municipal water system. A
water system connection fee shall be collected from any person requesting
connection to the water system for any new building or structure or for any
existing building for which a change in occupancy or use, as defined under the
international building code as adopted by the city and as may be amended, is
made and for which a new or larger water service line is installed.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no system connection fee shall be charged for
connection of water service solely for fire protection services. Such water
system connection fees shall be established by resolution approved by the city
council. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-12: WATER SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Service Charges And Fees Established: There is hereby established a
system of periodic service charges and fees in order to equitably impose upon
all water users the cost and expenses of operation, maintenance, replacement,
and repair of the city's municipal water system, participation in oversized
extensions to the system, and redemption of bonds that have been used to
finance system improvements, all as part of the city's responsibility to
provide adequate water service and facilities for the city. For new
connections, the water user charge is to begin when the meter is turned on. All
users who derive any benefit from the city's municipal water system shall, in
return for said benefit, pay user charges. All service charges and fees for the
water system shall be established by resolution approved by the city council.
   B.   Monthly Service Charges: The monthly water service charges and fees for
each water user served by the municipal water system shall be based upon the
total cost of the municipal water system operations and the gallons of water
used per connection as measured by the water meter reading and meter records
maintained by the city. Monthly service charges and fees levied and assessed
for the water system under the provisions of this chapter shall be effective as
of the date set forth in the resolution.
   C.   Miscellaneous Administrative Fees: The city may establish
administrative charges and fees by resolution approved by the city council
including, but not limited to, fees for any of the following: repairs to the
water meter; gallons of water used by a fire department in extinguishing fires;
convenience fees for electronic funds transfers or other similar payment types;
late fees; disconnect and turn on fees; and returned check fees.
   D.   Deposit: At the initiation or reconnection of service, the city may
elect to collect a security deposit to ensure the ultimate payment of charges
and fees. The procedures for collecting, the amount, the procedures for
applying to delinquent charges and fees, and the final disposition of unapplied
amounts of said security deposits shall be in accordance with policies adopted
by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015; amd. Ord. 611, 5-11-
2021)
7-5-13: BILLING, DELINQUENCY AND DISCONNECTION:
   A.   Billing Frequency: Each month the city shall furnish each water user a
unified statement of the amount due for water and sewer utilities for the
preceding month, and such bill becomes past due if not paid by the next billing
cycle. Billing cycle frequency and due date for accounts shall be established
in the billing policy, as adopted by resolution approved by the city council.
Any account not paid by the due date shall become delinquent and bear interest
at the maximum rate permitted by law, commencing on the due date. If the user
feels there is a discrepancy in the bill, the user may appeal to the city clerk
for an adjustment up to the due date. If the city clerk determines that an
error was made in calculation of the bill or because of faulty equipment, she
is authorized to make the necessary adjustments to the account.
   B.   Delinquency And Notice: All bills for water use fees not paid by the
past due date shall authorize the city, in addition to its rights and remedies
set forth in this chapter, to discontinue the water service to any such
defaulting customer, unless the user submits a written request to enter into a
short term payment agreement to the city clerk as provided in this section.
Notice of such delinquency and a disconnect date shall be included with the
monthly billing statement.
      1.   Short Term Payment Agreements: A water user may request to enter
into a short term payment agreement to extend the time for payment of all water
service charges and fees due prior to disconnection. Short term payment
agreements may not extend beyond sixty (60) days from the date the agreement is
executed. All fees due and owing at the end of the sixty (60) day period,
including charges for water and sewer service, disconnection fees and
reconnection fees, if any, must be paid in full or the service will be
disconnected without further notice and the consumer will be required to pay
all connection charges in effect at the time of reconnection. Only one short
term payment agreement may be authorized for each account per year, unless
additional agreements are approved by the mayor and city clerk.
      2.   Disconnection Fees: All delinquent accounts will be assessed a late
fee and a disconnection/turn on charge in an amount established by resolution
approved by the city council.
      3.   Pretermination Hearing: A user may request a pretermination hearing
by submitting a written request prior to the due date. Pretermination hearings
shall be heard by the city council, which shall render its decision in writing,
giving the reasons for its determination. If an adverse decision is rendered
against the user as a result of the pretermination hearing, the city may
require the user to pay the delinquent water bill attributable to his own use,
plus any applicable disconnection fees, turn on charges, interest and other
fees as established by resolution approved by the city council.
   C.   Collection: The city clerk is hereby authorized to collect delinquent
payments by any legal method as approved by the city attorney. At such time as
any delinquency shall become inactive for a period of time exceeding six (6)
months, or in the case of bankruptcy proceedings, said debt may be deemed
uncollectible. The city clerk may prepare a request for write off of the
account for the city council’s consideration. Writing off a delinquent account
shall not act as a forgiveness of the underlying obligation. In addition to any
other remedies provided by federal, state or local law, in the event a water
user fails to pay a water bill and allows the bill to become delinquent, the
city shall have the following remedies:
      1.   The city may turn the account over to a collection agency for
collection;
      2.   The city may attach the unpaid obligation to a different water or
sewer account in the user’s name, whether the account is in existence or
subsequently created, and continue to bill the original account; or
      3.   Refuse to offer new water or sewer services to the user until the
account is paid in full.
   D.   Liability Of Owner: In the event that a property is vacant, the owner
of such premises, as the authorized water user, shall be liable to the city for
the payment of any charges incurred, including the monthly base rate. This
includes all charges incurred between the time a tenant vacates the premises
and the premises is reoccupied by a new tenant.
   E.   Lien Imposed: Where allowed by law, all delinquent charges or fees, as
provided by this chapter, not paid after the final determination of the
delinquent account, shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the property
against which such charge or fee is levied or assessed; and the city clerk
shall, at the time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies
together with all penalties to the tax collector of Canyon County, and when so
certified, the same shall be a lien upon the property. All monies collected by
the city clerk under the provisions of this section shall be paid over to the
city treasurer in the same manner as is required for the payment of other city
monies. If a lien has been filed against the property, and service has been
shut off for any reason, the water service shall not be turned back on until
all liens and past due amounts are paid, including the minimum monthly charges
as established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015;
amd. Ord. 620, 12-12-2023)
7-5-14: WATER SERVICE INSTALLATION AND WATER METERS:
   A.   Water Meters: The city shall furnish, set and maintain all water
meters. All water meters shall be installed by the city, or by a licensed
plumber or a contractor with a public works license with permission of the
public works supervisor and be inspected by the public works supervisor or
designee. Water meters must be accessible to city staff at all times for
purposes of meter readings and maintenance.
      1.   Water Meters Required: A separate and independent city water service
with a meter and stop valve shall be provided for every authorized water user.
Water meter charges shall be set by resolution of the city council.
      2.   Monthly Readings, Special Readings: All meters shall be read by the
public works supervisor or designee at intervals of approximately one month, or
as nearly so as the convenient operation of the public works department will
permit, except as otherwise specifically provided for herein. The interval
between two (2) successive meter readings shall be deemed and regarded as a
month for the purposes of this chapter, and all fees shall be computed
accordingly. When service is commenced or discontinued between regular meter
readings, the base rate fee will be prorated if prior notice is provided and
will be charged based on the meter size through which such service is taken
plus any units of service consumed (water use fee).
      3.   Water Meter Charge: All water service applications which require the
installation of a new water service will be charged for the first service and
an additional charge for each subsequent service to be installed at single
premises. The water meter charge will be waived for meters replaced at end of
life. These charges shall be established by resolution approved by the city
council.
      4.   Separate Meters Required; Exception:
         a.   Every building or structure within the municipal water system
service area shall be separately and independently connected by a separate
meter to the city water system, with the exceptions provided below.
         b.   A separate meter shall be placed upon each separate service
connection to each parcel served and the charge to be paid shall be computed
separately upon each meter.
         c.   Meters shall not be required for stand alone interior fire
sprinkler systems.
         d.   Multiple buildings on the same parcel shall be separately and
independently connected by a separate meter. Multiple units within the same
structure or multiple other additional uses on the same parcel, which may
include, but not be limited to, inground swimming pools and mother-in-law
quarters, may be served by a single meter on a case by case basis at the
discretion of the city council with input from the public works supervisor,
building official and city engineer as to requirements that may be imposed for
up sizing the water meter, with partial connection fees (calculated as the
difference in connection fees for the size of the new larger meter installed
and the size of the smaller meter replaced) and any other fees and charges as
applicable and set by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Ownership, Replacement And Repairs: All water service connections,
meters and housings installed by the city or conveyed to the city, however
provided for, shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be
maintained, repaired and renewed by the public works supervisor when rendered
unserviceable through reasonable use. Where replacement, repairs or adjustments
are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the water
user, any member of the user's family, person in the user's employ, or agent of
the user, any expense caused to the city thereby shall be charged and collected
from the user. The city will pay no rent or charge where such facilities are
located on the user's premises. The city may relocate its facilities as
required by operating conditions, and may relocate any and all of its
facilities from user's premises at the termination of service.
   C.   Adjustments Of Bills For Meter Error: In the event the city determines
that a water meter is failing to register correctly the water used, the
authorized water user shall pay for the water for the month or months the
defective meter was used, on the basis of the average reading of the meter for
the previous three (3) months that the city determines the meter was operating
correctly.
   D.   Requested Water Meter Replacement: The authorized water user may
request that the water meter be replaced for any cause by written request to
the public works supervisor and pay all costs associated and incurred by the
city, as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-15: DEDICATION OF WATER, FIRE HYDRANT WATER LINES, AND WATER SYSTEMS TO THE
CITY:
   A.   Design Standards: All newly constructed water systems shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with all applicable regulations and construction
and design standards for such systems.
   B.   Water Systems To Be Dedicated To The City: The city may require that
domestic drinking water systems constructed after the enactment of this
section, to serve lands that receive or are to receive water from the city's
municipal water supply system, be dedicated to the city after the city inspects
such system for compliance with all applicable regulations and construction and
design standards. Included in the public dedication of the water system, the
water system owner must also provide reasonable rights of way and easements to
allow for maintenance and service of the water system.
   C.   Conditions Of Annexation And/Or Approval Of New Development: For
purposes of this section, the term "new development" shall mean any activity
within the city that requires the issuance or approval of a building permit,
rezone, special or conditional use permit, development agreement, variance or
subdivision plat. As a condition of annexation into the city and/or as a
condition of approval of new development within the city, the landowner and/or
developer shall:
      1.   Secure suitable surface water rights adequate to satisfy all
irrigation, aesthetic, amenity, or recreation needs of the proposed development
and/or property proposed to be annexed. Transferred water rights must be valid,
existing water rights recognized by the Idaho department of water resources
(the "department"). The water rights shall be used on the property for the life
of the development and the city may require a development agreement, special or
conditional use conditions, subdivision approval conditions, restrictive
covenants, plat notations and/or a transfer of water rights to assure
compliance with this section. If any transfer, amendment or other proceedings
are required under Idaho Code or department rule or regulation for the city's
use of such water, the owner and/or developer shall be solely responsible for
the city's costs of completing the same and the city's costs of obtaining all
necessary approvals from the department as a condition of annexation and/or
development, including costs associated with mitigation. The requirement to
transfer and assign water rights shall not apply if water rights appurtenant to
the subject property are held by an irrigation district, canal company, ditch
users' association, or other irrigation delivery entity.
      2.   Secure suitable groundwater supplies and rights adequate to satisfy
all domestic water needs of the proposed development and/or property proposed
to be annexed. If the land to be developed or annexed receives or will receive
water from the city's municipal water supply system the landowner and/or
developer shall transfer or assign said water rights to the city for inclusion
into the city's municipal water supply system. Said water rights must be valid,
existing water rights permitted or licensed by the department. If any transfer,
amendment or other proceedings are required under Idaho Code or department rule
or regulation for the city's use of such water, the owner and/or developer
shall be solely responsible for the city's costs of completing the same and the
city's costs of obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the
department as a condition of annexation and/or development, including costs of
mitigation.
      3.   Pay for the city's costs of construction of municipal supply well(s)
necessary to meet the demands of the proposed annexed property and/or new
development. The city engineer shall determine the necessary location, number,
and capacity of well(s) based upon the proposed development or other
improvements. Said well(s) shall be constructed to city standards. The owner
and/or developer shall be solely responsible for the city's costs of obtaining
all necessary permits and approvals for such well(s) as a condition of
annexation and/or development, including the costs of any required mitigation.
The design and construction of municipal supply well(s) shall be reviewed and
inspected by the city engineer.
      4.   Demonstrate that: a) the location of a new well will not result in a
violation of any regulation governing the location of water systems or
facilities, and b) the development will not result in substantial harm to
city's municipal water system.
   D.   Waiver: The requirements for obtaining surface water rights for
irrigation, aesthetic, amenity, or recreation needs may be waived if the city
council determines that the landowner and/or developer cannot secure surface
water rights by appropriation or transfer to the proposed development and/or
property proposed to be annexed.
   E.   Water And Fire Hydrant Water Line Dedications: A maintenance and
operation easement shall be granted to the city for any water mains and/or
appurtenances that are intended and/or required to be dedicated to the city
that are outside of dedicated public right of way and shall be granted prior to
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. Additionally, all water lines
servicing fire hydrants, including the fire hydrants themselves, shall be
dedicated to the public for ownership, operation and maintenance. Requests for
dedication shall be received, reviewed and cleared for city council agenda
placement prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 574, 3-
9-2015)
7-5-16: ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any
connection with the city water main or to introduce or cause to be introduced
water from the city water main into any connection made therewith unless a
permit has been first duly issued for such purpose by the building inspector in
compliance and conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the city that are now or may hereafter be established therefor;
or to cause a connection to become in noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations of the city that are now or may hereafter
be established; or to interfere with or injure any hydrant, pipe connection,
lock, meter or any property of the city water system.
   B.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon notice
by the public works supervisor or other appropriate designee of the city,
immediately take necessary steps to stop such illegal connection or
interference. Where such illegal connection or interference with the water
system poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the public works
supervisor shall have the authority to discontinue water service without
further notice.
   C.   Should the owner or occupant of the premises turn on the water, or
suffer or cause it to be turned on, after it has been shut off by the city, it
will be turned off at the main and a fee set by resolution approved by the city
council must be paid before the same shall be turned on again.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and each day shall
be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-17: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Unlawful Use Of Fire Hydrants: It shall be unlawful for any person,
except one duly authorized by the city, to open, close, operate, turn on, turn
off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with any
fire hydrant or auxiliary valve belonging to the city. Further, it shall be
unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing
around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material, or to
wilfully or carelessly injure the hydrant.
   B.   Malicious Or Wilful Waste Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any water
user to waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect water stops, valves
or leaky pipes that are not under the jurisdiction of the city, or to permit
the malicious or wilful consumption of water, having no beneficial use. The
city, based on meter readings, will make a determination of where water has
been wasted and shall notify the user of that determination. It shall then be
the user's responsibility to make the necessary repairs, or to institute
actions that will correct that situation within thirty (30) days of the city's
notification to the user. All costs incurred including the cost of wasted water
and any repairs shall be the responsibility of the user. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-18: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provided a specified maximum period of time, said period not to exceed
thirty (30) days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.
   B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to
but not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302,
as may be amended. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5-19: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application
thereof to any particular circumstance shall ever be invalid or unenforceable,
such holding shall not affect the remainder hereof, which shall continue in
full force and effect and be applicable to all circumstances to which it may
validly apply. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Purpose And Policy
7-5A-2: Definitions
7-5A-3: Cross Connection Protection
7-5A-4: Use Of Backflow Prevention Devices
7-5A-5: Cross Connection Inspections
7-5A-6: Additional Remedies
7-5A-7: Violations And Penalties
7-5A-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply of the city by isolating the
customer's water service from the city water system, thus preventing
contamination or pollution, which could backflow from the customer's premises
to the city water system;
      2.   To eliminate both potential and existing cross connections between
the potable water system and nonpotable water systems within the customer's
premises; and
      3.   To maintain the backflow prevention program by administering an
inspection and testing program of the customer premises and backflow prevention
assemblies installed at the location specified by the public works supervisor.
   B.   Policy: The city has a responsibility to protect the public water
system from contamination caused by the backflow of contaminants through a
water service connection. If, in the judgment of the public works supervisor,
an approved backflow prevention assembly is required to prevent contamination,
the city shall give notice to the customer to install the approved assembly or
assemblies at the service connection to the premises, or at an alternate
location deemed acceptable by the public works supervisor. The customer shall
immediately install the approved assembly or assemblies at the customer's own
expense. Failure, refusal or inability of the customer to install the approved
assembly or assemblies shall constitute grounds for disconnecting water service
to the premises until the backflow assembly or assemblies have been installed.
(Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
   BACKFLOW: The flow of nonpotable water, liquids, gases or other foreign
substances into the pipes of a potable water system from any source or sources.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent
back siphonage.
   CITY: The city of Parma, Idaho, or its authorized agent.
   CONSUMER: Any person served by a public water system.
   CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical biological or radiological substance or
matter in water.
   CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any
substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other
source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable system used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the
intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements,
jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other
temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can
or may occur are cross connections.
   HEALTH AGENCY: The state of Idaho department of environmental quality.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic uses, including source, treatment, storage,
transmission and distribution facilities, where water is furnished to any
collection or number of individuals, or is made available to the public for
consumption or domestic use.
   SUPERVISOR: The public works supervisor of the city of Parma or his
authorized agent. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-3: CROSS CONNECTION PROTECTION:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in
use by the city unless the water supply is protected by backflow prevention
devices as may be required by this article. The installation or maintenance of
a cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water
supply of the city shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross
connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of
cross connections shall be in accordance with this article, together with the
latest edition of the uniform plumbing code pertaining to the cross connection
control approved by the state of Idaho. The supervisor shall have the authority
to establish requirements more stringent than the state regulations if he deems
that the conditions so dictate. The city shall adopt rules and regulations as
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Installation Permits Required: If cross connection control device(s)
are found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must apply to the
city for a specific installation permit.
   B.   Backflow Prevention Devices:
      1.   Backflow Prevention Devices Required: Backflow prevention devices
shall be installed on any premises at the point on the premises where the
consumer connects to the public water supply system or within any premises
where, in the judgment of the city, the nature and extent of the activities or
the material stored on the premises would present an immediate and dangerous
hazard to health and/or deleterious to the quality of the water should a cross
connection occur even though such cross connection does not exist at the time
the backflow devices shall be installed under circumstances including, but not
limited to, the following:
         a.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply.
         b.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not
correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to
ascertain whether or not cross connections exist.
         c.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
         d.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
         e.   Premises on which any contaminant is handled under pressure so as
to permit entry into the public water supply or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters.
         f.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are
handled in such a way that, if back siphonage should occur, a serious health
hazard might result.
         g.   The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public
water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these
facilities unless the city and health agency determine that no hazard exists:
            (1)   Sewage treatment plants.
            (2)   Chemical or other industrial plants.
            (3)   Agricultural chemical storage, formulations and distribution
facilities.
            (4)   Petroleum storage facilities.
            (5)   Mortuaries.
            (6)   Hospitals.
            (7)   Piers and docks.
            (8)   Laboratories.
            (9)   Food processing plants.
            (10)   Tank truck fill stations.
            (11)   Car washes.
            (12)   Other facilities specified by the director or the city.
      2.   Type Of Device To Be Used: The type of protective device to be used
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists:
         a.   In cases where testing and repair of mechanical devices is not
possible, an air gap separation shall be required.
         b.   An air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be required where the water system may be contaminated
with sewage or other hazardous or toxic substances which may have an effect on
the health of the consumer.
         c.   A double check valve assembly, an air gap separation or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
water system may be contaminated with a substance which may be aesthetically
objectionable but not hazardous to the health of the consumer.
      3.   Installation Requirements:
         a.   Backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be
installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises when meters are
not used or at a location designated by the city. The device shall be located
so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and furthermore,
where no part of the device will be submerged.
         b.   Backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be
installed under the supervision of, and with approval of the supervisor or the
supervisor's designee.
      4.   Inspections, Tests, Maintenance And Repair: Backflow prevention
devices installed pursuant to this section shall be inspected and tested
periodically. Inspection and testing intervals shall be in conformance with
time periods specified in the city cross connection and backflow prevention
program. Inspections, tests and maintenance of backflow prevention devices
shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the devices are found to be
defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the customer's expense.
Inspections, tests, repairs and records thereof shall be accomplished under the
city's supervision. Failure of a customer to cooperate in the installation,
maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required by
this section and section 1-8306 of Idaho regulations for public drinking water
shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises or, in
the alternative, the installation of air gap separation or other device at the
customer's expense.
   C.   Protective Devices Must Be Approved: Any protective device required by
this article shall be a model approved by the supervisor. There shall be no
connection between the distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants,
water loading stations or tanks whereby unsafe water or other contaminating
materials may be discharged or drawn into a public water system. The water
purveyor is responsible through its cross connection control program to take
reasonable and prudent measures to protect the water system against
contamination and pollution from cross connections through premises isolation
or containment, internal or in plan isolation, fixture protection, or some
combination of premises isolation, internal isolation and fixture protection.
      1.   Testable Assemblies: All double check valve backflow prevention
assemblies, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies, spill
resistant vacuum breakers, and pressure vacuum breakers used must pass a
performance test conducted by the University Of Southern California Foundation
For Cross Connection Control And Hydraulic Research. In addition, all double
check valve backflow prevention assemblies and reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assemblies used shall meet American Water Works Association
(AWWA) standards C-510 or C-511, incorporated by reference into these rules at
subsection 002.01, or an equivalent standard approved by the department.
      2.   Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers: All atmospheric vacuum breakers used
shall be marked approved either by the International Association Of Plumbing
And Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) or by the American Society Of Sanitation
Engineers (ASSE).
      3.   Resilient Seated Shutoff Valves: Resilient seated shutoff valves
shall be used when double check valve backflow prevention assemblies, reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies and pressure vacuum breakers
are installed.
      4.   Expense: These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at
the expense of the consumer.
   D.   Termination Of Water Service: Failure of the consumer to cooperate in
the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention
devices required by this article shall be grounds for terminating water service
to the premises, or, in the alternative, the installation of an air gap
separation at the consumer's expense. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-5: CROSS CONNECTION INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the
city or within areas served by city water until the same shall have been
inspected by the city for possible cross connections and been approved as being
free of same.
   B.   Any construction for industrial or other purposes which are cited in
subsection
7-5A-4B1g of this article, where it is reasonable to anticipate cross
connections, or as determined by the director, shall be protected by the
installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of service
from the public water supply or any other location designated by the city.
   C.   Inspections shall be made periodically of all buildings, structures or
improvements of any nature now receiving water through the city's system for
the purpose of ascertaining whether cross connections exist. Such inspections
shall be made by the city. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-6: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time
limit set by the city, or, in the event the city is refused access to any
property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections exist,
delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is corrected
to the city's satisfaction. In addition, the city may effect the necessary
repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and refuse
delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been paid.
(Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
7-5A-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article or the
rules and regulations adopted by the city, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall for each offense be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2015)
CHAPTER 6
RELINQUISHING UTILITY CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Title
7-6-2: Purpose
7-6-3: Definitions
7-6-4: Application Required
7-6-5: Application Contents
7-6-6: Permit Required
7-6-7: Deposit Required
7-6-8: Bond Required
7-6-9: Staff Review
7-6-10: Approval Process
7-6-11: Work Within City Right-Of-Way
7-6-12: Notification To City Hall Of Removal
7-6-13: Inspection
7-6-14: Bond Release
7-6-15: Abandonment Versus Removal
7-6-16: Internal Process
7-6-17: External Process
7-6-18: Reconnections Limited And Subject To Availability And New Rates
 
7-6-19: Penalties
7-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Relinquishing Utility Connections
Ordinance. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and allow certain
property owners to relinquish water and or sewer connections in a standardized
manner while protecting fire suppression water availability and the solvency of
the water and wastewater enterprise funds. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
These definitions are in addition to all other terms defined in Title 7
regarding public utilities relating to water and wastewater services.
ABANDON/REMOVAL:                  The process of removal or abandoning a water
                                  and/or sewer service.
                                  A maintenance bond issued to the City of
                                  Parma to ensure the work performed protecting
BOND:                             the city from financial loss in the event the
                                  work completed becomes faulty within twelve
                                  (12) months from completion date.
CITY COUNCIL:                     The Parma city council.
                                  A combination of a water or wastewater
EXTRA CONNECTION:                 connection serving a single property or
                                  parcel.
INSPECTION:                       The process of reviewing work performed, by
                                  the Parma public works superintendent.
ISPWC:                            The Idaho standards for public works
                                  construction.
                                  A contractor licensed to do public works
LICENSED PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTOR: construction with the State of Idaho who is
                                  licensed, insured and proficient in the
                                  removing water/sewer connections.
                                  A pipe or conduit designed to collect sewage
MAINLINE:                         or a pipe or conduit designed to deliver
                                  potable drinking water.
METER LOCK:                       A physical device designed to lock a water
                                  meter from use.
METER PIT:                        An area which houses a water meter, setter
                                  and backflow device.
                                  A person, persons or firm legally owning real
PROPERTY OWNER(S):                property within the City of Parma, Canyon
                                  County, Idaho.
                                  The City of Parma public works superintendent
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT:      or designee appropriately licensed, trained
                                  and authorized to perform inspections.
                                  A notarized document or notarized agreement
RECORDED ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:         entered into by the mayor or designee and the
                                  property owner(s).
REGISTERED AGENT(S):              A person, persons or firms legally
                                  representing a property owner or owners.
SEWER HOOKUP/CONNECTION:          Refers to a connection to the city's
                                  municipal sewer system.
SEWER PLUG:                       A device used to stop sewage from entering
                                  the sewer main.
                                  Refers to the point where a customer's piping
WATER HOOKUP/CONNECTION:          or water system connects to the municipal
                                  water supply.
WATER METER:                      A device within a meter pit measuring water
                                  delivered. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
 
7-6-4: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Only a property owner may apply to relinquish or abandon a existing
water and or sewer hookup. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-5: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   The contents of the application shall contain the property owner name
(s); Canyon County parcel number; property address which will continue to
receive services with account number, meter identification number; in addition,
the Canyon County parcel number, property address which will discontinue to
receive services with the account number, meter identification number; and
   B.   A proposed timeline shall be included in the application; and
   C.   The proposed name of the contractor with their public works license
number, contact information; and
   D.   A written estimate from the public works license contractor dated
within thirty (30) days prior to application; and
   E.   A statement requesting an extra connection be removed, signed and
notarized by all owners or their registered agents; and
   F.   The payment of a fee is set by the Parma city council by resolution as
set from time to time. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No removal of nor abandonment or relinquishment of a service connection
shall be allowed without the property owner first obtaining approval and a
permit issued by the city.
   B.   If permit is issued; said permit will only be valid for sixty (60) days
after council approval of permit.
   C.   Removal not completed within sixty (60) days shall require a new permit
application and associated fees. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-7: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
   A.   If the property owner requests, connection removal may be done by the
city's public works department. A deposit as set by resolution of the Parma
city council may be required if the city is proposed to do the work. This
deposit shall be refunded after all expenses have been tabulated. In a case
where time and materials exceed the cost of the removal, the property owner
shall pay the difference. The estimated cost of removal shall be shown on the
face of the permit at the time of issuance. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-8: BOND REQUIRED:
If the connection removal and relinquishment is to be done by the property
owner or the owner's agent or contractor, a bond shall be required as follows:
   A.   A bond in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the written
estimate provided at time of application.
   B.   Prior to work being started, the city clerk shall receive the bond and
attach it to the file.
   C.   A cash bond equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the written
estimate provided at time of application may be paid by certified check, bank
draft or other legal tender. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-9: STAFF REVIEW:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application at Parma city hall, city hall staff
shall review the application for completeness, route a copy of the application
to the public works supervisor for review.
   B.   The public works supervisor shall issue a written report as to a
potential plan of removal or abandonment to be taken.
   C.   Upon review by the public works supervisor, the city clerk shall be
notified to place the item on the next regular Parma city council meeting, no
sooner than ten (10) days and no longer than sixty (60) days from receipt of
the completed application. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-10: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   At a regular Parma city council meeting, the matter of the application
will be taken up.
   B.   The Parma city council shall either approve, deny or modify the plan
proposed by the public works supervisor.
   C.   Once a determination is made, not more than fourteen (14) days after
the city council decision, the decision will be forwarded in writing to the
property owner in the form of a permit to remove the connection. If denied or
modified, the reason for the denial or modification shall be provided to the
property owner in writing. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-11: WORK WITHIN CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A.   A separate right of way permit to remove the connection may be required
and must be applied for on the appropriate forms provided by city hall prior to
work being started on the removal.
   B.   The existing hookup shall be removed from the mainline to the edge of
the right-of-way, including the service line piping, meter box and fittings.
The service line connection to the main line shall be capped and secured to the
specifications and satisfaction of the public works supervisor. All materials
are property of the city and shall be returned to the city.
   C.   Any and all dirt or gravel removed or disturbed during the removal of
the hookup shall be hauled away and replaced with gravel per the specifications
of the city. Compaction of the trench or area filled shall meet Idaho standards
for public works construction requirements and be warranted for one (1) year
after acceptance by the city.
   D.   Any street or sidewalk disturbed shall be replaced to the latest State
of Idaho and City of Parma requirements or regulations.
   E.   In any event where a sidewalk is not present on removal, a new sidewalk
shall be installed at the owner's expense. The Parma city council may at its
own option be able to cost share in the construction cost of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-12: NOTIFICATION TO CITY HALL OF REMOVAL:
The property owner must schedule with city hall the inspection by the public
works prior to work beginning. The schedule should include a tentative time and
date for a final inspection prior to the burial or concealment of the
disconnection of the service. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-13: INSPECTION:
   A.   The public works supervisor shall inspect the removal and determine if
in his or her opinion, the work completed is satisfactorily sufficient to
protect the health, safety and sanitation of the citizens of Parma and the
city's public works systems. If the work is not completed satisfactorily, the
city may file a claim against the bond for the maximum amount allowed.
   B.   If the work is completed satisfactorily, the public works supervisor
shall file a report with the city clerk to be added to the file.
   C.   The public works supervisor shall also include in his or her monthly
written report to the council the progress of the removal. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-
10-2025)
7-6-14: BOND RELEASE:
If after the work is completed and sufficient to the public works supervisor,
he or she shall notify the city clerk of the progress and the city clerk shall
release the bond after twelve (12) months from the date of notification from
the public works supervisor in the same manner in which it was paid. (Ord. 633-
2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-15: ABANDONMENT VERSUS REMOVAL:
If recommended by the public works supervisor and approved by the Parma city
council, the connection may be relinquished by abandonment versus removal.
(Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-16: INTERNAL PROCESS:
Once city hall is notified of the completion of the project, the utility
billing software rates shall be modified to reflect the change. At least one
(1) of each connection type must remain on the property and shall be subject to
the minimum monthly rate set forth under this title and by resolution of the
council. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-17: EXTERNAL PROCESS:
Once the project is complete, the city shall record with the Canyon County
clerk a notarized affidavit indicating the property has a single utility
connection of each utility type. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-18: RECONNECTIONS LIMITED AND SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY AND NEW RATES:
Reconnecting of abandoned or relinquished connections shall not be permitted on
the same property within five (5) years. Reconnection may only occur if the
city has sufficient connections available or the ability to serve and requires
payment of full connection fees in effect at the time of application for
reconnection. (Ord. 633-2025, 6-10-2025)
7-6-19: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with this code shall constitute a misdemeanor. Tampering with
a locking device on a public water system constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 633-
2025, 6-10-2025)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Littering Prohibited
8-1-2: Abandoned Refrigerators
8-1-3: Electric Fences
8-1-4: Open Burning
8-1-1: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public
thoroughfares any handbills, posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein
shall be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public thoroughfares
or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere or prevent
the posting of notices required by law to be posted. (1959 Code §5-203)
8-1-2: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under his or its control, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other
locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first
removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device or by first
fastening, bolting or locking the same in such a manner that it is impossible
to open the same by the use of the hands. (1959 Code §6-601)
8-1-3: ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city any
electric fence as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land. (1959 Code §6-
115; amd. 1990 Code)
8-1-4: OPEN BURNING:
It shall be unlawful to create or have an open fire for any purpose within the
city limits; provided, that the city clerk may issue a special permit when
circumstances warrant such permit.
   A.   The prohibition on burning shall be stayed as follows:
      1.   From April 15 of each year to May 15 of each year; and
      2.   From October 15 of each year to November 15 of each year.
   B.   Subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Burning shall only occur between sunrise and up to one (1) hour
prior to sunset, as long as air quality is favorable on such date. Burning must
comply with the rules and regulations of the environmental protection agency of
the United States.
      2.   All conditions of a special permit shall apply to any period of open
burning.
   C.   Special and/or temporary permits may be issued at any other time for
one (1) day's duration from the city clerk under the following rules:
      1.   Fire shall be attended all the time it is burning.
      2.   A source of water sufficient to extinguish the fire shall be is
available for the duration of burning.
      3.   The fire must be completely out upon leaving.
      4.   If trouble is encountered, the fire department (911) must be called.
      5.   There will be no burning in or on streets, sidewalks, roads, alleys,
curbs, or gutters.
      6.   That the owner, occupant, or agent accepts all responsibility for
damage to neighboring property.
      7.   No burning of animals, plastic articles, petroleum products,
pathogenic products, tires or rubber products or hazardous wastes will be
allowed. (Ord. 478, 3-23-1998; amd. Ord. 614, 12-14-2021)
CHAPTER 2
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definition
8-2-2: Prohibition On Dumping Or Storage Of Solid Waste
8-2-3: Compost Piles
8-2-4: Compliance With Fire Safety Codes
8-2-5: Prohibiting Nuisance Or Health Menace (Rep. by Ord. 553, 3-23-2009)
8-2-6: Prohibiting Storage Susceptible To Winds Or Other Littering
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
   GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE: All nontoxic and nonhazardous waste, rubbish,
papers, cinders, ashes, household hazardous wastes as defined by the
environmental protection agency of the United States of America, debris from
construction, remodeling, or lawn renovation, and building material waste,
debris or scraps. (Ord. 436, 12-14-1992)
8-2-2: PROHIBITION ON DUMPING OR STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE:
Waste deposits by individuals or corporations whether the owners, occupiers or
transients is prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any individual or corporation to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited any garbage or solid waste in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city in violation of the environmental protection agency
rules and regulations and for nonhazardous waste under EPA in excess of two (2)
weeks' temporary collection in self-contained, sanitary, rodentproof and
flyproof containers. (Ord. 436, 12-14-1992)
8-2-3: COMPOST PILES:
Compost piles for single-family use on the premises and not for any commercial
use or purpose may be maintained for fertilization purposes and matter used for
fertilization purposes only may be kept and used in such piles; provided that
the same shall not constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 436, 12-14-1992)
8-2-4: COMPLIANCE WITH FIRE SAFETY CODES:
Nothing in these provisions shall be construed as permitting a violation of the
rural fire department laws, rules or fire safety codes or as permitting any
burning of such garbage or solid waste. (Ord. 436, 12-14-1992)
8-2-5: PROHIBITING NUISANCE OR HEALTH MENACE:
(Rep. by Ord. 553, 3-23-2009)
8-2-6: PROHIBITING STORAGE SUSCEPTIBLE TO WINDS OR OTHER LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave or to permit to remain anywhere
within the city any garbage or solid waste, in such a manner that it can be
blown away by the wind or can cause littering on public or private premises.
(Ord. 436, 12-14-1992)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
SECTION:
8-3-1: Trees And Shrubs To Be Trimmed
8-3-2: Injury To Trees Or Shrubs Prohibited
8-3-3: Authority
8-3-1: TREES AND SHRUBS TO BE TRIMMED:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees
on property owned or occupied by him overhanging the sidewalks, streets or
alleys so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or
public travel. (1959 Code §9-301)
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/
or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk. (1959 Code §9-
302)
8-3-2: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or
without lawful authority so to do, to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or
destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub or to injure, destroy, cut
or pick any flower or plant growing, standing or being either on private ground
or any street, parking, public park or place. (1959 Code §9-303)
8-3-3: AUTHORITY:
The mayor and council are hereby given full and complete control over all trees
growing within the confines of the city limits which are outside the property
lines of the respective lots, plats and tracts. (1959 Code §9-304)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Short Title
8-4-2: Authority And Purpose
8-4-3: Definitions
8-4-4: Public Nuisance Declared Unlawful
8-4-5: Enforcement Procedure
8-4-6: Penalties
8-4-7: Interference With Authorized Person
8-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter is entitled the CITY OF PARMA NUISANCE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 560, 8-23-
2010)
8-4-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by article 12, section
2, Idaho constitution, and sections 50-302, 50-317 and 50-1008, Idaho Code. Its
purpose is to advance the public health, safety and welfare by providing a
procedure for removing nuisances and rubbish. Any provision of city ordinance
or code in conflict with this is repealed by this ordinance, which shall take
effect upon publication according to law. (Ord. 560, 8-23-2010)
8-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and meanings apply when used in this chapter:
 
 
          Any condition or use of property which is harmful or injurious to, or creates a
          danger of harm or injury to the health and/or safety of the public. The term is
          further defined so as to include, but not be limited to, the following:
          A condition or use of property which:
             A.   Is harmful or injurious to, or creates any fire, traffic, safety or health
          hazard to members of the public.
             B.   Allows the existence of any sight obstruction, including, but not limited
          to, fences, walls, or growth of any weeds, grasses, bushes, shrubs, trees, or
NUISANCE: other plant life to such a size and in such a condition as to cause a traffic or
          safety hazard applying the measurements and standards contained in Idaho Code
          section 49-221, at intersections or other points at which driveways, lanes,
          alleys, or highways intersect.
             C.   Creates a fire hazard because of dead or dried vegetation, or other
          flammable or combustible materials kept or located upon the premises.
             D.   Provides nesting grounds or habitat for rodents, vermin, insects, or other
          disease carrying vectors.
             E.   Is an accumulation of snow, ice, vegetation, weeds personal property of
          any kind, or other object or material on any portion of a public sidewalk.
          Garbage or waste of any kind, including, but not limited to: plastic sacks
          designed to store refuse; solid waste as defined in Idaho Code; animal carcasses
          and waste; construction or demolition scraps and debris; hazardous waste as
          defined by federal and state law; weeds; household appliances; miscellaneous
RUBBISH:  equipment trailers or other property that is abandoned, stolen, wrecked,
          unregistered, or unlicensed and not enclosed in a building partially dismantled,
          wrecked, discarded, or otherwise nonoperating equipment, or unregistered or
          unlicensed motor vehicles or trailers, or parts thereof; tree, shrub and brush
          trimmings or newspapers and magazines or meat, vegetables or fruit exposed to air,
          flies or rodents.
          Undesirable or objectionable and non useful plant growth, exceeding six (6) inches
WEEDS:    in height, including noxious weeds as defined by Idaho Code. (Ord. 554, 6-8-2009;
          amd. Ord. 560, 8-23-2010; Ord. 560, 4-9-2024)
 
8-4-4: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
   A.   Declared Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to create, cause,
maintain or knowingly allow to exist a public nuisance on any premises or real
property which the person owns, rents, leases, occupies, manages or has charge
or possession of in the city of Parma. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit a nuisance or the accumulation of rubbish on public or private
property or its adjacent curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, ditch banks
or ditches.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   An official public disposal site, landfill, or transfer station
operated by the city of Parma or its franchisee shall not be a public nuisance.
      2.   The application and enforcement of this chapter shall not contravene
the right to farm codified at title 22, chapter 45, Idaho Code.
      3.   The lawful business operation of a licensed dismantler, salvage yard
or junk dealer shall not be a public nuisance, provided said operation does not
create a fire, traffic, safety or health hazard to members of the public.
      4.   The restoration, maintenance, and/or preservation of motor vehicles
as a noncommercial hobby shall not be a public nuisance, provided such
operation does not create a fire, traffic, safety or health hazard to members
of the public, and that such hobby is conducted entirely within a closed
building. (Ord. 560, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 560, 4-9-2024)
8-4-5: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Administrator: The Parma city police department, or its designated code
enforcement officer, shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Abatement: When a public nuisance is suspected within the city of
Parma:
      1.   Written Notice Of Public Nuisance: A written notice of the existence
of a public nuisance shall be served upon the owner, and the occupant or person
in charge of the premises or property, if known. The written notice may be
personally served or sent by certified mail. If written notice cannot be served
personally or by mail, the notice shall be posted by being affixed to the
building, prominent fixture or other place on the premises or property so
conspicuous that any person occupying, possessing, or using the premises or
property would be reasonably expected to see it.
         a.   The written notice referred to above shall describe the nuisance;
advise that the nuisance must be abated within a specified number of calendar
days from the date of the notice; that either civil or criminal proceedings may
be initiated if the nuisance is not abated; that costs of court proceedings may
be assessed; that the nuisance may be summarily abated by the city and that the
cost of abatement may be assessed to the owner; and that the owner has the
right to request a hearing before the City Council regarding the nuisance.
      2.   Issuance Of Uniform Citation: If the specified period contained in
the notice as provided above has run and the nuisance has not been abated then
a uniform citation may be issued by a law enforcement officer, or the Parma
city council may request the city prosecutor to initiate civil proceedings to
abate the nuisance.
      3.   Civil Enforcement: The Parma city council, after the specified
notice period has elapsed, may cause the abatement materials and conditions
constituting a “public nuisance” as defined in section
8-4-3 of this chapter as often as necessary on lots, lands, or premises not in
compliance with this chapter. The expense of such work shall be billed to and
paid by the property owner involved and if not paid within thirty (30) calendar
days, assessed against the property involved as general taxes and collectible
as other state, county and municipal taxes.
      4.   Employment Of Labor: The Parma city council shall employ such labor
as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and allow the bills
therefor.
      5.   Request for Hearing: After notice to abate a nuisance has been
given, the owner or person responsible for the nuisance may make written
request for a hearing before the City Council regarding such nuisance and
whether or not abatement or other remedies should apply. Said hearing shall be
at the next regularly scheduled council meeting falling more than seven days
after the written request is received by the City. (Ord. 560, 8-23-2010; amd.
Ord. 560, 4-9-2024)
8-4-6: PENALTIES:
A.   Penalty: Any person found in violation of these provisions of this chapter
for the first time shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a
fine of $150 inclusive of court costs.
   1.   Any person who pleads guilty to, is found guilty of, or is in any
manner convicted of a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this
chapter within two (2) years, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by
a fine of not more than $500 or up to ten (10) days in jail, or both.
B.   Continuing Violation: Each day a nuisance persists shall be considered a
separate offense.
C.   Costs Of Abatement: In addition to the above criminal penalties, should
the city of Parma, pursuant to subsection
8-4-5B3 of this chapter, cause abatement of a public nuisance as often as
necessary on lots, lands or premises not in compliance, such work shall be
billed to and paid by the property owner involved. The court shall permit
payment to the city of the above cost as a condition of any probation granted
in a criminal proceeding. Such costs may also be assessed to the property owner
as taxes in accordance with Idaho Code § 50-1008 and as in subsection
8-4-5B3 of this chapter. (Ord. 560, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 560, 4-9-2024)
8-4-7: INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED PERSON:
   A.   Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful, and shall be a
misdemeanor, for any person to interfere with the peace officer, code
enforcement officer, or any law enforcement officer in the performance of
duties connected with enforcement of this chapter. Such interference shall
include, but not be limited to, removal of notices posted on the property
pursuant to this chapter or impediment or harassment of the authorized person
in the performance of their duties under this chapter.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A misdemeanor violation of this section shall be
punishable as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113. (Ord. 560, 8-23-2010; amd.
Ord. 560, 4-9-2024)
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Fireworks
8-5-1-1: Definitions
8-5-1-2: Permit Required
8-5-1-3: Application For Permit
8-5-1-4: Permit Fee And Contents
8-5-1-5: Investigation Of Applicant
8-5-1-6: Approval Of Application
8-5-1-7: Term Of Permit; Nontransferability
8-5-1-8: Insurance Requirements
8-5-1-9: Hours Of Operation
8-5-1-10: Temporary And Permanent Fireworks Structures
8-5-1-11: Compliance With Provisions; Penalty
8-5-2: Explosives
8-5-2-1: Application Of Provisions
8-5-2-2: Manufacture And Storage Prohibited
8-5-2-3: Transportation Of Explosives
8-5-1: FIREWORKS:
8-5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this section
8-5-1, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
   A.   Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube
salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardments, grasshoppers and other
explosive articles of similar nature.
   B.   Blank cartridges.
   C.   Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge.
   D.   Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into
the air.
   E.   Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about
the surface of the ground during discharge.
   F.   Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury.
   G.   Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-quarter inch (1/
4") in diameter or made with other than iron wires.
   H.   All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes,
flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, mines, Dago bombs and similar
devices.
   I.   All torpedoes which explode by means of friction or which contain
arsenic and all other similar fireworks devices including cracker balls.
   J.   Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of
any kind attached thereto.
   FIREWORKS Blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns
in which explosives are used, fire balloons (balloons of a type which have
burning materials of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath
to propel them), firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman candles,
fountains, wheels, Dago bombs, sparklers, and other fireworks of a like
construction and any fireworks containing any combustible or explosive
substance for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of
combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation.
Exempted from this definition are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes and
toy guns and similar devices such as party poppers or party favors in which
paper caps containing not more than twenty five one-hundredths (.25) grain of
explosive compound per cap are used and such caps, whether single, roll or tape
type.
   SAFE FIREWORKS Includes any of the following:
   A.   Cone fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding fifty (50)
grams each.
   B.   Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle, with pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding seventy five (75) grams each and inside tube diameter
not exceeding three-quarters inch (3/4").
   C.   Sparklers and "dipped sticks" not more than ten inches (10") in length
or one-quarter inch (1/4") in diameter made on steel or iron wire and suzuke
and morning glories with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding four (4) grams
each.
   D.   Snakes which do not contain bichloride or mercury and pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding two (2) grams each.
   E.   Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding sixty (60) grams for
each driver unit or two hundred forty (240) grams for each complete wheel. The
inside tube diameter of driver unit shall not exceed one-half inch (1/2").
   F.   Whistles without report and which do not dart or travel about the
ground during discharge with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding six (6)
grams and containing no picric or gallic acid. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Dangerous Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to
import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store or permit the
keeping or storing of any dangerous fireworks for any use or purpose; except,
that a person holding a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms
and conditions of this Section may use dangerous fireworks for a safely
supervised and conducted public display of fireworks, and said fireworks may be
stored for a period not exceeding four (4) days immediately preceding the date
of said public display, provided the fireworks are to be used exclusively for
the public display.
   B.   Safe Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for any person not having a valid
safe fireworks permit issued pursuant to terms and conditions set forth in this
Section, to import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale or
sell any safe fireworks for any use or purpose. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any reputable person in reasonable pursuit of furtherance of any legitimate
personal, business or charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of
"safe" fireworks within the City shall first make written application to the
City Clerk for a safe fireworks permit, and any reputable person in reasonable
pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or charitable
purpose, desiring to make a public display of "dangerous fireworks" shall first
make written application to the City Clerk for a dangerous fireworks permit.
Each application for permit to sell "safe" fireworks at retail shall be filed
with the City Clerk on or before April 1 of the calendar year for which the
permit is sought; except, that for the calendar year of 1968, applications for
a permit may be filed on or before June 1, 1968. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-4: PERMIT FEE AND CONTENTS:
A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged for such permits. Each applicant
for a "safe fireworks permit" or a "dangerous fireworks permit" shall show the
following:
   A.   Name and address of applicant.
   B.   The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which
it was organized.
   C.   The names and addresses of the officers, trustees and/or directors, if
any, of the applicant.
   D.   The location where the applicant requests permission to sell safe
fireworks or display dangerous fireworks.
   E.   When and where the applicant was organized and established or, if a
natural person, the applicant's age.
   F.   The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting place
or places or principal place or places of business.
   G.   The applicant's State sales tax permit number.
   H.   If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the
name and a general description of the business activities of each parent or
subsidiary company, business or entity and a general description of the
ownership organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any.
   I.   Such other information as the City Clerk may require on a standard form
submitted to all applicants and which is reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, safety and morals. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
The City Council shall cause an investigation to be made of each application
and applicant by the Fire Chief, and he shall submit a written report of his
findings and recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit,
together with his reasons therefor, to the City Council. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-6: APPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
The City Council shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny any
application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall
prescribe so long as the denial of the application or any conditions imposed on
the granting of the application are reasonably necessary for protection of the
public health, safety and morals. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-7: TERM OF PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
A safe fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to this
Section shall be valid only within the calendar year in which issued. A permit
shall be valid only for the specific premises or location designated in the
permit. However, subject to reasonable conditions necessary for protection of
the public health, safety and morals, an applicant may be granted permits for
more than one site or location within the City. No permit shall be transferable
or assignable. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-8: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Each applicant for a safe fireworks permit or for a dangerous fireworks permit
shall have filed with the City Clerk, prior to the issuance and validity of any
permit, a policy, or a certified true copy thereof, of public liability and
products liability insurance, including both "accident" and "occurrence"
coverage. The insurance coverage limits for both public liability coverage and
for products liability coverage shall be at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per person per occurrence for bodily injury, five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for aggregate bodily injury and
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for aggregate
property damage for a safe fireworks permit. The insurance coverage limits for
both public liability coverage and for products liability coverage shall be at
least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person per occurrence for
bodily injury, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for
aggregate bodily injury and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence for aggregate property damage for a dangerous fireworks permit. Each
policy of insurance shall be in form and substance acceptable to the Council
and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the policy the City, all
officials of the City in performance of official functions regarding all
operations under or pertaining to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the
applicant and all vendors of the fireworks covered by the permit to be issued
to the applicant. Said policy of insurance shall be so written that it cannot
be cancelled without at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the City
from the underwriting insurance company. The policy of insurance shall be
underwritten through or by a qualified and duly licensed insurance company or
companies doing or authorized to do insurance business in Idaho. (Ord. 289, 4-
9-68; 1990 Code)
8-5-1-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No safe fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale except from twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on June 15 to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 31 of each
year. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-1-10: TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT FIREWORKS STRUCTURES:
All retail sales of safe fireworks shall be permitted only from within a
temporary fireworks stand and approved business structures.
   A.   Temporary Stands: Temporary stands shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of
any building nor within one hundred feet (100') of any gasoline station.
      2.   All stands shall meet the structural stability requirements of the
Building Ordinance of the City, 1  and all lighting circuits and other
electrical equipment shall meet the requirements of the Electrical Ordinance of
the City.1
      3.   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet.
      4.   Stands shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at
both ends of the structure and one additional door for each twenty five feet
(25') of rear wall in excess of twenty four feet (24'). All doors shall open
outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all
supplies and materials at all times.
      5.   Each stand shall be provided with two (2) two and one-half (21/2)
gallon "soda and acid" type fire extinguishers, in good working order and
easily accessible for use in case of fire.
      6.   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age
or older, on duty at all times. No person under eighteen (18) years of age
shall be allowed inside the stand at any time nor shall any person under
eighteen (18) years of age work at or about any premises where safe fireworks
are sold or offered for sale.
      7.   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
of any stand when it is not open for business.
      8.   "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed, both inside and
outside the stand. Smoking shall not be permitted within the stand or within
fifteen feet (15') of the stand.
      9.   No stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The premises
on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris not
later than noon of July 26.
      10.   No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet
(25') of any fireworks stand.
      11.   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any
fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist.
      12.   No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of
whether the fireworks stand is open for business or not. If any fireworks are
stored, they shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage of
fireworks by the City Fire Inspector.
   B.   Permanent Business Structures: Permanent business structures from which
safe fireworks are to be sold shall be subject to the following provisions:
      1.   All such buildings shall meet the structural stability requirements
of the building regulations of the City 2  and all lighting circuits and other
electrical equipment shall meet the requirements of the electrical regulations
of the City.1
      2.   The building shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide
at both ends of the structure and shall otherwise conform to the exit
regulations established by the City building regulations for structures of the
size and nature of said building.1 All doors shall open outward and all
doorways shall be kept free and clear from all supplies and materials at all
times.
      3.   Each building shall be provided with such number of fire
extinguishers as the Fire Chief of the City shall deem adequate but in all
cases, the number shall be not less than two (2). The fire extinguishers shall
be two and one-half (21/2) gallon "soda and acid" type extinguishers or other
types approved by the Fire Chief. The fire extinguishers shall be in good
working order, easily accessible for use in case of fire and kept in immediate
proximity to the location when the fireworks are retailed.
      4.   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age
or older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be screened or otherwise
effectively segregated from any kind of self service by the public and shall be
placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the
public in capacities other than as legal customers. No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall be allowed at any time inside the screened or otherwise
segregated area where the fireworks are located.
      5.   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
the screened or otherwise segregated area when it is not open for business.
      6.   "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and
outside the screened or otherwise segregated area. Smoking shall not be
permitted within the screened or otherwise segregated area or within fifteen
feet (15') of such area.
      7.   No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25')
of the screened or segregated area where fireworks are kept.
      8.   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate or permit a fire
nuisance to exist in or around the area where fireworks are sold.
      9.   If fireworks are stored, they shall only be stored in such places as
are approved for storage of fireworks by the Fire Chief.
      10.   No building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on
the premises shall be used for the retail sale of safe fireworks.
      11.   The City Council may establish other regulations for permanent
structures where fireworks are to be sold so long as said regulations are
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and morals and apply
uniformly to all applicants. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code.
2 1. See Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code.
8-5-1-11: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; PENALTY:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with
all the provisions of the State Fireworks Law1 and this Section. The violation
of the aforesaid State Fireworks Law or any of the provisions of this Section
by the permittee or by any of its agents, employees or officers shall
constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a
permit. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with the
provisions of Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 289, 4-9-68)
8-5-2: EXPLOSIVES:
8-5-2-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Section applies to all explosives except small arms ammunition and
pyrotechnic devices. (1959 Code §7-201)
8-5-2-2: MANUFACTURE AND STORAGE PROHIBITED:
The manufacture and storage of explosives within the City limits is prohibited.
(1959 Code §7-202)
8-5-2-3: TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit shall be obtained from the Chief of the Fire
Department to transport any explosive in or through the City. (1959 Code §7-
202)
   B.   Transportation Regulations:
      1.   Explosives shall not be transported or carried on or in any
conveyance carrying passengers for hire.
      2.   Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall display upon an
erect pole at the front end of such vehicle and at such height that it shall be
visible from all directions, a red flag with the word "DANGER" printed, stamped
or sewed thereon in white letters at least six inches (6") in height or, in
lieu of such flag, the word "EXPLOSIVES" must be painted on or attached to the
rear end and each side of such vehicle in letters at least four inches (4") in
height.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a vehicle
containing explosives to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle, to drive, load or
unload the vehicle while intoxicated, to drive the vehicle in a careless or
reckless manner or to load or unload such vehicle in a careless or reckless
manner.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry, or cause to
be placed or carried, any metal tool or other similar piece of metal in the bed
or body of a vehicle containing explosives.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or, carry or cause to
be placed or carried, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives,
any exploders, detonators, blasting caps or other similar explosives material,
or to carry in or upon any such vehicle any matches. (1959 Code §7-203)
TITLE 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Department Created
9-1-2: Chief of Police
9-1-3: Police Matron
9-1-4: Duties of Department Members
9-1-5: Rules and Regulations
9-1-6: Witness Fees
9-1-7: Special Police
9-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department which shall consist of the Chief of
Police and such other personnel as may be provided by the governing body of the
City. (1959 Code §3-201)
9-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment and Term: The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold office for the
duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with a
concurrence of the Council. (1959 Code §1-1301)
   B.   Powers and Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department
and have supervision over all the officers and members thereof. He shall be
responsible for the performance of the Police Department and of its functions
and all persons who are members of the Police Department shall serve subject to
his orders. (1959 Code §§1-1302, 1-1303)
      2.   Enforcement of Powers: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police
to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this Code and of all applicable
statutes and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. He shall have the authority to call upon any citizen or
bystander to assist him in the execution of his duty. He shall serve all
processes issued to him and enforce all orders and judgments of the court.
      3.   Records and Reports: The Chief of Police shall keep such records and
make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may be
required by statute or by the Mayor. (1959 Code §1-1303)
      4.   Custody of Abandoned, Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall
have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within the
Municipality. 1  (1959 Code §1-1304)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 6 of this Title.
9-1-3: POLICE MATRON:
The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint a Police Matron who
shall perform such duties as may be assigned to her by the Chief of Police or
by the Mayor. (1959 Code §3-205)
9-1-4: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of all of the laws of the Municipality and all statutes applicable
therein and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. (1959 Code §3-202)
9-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as he shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the
governing body, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations
may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be
worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters
necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department. (1959 Code
§3-204)
9-1-6: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any law or of any state or
federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the municipality is a party; any fees paid for
such services shall be turned over to the chief of police who shall deposit the
same with the treasurer. (1959 Code §3-203)
9-1-7: SPECIAL POLICE:
The chief of police may, with the approval of the mayor, appoint such special
police as may be required from time to time, however, such appointment may not
be for a period of longer than ten (10) days, and special police shall not be
reappointed following the specified ten (10) days without the consent of the
governing body. (1959 Code §1-1302)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
9-2-1: Short Title And Savings Clause
9-2-2: Purposes And Authority
9-2-3: Definitions
9-2-4: Cruelty To Animals
9-2-5: Commanding An Animal To Attack; Prohibited
9-2-6: Interfering With Animal Control Officer In The Impoundment Of Animal;
Unlawful
9-2-7: Wild Animals; Prohibited
9-2-8: Vicious Animals
9-2-9: Control Of Vicious Animals
9-2-10: Action For Damages; Destruction Of Offending Animal; Civil Penalty
9-2-11: Determination Of A Vicious Animal
9-2-12: Liability Of Parents For Damages Caused By Animal Owned By A Minor
9-2-13: Canine License Required; Application; Fees
9-2-14: Collar And Tag Required
9-2-15: Imitation License Tags
9-2-16: Residential Kennel And/Or Cattery License; Application And Conditions
9-2-17: Commercial Kennel And/Or Cattery License; Application And Conditions
9-2-18: Rabies, Diseases And Quarantine
9-2-19: Enforcement By Animal Control Officer
9-2-20: Offenses And Conditions
9-2-21: Impoundment
9-2-22: Canine/Feline Impound Fees
9-2-23: Keeping Of Livestock; Impoundment Of Livestock In Violation Of This
Chapter
9-2-24: Sale Of Animal
9-2-25: Canine Adoption
9-2-26: Poultry And Fowl
9-2-27: Rabbits
9-2-28: Other Animals At Large
9-2-29: Uniform Summons; Prosecution; Fine Schedule
9-2-1: SHORT TITLE AND SAVINGS CLAUSE:
This chapter shall be known as the ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE. The
"city of Parma animal control ordinance", previously contained in sections
 9-2-1 through
9-2-5 of this chapter, is hereby repealed, as well as all other ordinances and
parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, upon the effective date of this
chapter. All offenses committed prior to this repeal may be prosecuted and
punished in the same manner and with the same effect as if said repeal had not
been made. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-2: PURPOSES AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of Parma and to help solve the problems caused by unowned, unwanted
and undisciplined animals running at large in the city, and to provide for the
registration of kennels and catteries, and to provide for determination,
registration and disposal of vicious animals in the city. This chapter is also
intended to provide for the limitation and prohibition of certain classes of
animals within the corporate limits of the city to further the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of Parma and to preserve the quality of life in the
city. This chapter is enacted upon the authority derived from Idaho Code
sections 25-2801 et seq., 50-302, 50-304, 50-319 and 50-334 and to provide for
the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
   ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or
negligent conduct resulting in the animal's bruising, bleeding, malnutrition,
dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones, subdural hematoma, soft
tissue swelling, death or lack of veterinary care and attention.
   ANIMAL: Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and
sustain its life and which generally has mobility and a developed central
nervous system.
   ANIMAL CONTROL DIRECTOR: The person contracting with the city to provide
animal control enforcement services and/or animal shelter services.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person appointed by the city to provide animal
control enforcement and/or animal shelter services.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner
or member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or other means
of physical restraint.
   CANINE: Shall mean and include either male or female, whether neutered or
spayed, whether full domesticated canine or partial wolf, or partial coyote.
   CATTERY: A facility located at the private residence of the feline owner,
where more than three (3) of the owner's felines are maintained for purposes of
breeding, competition, or for personal enjoyment. Trophies, medals or other
awards realized by the feline owner shall not be construed as compensation.
   CITY: The city of Parma, Canyon County, Idaho.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Parma, Idaho.
   COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho, or the unincorporated areas of Canyon County,
Idaho.
   ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming
or causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be
taken by the owner such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and
shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping.
   FELINE: Shall mean and include either male or female cat of any breed or
mixed breed whether neutered or spayed.
   IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of the city animal shelter.
   KENNEL: A facility located at the private residence of the canine owner,
where more than three (3) of the owner's canines are maintained for purposes of
breeding, hunting, organized field trials, obedience or confirmation,
competition, personal safety and security, or for personal enjoyment. Trophies,
medals or other awards realized by the canine owner shall not be construed as
compensation.
   LIVESTOCK: Horses, mules, donkeys, burros, llamas, goats, cattle, sheep,
pigs, hogs and rabbits.
   MISUSE: The intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task
which could be dangerous or harmful to the animal.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Includes, without limitation, automobile, pickup truck,
flatbed truck, open equipment laden truck, any open bed vehicle and any
motorized vehicle.
   MUNICIPALITY: The city of Parma, Idaho.
   OWNER: Shall be construed to mean and include any person owning, harboring,
keeping, possessing, caring or having custodial duties over any animal.
   SIGN: Any structure used to attract attention to any object, place,
activity, person, animal, or business which shall display or include any
letter, word, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the
nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purposes of this
chapter, the sign shall be constructed of wood, metal or other similar
weatherproof material, at least twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x
24") in size, with letters in indelible or fluorescent ink with the words in
clear, capital letters as follows: "VICIOUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES, VICIOUS CANINE
PROPERTY", or words of similar meaning; and shall be posted at all visible
entryways onto the owner's property, or where canine is lodged.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon
the streets, sidewalks, and public grounds or places, or private property not
owned or possessed by the owner of the animal;
   B.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or domestic animals;
   C.   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal without provocation;
   D.   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purposes of
fighting or any animal trained for fighting;
Notwithstanding the definition of a "vicious animal" above, no animal may be
declared vicious under section
9-2-11 of this chapter if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at
the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a wilful trespass
or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared vicious if the animal
was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
animal from an unjustified attack or assault. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-4: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a cruel manner to any animal
within the city. The phrase "cruel manner" shall include, but is not limited
to, the following specific acts and omissions:
   A.   Failure To Provide: Any owner of an animal who fails to provide such
animal with:
      1.   Sufficient good and wholesome food; or
      2.   Proper shelter and protection from the weather; or
      3.   Proper veterinary care to prevent suffering or disease; or
      4.   A clean and wholesome environment in which to live; or
      5.   Protection from the abuse of other persons.
   B.   Commission Or Omission: Any person who, through act or omission, does
any of the following specific acts with an animal:
      1.   Abuses or otherwise mistreats; or
      2.   Tortures; or
      3.   Misuses; or
      4.   Overloads or overrides; or
      5.   Abandons; or
      6.   Exposes to unreasonable danger to health or life.
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to three hundred
dollars ($300.00), or six (6) months in jail, or both. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. It
shall be the duty of any police officer, animal control officer, or other
designated city employee to take possession of any animal which he has probable
cause to believe falls under the preceding subsection and deliver such animal
to the animal shelter. All costs incurred for the maintenance of such animal
will be paid by the person charged with the offense. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-5: COMMANDING AN ANIMAL TO ATTACK; PROHIBITED:
Except where great bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it is
unlawful for any person to command, encourage or aid by word or conduct, any
animal to bite, chase, attack or attempt to bite, chase or attack another
person or animal. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-6: INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER IN THE IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMAL;
UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or molest any animal control
officer who may be engaged in seizing, keeping or removing any animal in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-7: WILD ANIMALS; PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, maintain or possess within
the corporate limits of the city any wild animal, as determined by the United
States endangered species list, any furbearing animal and hawks or eagles.
(Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-8: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Requirements For Registration:
      1.   No vicious animal shall be licensed for any licensing period
commencing after the effective date of this chapter, unless the owner or keeper
of such vicious animal shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   The owner shall present to the city clerk or other licensing
authority, proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in
the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious animal during
the twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought. The policy shall
contain a provision requiring the city to be named as additional insured for
the sole purpose of the city clerk, or other licensing authority where such
animal is licensed to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation,
termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
         b.   The owner shall, at his own expense, have the licensing number
assigned to such vicious animal, or such other identification number as the
city clerk or other licensing authority shall determine, tattooed upon such
vicious animal by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as a tattooist and
authorized as such by any state, city or police department. The tattoo shall be
placed on the upper inner lip, inside ear or inside rear thigh of the vicious
animal. The number shall be noted on the city licensing files for such vicious
animal, if it is different from the license number of such vicious animal. For
the purposes of this chapter, "tattoo" shall be defined as any permanent
numbering of a vicious animal by means of indelible or permanent ink with the
number designated by the licensing authority, or any other permanent acceptable
method of tattooing.
   B.   Display Of Sign: The owner shall display a sign in conformance with
this chapter on his premises warning that there is a vicious animal on the
premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public
highway.
   C.   Statement By Owner: The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
      1.   The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability
insurance required by this chapter during the twelve (12) month period for
which licensing is sought, unless the owner shall cease to own or keep the
vicious animal prior to expiration of such license.
      2.   The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license
for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the vicious animal
on the property where the vicious animal will be kept or maintained.
      3.   The owner shall notify the licensing authority and the animal
control officer within twenty four (24) hours if a vicious animal is on the
loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human
being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious animal has
been sold or given away, the owner shall also provide the licensing authority
with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the vicious
animal.
   D.   Animal Control Officer: An animal control officer is empowered to make
whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, and any such animal control officer is hereby empowered to
seize and impound any vicious animal whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions hereof.
   E.   Search Warrant: In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to
surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control officer
may require a police officer to obtain a search warrant to seize the animal
upon execution of the warrant.
   F.   Ownership Restrictions: No person shall possess with intent to sell, or
offer for sale, breed or buy or attempt to buy any vicious animal within the
city. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-9: CONTROL OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   All vicious animals shall be confined in an enclosure. It is unlawful
for any owner to maintain a vicious animal upon any premises which does not
have a locked enclosure.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal to be
outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is
necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or to
sell or give away the vicious animal or to comply with command or directions of
the animal control officer with respect to the vicious animal, or to comply
with the provisions of section
 9-2-8 of this chapter. In such event, the vicious animal shall be securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three
hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be
under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the vicious animal.
   C.   No person shall own, harbor, or breed any animal for the purpose of
animal fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait, or use any animal for the
purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to make unprovoked attacks upon
human beings or domestic animals. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-10: ACTION FOR DAMAGES; DESTRUCTION OF OFFENDING ANIMAL; CIVIL PENALTY:
   A.   Assault Or Attack By Vicious Animal: If any vicious animal shall, when
provoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any sheep, lamb,
cattle, horse, hog, swine, fowl or other domestic animal, belonging to or in
the possession of any person, or shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, bite
or otherwise injure any human being or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting
or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the enclosure of
the owner or keeper of such vicious animal, or while otherwise, on or off the
property of the owner whether or not such vicious animal was on a leash and
securely muzzled or whether the vicious animal escaped without fault of the
owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable to the
person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damages sustained, to be recovered in a
civil action, with costs of suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law
that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious animal in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such
action, to prove that the owner of such vicious animal knew that such vicious
animal possessed the propensity to cause such damages or that the vicious
animal had a vicious nature. Upon such attack or assault, the animal control
officer is empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious animal, if the
conduct of such vicious animal or its owner constituted a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, punishable by the confiscation and destruction of
the animal.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to K-9 or
other animals owned by any police department or any law enforcement officer
which are used in the performance of law enforcement work.
   C.   Penalties For Violation:
      1.   Any vicious animal:
         a.   Which does not have a valid license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; or
         b.   Whose owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage
required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and/or
         c.   Which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; and/or
         d.   Which shall be outside of either the dwelling of the owner, or an
enclosure except as provided in this chapter; or
         e.   Which is not tattooed;
shall be confiscated by the animal control officer and destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting
period exclusive of Sundays and holidays. In addition, the owner shall pay a
two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine.
   D.   Unprovoked Attack On Another Animal: If any vicious animal shall, when
unprovoked, kill, wound, worry or assist in killing or wounding any animal
described in this chapter, the owner of said vicious animal shall pay a two
hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and the animal control officer is empowered
to confiscate and, after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting period
exclusive of Sundays and holidays, shall destroy said vicious animal. For each
subsequent violation, the owner of said animal shall pay a fine of three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
   E.   Unprovoked Attack On Human: If any vicious animal shall, when
unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure a human being, the
owner shall pay a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   F.   Requirements For Identification Not Suspended: No fine and/or tattooing
requirement shall be suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-11: DETERMINATION OF A VICIOUS ANIMAL:
   A.   In the event the animal control officer or law enforcement officer has
probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, the chief of police, or
his designee shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the animal in question should be declared vicious.
      1.   The animal control officer or the chief of police shall then conduct
or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify, in writing, the
owner of the animal that a hearing will be held at which time he or she may
have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal should not be declared
vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five (5) days
and not more than ten (10) days after service of notice upon the owner of the
animal. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public.
      2.   After the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be notified, in
writing, of the determination. If a determination is made that the animal is
vicious, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter within
thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the determination.
      3.   If the owner of the animal contests the determination, he or she
may, within five (5) days of such determination, bring a petition in the
magistrate court of the third judicial district praying that the court conduct
its own hearing on whether or not the animal should be declared vicious. After
service of notice upon the animal control officer, the court shall conduct a
hearing de novo and make its own determination as to viciousness. The hearing
shall be conducted within fourteen (14) days of the service of the notice upon
the animal control officer or law enforcement officer involved. The issues
shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence. If the court rules the
animal to be vicious, the court may establish a time schedule to ensure
compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty (30) days
subsequent to the date of the court's decision.
      4.   The court may decide all issues for or against the owner of the
animal regardless of the fact that said owner fails to appear at said hearing.
      5.   The determination of the court shall be final and conclusive upon
all parties. However, the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer
shall have the right to declare an animal to be vicious for any subsequent
actions of the animal.
      6.   In the event that the animal control officer or law enforcement
officer has probable cause to believe that the animal in question is vicious
and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic
animals, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may seize and
impound the animal pending the aforesaid hearings. The owner of the animal
shall be liable to the animal control director for the costs and expenses of
impoundment of such animal.
   B.   If the owner of an animal impounded for an alleged violation of section
 9-2-10 of this chapter believes that there was not a violation of such
section, such owner may petition the magistrate court of the third judicial
district praying that the impounded animal not be destroyed. The impounded
animal shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's petition if
the petition shall have been filed within five (5) days of the impoundment upon
the animal control officer or keeper of the impounded animal. The hearing shall
be conducted within fourteen (14) days from serving of the notice.
   C.   The decision of the magistrate court may be appealed to the district
court by an aggrieved party within forty two (42) days of the decision. The
animal shall remain impounded pending the appeal.
      1.   If the court finds that there was not a violation of section
9-2-10 of this chapter, such animal may be released to the custody of the owner
upon payment to the county animal shelter of the expense of keeping such
animal. The costs shall be paid, in full, to the shelter prior to the release
of said animal.
      2.   If the court finds that there was a violation of any of the terms
and conditions of section
9-2-10 of this chapter, said owner shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for the first such violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each
subsequent violation. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-12: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY ANIMAL OWNED BY A MINOR:
In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of
such minor shall be liable for all injuries, property damage, fines and
impoundment fees caused or incurred by said animal. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-13: CANINE LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess a
canine more than six (6) months of age within the city limits without first
procuring a license therefor, as provided by this chapter. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to any person visiting in the incorporated areas
of the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and owning or
possessing a canine, if such canine is currently licensed or bearing the
license issued by another municipality or other licensing authority, or if such
person is a permanent resident where no such license is required. Canine
licenses may be purchased for a one year period. All canine licenses shall
begin on January 1 and expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 31.
The licensing of vicious animals is governed by section
 9-2-8 of this chapter. The owner or person having charge of any canine within
the city shall make application to the city clerk or other designated agent,
and pay a license fee according to the schedule adopted by the city council.
   B.   No canine will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that
such surgery was performed. No canine will be licensed without proof of current
rabies vaccination.
   C.   Upon receipt of application for license and payment of fees, the person
issuing the license shall issue a receipt designating the owner's name and the
number of the license, the sex (or status of spayed or neutered) of the canine,
and the amount paid by him or her, together with a metal tag bearing the number
corresponding to the number of the receipt. If a license is lost, the city
clerk or other designated agent shall, upon application and payment of two
dollars fifty cents ($2.50), issue a duplicate license. Licenses for the
following year may be purchased within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
date.
   D.   License fees shall be waived for any guide canine that has been
properly trained for the purpose of, and is used to, guide a blind or partially
blind person, a person with impaired hearing, or any other severely disabled
person who requires a guide canine.
   E.   License fees shall be waived for any canine used by law enforcement
personnel for law enforcement purposes.
   F.   The city council shall establish kennel, cattery and canine license
fees by resolution. No canine license fee is refundable due to death or loss of
licensed canine. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-14: COLLAR AND TAG REQUIRED:
   A.   Upon the payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the
owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each canine licensed. The
shape of the tag shall change each year and shall have stamped thereon the year
for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the
certificate.
   B.   Every owner shall be required to provide each canine with a collar to
which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar tag is worn
at all times.
   C.   Canine tags shall not be transferred from one canine to another and no
refunds shall be made on any canine license fee for any reason. (Ord. 558, 12-
14-2009)
9-2-15: IMITATION LICENSE TAGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any canine owned, kept or harbored
by him/her to wear a license tag received on account of a former license, or to
wear a license tag originally issued to another canine, or to wear any
imitation of the license tag issued by the city clerk or designated person or
participating veterinarian for that year, or any tag marked on a plate or
collar similar to that required by this chapter at any time, and calculated to
deceive. It shall be unlawful for any person to put a female canine tag
received with a license on a male canine, or to allow any female canine owned
by him/her or within his/her care or custody to wear a tag issued with a
license for a male canine. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-16: RESIDENTIAL KENNEL AND/OR CATTERY LICENSE; APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises of any
one household more than three (3) canines and/or three (3) felines, six (6)
months of age or older, in the city unless the owner or person in charge
thereof shall have obtained a residential kennel and/or cattery license as
provided in this section. A residential kennel and/or cattery license may not
be obtained for breeding or boarding operations or any other commercial use.
   B.   All residential kennel and cattery licenses expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the calendar year of date of issuance, with
the exception of new licenses issued in December which expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the following calendar year. These licenses
must be renewed annually.
   C.   The exterior boundaries of a residential kennel or cattery licensed
premises must be greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any dwelling
unit, not including the dwelling unit of the owner of the residential kennel or
cattery license, unless the license applicant provides current written consent
of all property owners within said area (as shown on the Canyon County
assessor's records) to the issuance of the residential kennel or cattery
license.
   D.   An application for a new residential kennel and/or cattery license
shall be filed with the city clerk together with the payment of the annual
kennel or cattery license fee and the annual tag fee, as established by
resolution of the city council, for each canine and/or feline six (6) months of
age or older to be kept in the kennel and/or cattery.
      1.   The application for a new kennel or cattery license must be made on
the form approved for use by the Parma city council and shall include a list of
all property owners (as shown on the Canyon County assessor's records), along
with complete addresses, located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
exterior boundaries of the proposed kennel and/or cattery licensed premises.
      2.   When application is complete, fees are paid, and inspection has been
made by the Parma police department, a public hearing shall be scheduled before
the city council by the city clerk.
      3.   The city clerk shall provide notice of hearing by mail to all
property owners (as shown on the Canyon County assessor's records) located
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
kennel and/or cattery licensed premises at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing. The applicant shall reimburse the city for the costs incurred
for the public hearing notifications.
      4.   Written or oral comments may be received for testimony at public
hearing.
      5.   The city council shall either approve or deny the permit. Upon
approval, the city clerk shall issue a kennel and/or cattery license number.
      6.   The owner shall notify the city of any additional canines and/or
felines obtained during the permit year and immediately license each additional
one.
   E.   Annual renewal of a residential kennel and/or cattery license may be
done administratively by the city clerk, or other designated agent, following a
satisfactory inspection of the kennel by the city police; paying the annual
kennel fee, as set by resolution of the city council; and licensing each canine
and/or feline if no complaints have been received by the city during the
previous permit year. If complaints have been received, the application must
follow the procedure for a new license as outlined in subsection D of this
section and the city council shall either approve or deny the renewal. (Ord.
558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-17: COMMERCIAL KENNEL AND/OR CATTERY LICENSE; APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises of any
one household within the city limits more than three (3) canines and/or three
(3) felines, six (6) months of age or older, which will be kept for the
purposes of breeding, boarding, training, showing, selling, or any other
commercial uses. The owner or person in charge thereof shall obtain a
commercial kennel and/or cattery license as provided in this section.
   B.   All commercial kennel and cattery licenses expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the calendar year of date of issuance, with
the exception of new licenses issued in December which expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the following calendar year.
   C.   The exterior boundaries of a commercial kennel or cattery licensed
premises must be greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any dwelling
unit, not including the dwelling unit of the owner of the kennel or cattery
license, unless the license applicant provides current written consent of all
property owners within said area (as shown on the Canyon County assessor's
records) to the issuance of the kennel or cattery license.
   D.   An application for a new commercial kennel or cattery license shall be
filed with the city clerk together with the payment of the annual kennel or
cattery license fee and the annual tag fee, as established by resolution of the
city council, for each canine and/or feline six (6) months of age or older to
be kept in the kennel and/or cattery, together with the kennel or cattery
facilities care plan.
      1.   The application for a new commercial kennel or cattery license must
be made on the form approved for use by the Parma city council and shall
include:
         a.   A list of all property owners (as shown on the Canyon County
assessor's records), along with complete addresses, located within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed kennel and/or
cattery licensed premises; and
         b.   A kennel or cattery facilities and care plan, including a
description of the number of animals for which the license is sought, the
adequacy of the facilities, feeding, grooming and healthcare of the animals and
the day to day supervision and management of the kennel or cattery facilities.
      2.   When application is complete, fees are paid, and inspection has been
made by the Parma police department, a public hearing shall be scheduled before
the city council by the city clerk.
      3.   The city clerk shall provide notice of hearing by mail to all
property owners (as shown on the Canyon County assessor's records) located
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
commercial kennel and/or cattery licensed premises at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall reimburse the city for the
costs incurred for the public hearing notifications.
      4.   Written or oral comments may be received for testimony at public
hearing.
      5.   At the public hearing, the applicant must establish as a burden of
proof that a reasonable standard of care of the animals will be applied by the
applicant in accordance with the kennel or cattery facilities and care plan in
the exercise of the license in regard to providing:
         a.   Adequate and sanitary kennel or cattery facilities; and
         b.   Adequate feeding, grooming, and healthcare of the animals; and
         c.   Adequate day to day supervision and management of the kennel or
cattery facilities.
      6.   If there is a dwelling unit within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
the exterior boundaries of the commercial kennel or cattery facilities
premises, the applicant must provide at the hearing all current written
consents of all property owners within said area (as shown on the Canyon County
assessor's records) to the issuance of the commercial kennel or cattery
license.
      7.   The city council shall either approve or deny the permit based upon
whether or not the applicant has complied with this section, met the
applicant's burden of proof at the hearing, and otherwise complied with the
criteria for issuance of the license.
      8.   In the event the city council issues a commercial kennel or cattery
license, it shall include the approved facilities and care plan as conditions
of the license issuance.
   E.   A commercial kennel or cattery license shall be issued to the applicant
and is not assignable or transferable to other premises. Changing the premises
location of a commercial kennel or cattery requires a new commercial kennel or
cattery license.
   F.   Applications for renewal of commercial kennel or cattery license shall
be filed with the city clerk together with the payment of the annual kennel or
cattery license fee and the annual tag fee, as established by resolution of the
city council, for each canine and/or feline six (6) months of age or older to
be kept in the kennel and/or cattery, together with any written changes in the
kennel or cattery facilities care plan.
      1.   When the renewal application is complete and fees are paid, an
inspection will be made by the Parma police department to establish that the
licensed approved kennel or cattery facilities care plan is being followed. In
the event the Parma police department inspection report confirms that the
licensed approved kennel or cattery facilities care plan is being followed and
any written changes in the kennel or cattery facilities care plan do not
increase the size or capacity of the kennel or cattery facilities and do not
raise any issues of standards of care for the animals, the city clerk shall
issue a renewal of the license.
      2.   In the event the clerk denies the application for renewal, the
applicant may request the council to set the matter for public hearing, in
which event the procedure and process and criteria of a public hearing for a
new commercial kennel or cattery license shall be followed.
   G.   Failure of a licensee to comply with the licensed approved kennel or
cattery facilities care plan shall be grounds for the city council to revoke a
commercial kennel or cattery license.
      1.   In the event the licensee fails to comply with the conditions of the
license, including the approved kennel or cattery facilities care plan, a
complaint may be filed with the city clerk who shall cause inspection to be
made by the Parma police department to determine the merits of the complaint
and whether or not the licensed approved kennel or cattery facilities care plan
is being followed.
      2.   In the event the Parma police department investigation report
determines that there is merit to the complaint and that the licensed approved
kennel or cattery facilities care plan is not being followed, the city clerk
shall report the same to the city council and request that the council set a
public hearing for consideration of the revocation of the commercial kennel or
cattery license, in which event the procedures and process shall be followed.
The city council shall revoke a commercial kennel or cattery license in the
event it is found that the licensee has failed to comply with the licensed
approved kennel or cattery facilities care plan. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-18: RABIES, DISEASES AND QUARANTINE:
   A.   Keeping Of Animal With Rabies: It is unlawful for a person other than a
veterinarian, or the animal shelter to own, keep or harbor any animal afflicted
with rabies.
   B.   Disposition Of Animal With Rabies: The sheriff of Canyon County or his
designee, the chief of police of the city or his designee, or the animal
shelter director or his designee or the owner shall secure disposition of any
animal afflicted with rabies.
   C.   Duty Of Owner: It is the duty of every owner of an animal showing
symptoms of rabies or which the owner has no proof of current rabies
vaccination or which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to
surrender the animal for confinement and isolation at the animal shelter or to
a licensed veterinarian for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. If such
animal shall be determined free of rabies, it shall be returned to the owner
upon payment of the regular fee for keeping such animal impounded. If such fee
is not paid, the animal shall be subject to disposal as provided in this
chapter.
   D.   Contagious Diseased Animals: Any animal which has a contagious disease
shall not be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner of such animal
except under the supervision of the animal control director.
   E.   Rabies Inoculation: It is unlawful to keep or harbor any canine over
the age of six (6) months in the city unless such canine has been inoculated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian within the preceding three (3) years.
No license shall be issued for any canine over the age of six (6) months unless
the applicant for such license presents a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian establishing that the canine will be immune from rabies for the
license period. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-19: ENFORCEMENT BY ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   The mayor and city council delegate the enforcement of this chapter to
the animal control officer within the incorporated city limits. It shall be the
duty of all animal control officers and/or public works employees to remove
deceased small animals from public roads and rights of way.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to hinder, molest or in any way interfere
with any animal control officer while the officer is lawfully engaged in the
performance of his/her duties. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-20: OFFENSES AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
allow a canine which he/she owns, keeps, or harbors, to be at large upon the
roads, streets or alleys of the city or in any public place of the city or upon
any premises other than his/her own. This provision applies regardless of
whether the canine is licensed or not. Any canine found in the city, either
without a license or running at large in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, is declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded as herein
provided. While felines are not prohibited from running at large, any feline
with or without tags that is captured while running at large shall be subject
to the same boarding fees and fines as captured canines.
   B.   Canines Unattended In Vehicles: No person shall leave a canine or other
animal in any unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation, sanitary
conditions, or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme
temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health and safety.
   C.   Public Buildings: It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep
or carry any animal in, upon or within a public transportation facility, or any
other public building or facility, particularly a building or facility in which
food or drink is prepared or stored, except as provided in this section.
      1.   Exceptions:
         a.   A blind or partially blind person, a person with impaired
hearing, or any severely disabled person who requires a guide canine shall not
be denied the use of any common carrier or public transportation facility or
admittance to any other public building or place within the city by reason of
his being accompanied by a seeing eye or guide canine specially trained for
such purposes. It is the intent of this chapter to permit and authorize a blind
person, partially blind person or disabled person who requires a guide canine
to have a seeing eye or guide canine with him in such place and while using
such facilities without being required to pay any additional charges for the
canine, but such blind person shall be liable for any damage or disturbances
caused by such canine.
         b.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other
animals owned by any police department or any law enforcement officer which are
used in the performance of law enforcement work.
   D.   Disturbances: It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal,
including, but not limited to, canines, felines, chickens, turkeys or ducks, to
allow or permit such animal to become a nuisance by disturbing the peace and
comfort of any reasonable person or to interfere with the reasonable and
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by said animal’s excessive,
continuous, frequent or habitual barking, whining, meowing, clucking, or making
loud or unusual noises, or by running through or across cultivated gardens or
lawns not the property of the owner. Any animal, which has persistently created
the noises referred to in this subsection, as demonstrated by two (2) or more
convictions of the owner thereof for violating this subsection, is declared to
be a public nuisance and may be impounded.
   E.   Violations, Penalties: A first offense violation of this section shall
be an infraction punishable by a fine of seventy-five ($75.00) dollars. A
second offense violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a
fine of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars. Third and subsequent offenses of
this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of three hundred
($300.00) dollars. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009; amd. Ord. 622, 12-12-2023)
9-2-21: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Apprehension Of Animal Running At Large: It shall be the duty of the
animal control officer, animal control director, and peace officers of the city
to apprehend any animal found running at large or disturbing the peace contrary
to the provisions of this chapter, and to impound such animal in the animal
shelter or other suitable place; provided, that if any fierce, dangerous or
vicious canine found running at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded,
such canine may be slain by any peace officer or animal control officer.
   B.   Record Of Animals Impounded Or Destroyed: The animal control officer or
police officer so impounding or slaying any animal shall record a description
of the animal, whether licensed or not, in a book kept for that purpose.
   C.   Recovery Of Impounded Animals: The owner of any animal impounded may
recover possession of same upon payment of all required fees which include
impound fee, rabies voucher, license 1  and board fees. If the owner or
representative of the owner of any canine or any other animal impounded shall
fail to pay the required fees within twenty four (24) hours after actual notice
to the owner or representative of the owner, or within five (5) working days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after reasonable or diligent effort
to notify the owner or representative of the owner, the animal shelter may
dispose of any animal either through adoption, provided the new owner shall pay
the required fees, or through euthanasia.
   D.   Impounding And Recovery Of Unlicensed Animals: It shall be the duty of
the animal control officer and animal shelter director to hold, for a period of
three (3) working days excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, any
unlicensed animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The owner of
any unlicensed impounded animal may recover possession of an impounded animal
upon payment of the required fees. Any such unlicensed animal not redeemed
within three (3) working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, may
be sold or disposed of in a humane manner under the direction of the animal
control director.
   E.   Diseased Animals; Destruction: Any animal impounded and suffering from
serious injury or disease, may be euthanized at the discretion of the animal
control shelter.
   F.   Traps: Animal control officers are authorized to place humane animal
traps on public or private property upon request and permission of the owner.
Such traps shall be checked daily by the animal control officers.
   G.   Freeing Of Impounded Animals, Canines, Felines And Poultry Prohibited:
It shall be unlawful to break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid
or assist in the breaking open of any pen or enclosure with the intent of
releasing any animal or poultry.
   H.   Release Of Impounded Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person,
except those responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, to release any
animal without the consent of the owner to release his/her own or any other
canine from the city animal shelter or from any other place where an animal may
be held for observation. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. Noncanines will not be charged a license fee when recovered from impound.
9-2-22: CANINE/FELINE IMPOUND FEES:
 
            Licensed Unlicensed
Impound Fee $50.00   $50.00
 
In addition to the above impound fees, the following shall be charged a kennel
charge for boarding and keeping the animal:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each twenty four (24) hour day or any portion of
any twenty four (24) hour day that the canine is kept at the shelter. (Ord.
558, 12-14-2009; amd. Res. 2021- , 9-2-2022; Res. 2023-5, 7-11-2023)
9-2-23: KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK; IMPOUNDMENT OF LIVESTOCK IN VIOLATION OF THIS
CHAPTER:
   A.   Keeping Of Livestock Prohibited: Except as provided in this chapter, no
cows, calves, bulls, horses, mules, goats, hogs, sheep or other livestock shall
be kept, harbored, or maintained within the corporate limits of the city of
Parma.
   B.   Conditional Use For The Keeping Of Livestock; Limitation And
Prohibition After Two Years: The keeping of livestock as an accessory use to
residential and agricultural uses shall be allowed in residential zones as a
conditional use subject to the standards set forth herein; provided, however,
that this section shall expire and no livestock shall be kept anywhere within
the city limits after two (2) years from the effective date hereof. A
conditional use permit for the keeping of livestock shall be processed pursuant
to
title 5, chapter 3, of this code.
   C.   Standards For Keeping Of Livestock: A conditional use permit for the
keeping of livestock shall be issued according to the following standards, the
violation of any one of which shall immediately void the conditional use permit
without further action by the city.
      1.   Minimum Lot Size: No conditional use permit shall issue for any
parcel that is any smaller than two (2) acres. As used in this section,
"parcel" means a legal lot. A minimum of at least three-fourths (3/4) of an
acre must be dedicated to the keeping of livestock, and this area shall be
configured in a contiguous and usable manner to accommodate the grazing area,
feed storage, and manure piles. This area must be exclusive of any structures,
including, but not limited to, storage sheds, barns, residential units, and
carports. Horses are not subject to the animal density allowed and are instead
subject to an animal density of one horse for every fourteen thousand five
hundred (14,500) square feet on a two (2) acre lot.
      2.   Enclosures: Livestock enclosures must meet the setback requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located.
      3.   Density: The maximum animal density, except with respect to horses,
is two (2) animals per acre based upon the area that is designated for the
keeping of livestock. That portion of the lot used for the dwelling unit, lawn,
parking, or other nonanimal dedicated area shall not be included in the density
calculation. Animals younger than nine (9) months of age are not included in
the counting of animals for purposes of calculating animal density.
      4.   Maintaining Animals: Property owners keeping livestock in accordance
with this section must maintain animals in a manner that does not cause adverse
impact to neighboring properties. Each person who keeps livestock is
responsible for the regular maintenance and removal of animal waste and control
of insects, erosion, and odor.
   D.   Livestock Running At Large: If any animals shall be found running at
large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, it is hereby made the duty of
the animal control officer or any other peace officer of the city to take up
and confine the same in the county animal shelter or livestock yard. That, in
the case of an animal disturbing the peace, there shall be made an attempt to
contact the owner at his home and a warning issued. If the owner is not present
or does not heed the warning, the animal may be impounded in accordance with
this chapter. Such animal taken up and confined shall not be released until the
owner or person entitled to have possession thereof shall pay all fees
including all expenses incurred in boarding such animal so impounded.
   E.   Impounded Livestock Redemption: Any animal impounded because it was
found running at large may be redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or
destruction of such animal, by paying all charges against the same. The animal
control shelter is entitled to charge a board fee of five dollars ($5.00) per
day per animal, an impound fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per animal and
any hauling fee applicable for the keeping of any animal, which fees shall be
retained by the animal shelter as payment toward the costs and expense incurred
in the transporting and keeping of such animal. The fees which may be charged
by the animal shelter for impounding and keeping of any animal are to be paid
upon redemption of such animal. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-24: SALE OF ANIMAL:
   A.   Notice Of Sale: At any time after any horse, mule, any kind of cattle,
hog or any stock animal shall have been impounded, and after notification of
the brand inspector, the animal shelter shall give notice of sale by posting a
notice at the shelter, describing the animal impounded, and notifying the owner
by certified or registered mail, if the owner is known, to pay the charges
thereon and remove same prior to the time fixed for sale thereof; and that,
otherwise, the animal will be sold at public sale at a time and place named in
said notice, which time shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from the date
of the posting of such notices.
   B.   Revenue From Sale: In case any animal sold pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter be sold for more than is sufficient to pay the fees and charges
aforesaid, such excess shall be deposited with the animal shelter who shall pay
such excess to the owner of such animal or animals or to the person entitled to
possession of the same upon claim and proper proof of ownership within six (6)
months from date of said sale. If, after six (6) months, such excess is not
claimed, the excess fees shall be disposed of in accordance with Idaho Code
section 25-2312. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-25: CANINE ADOPTION:
   A.   Adoption Fee: Canines licensed which have been held for five (5)
working days, and unlicensed animals which have been held for three (3) days
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, may be adopted from the county
animal shelter, after due notification to the owner (if known), upon payment of
an adoption fee of twenty dollars ($20.00).
   B.   Additional Fees: In order to adopt an animal, a person must also pay
the following additional fees:
      1.   Thirty dollars ($30.00) spay/neuter voucher; cost for senior
citizens is twenty dollars ($20.00);
      2.   Six dollar ($6.00) rabies vaccination voucher; and
      3.   County canine license appropriately applicable.
   C.   Required Spay/Neuter Voucher To Ensure Sterilization: Any person
acquiring a canine from the animal control shelter shall be required to
purchase a twenty five dollar ($25.00) spay/neuter voucher to be redeemed at
any participating veterinarian in partial payment for the surgical procedure of
spaying a female animal or the neutering of a male animal. Each voucher will
display an expiration date determined as follows:
      1.   If the animal adopted is under six (6) months of age, the voucher
will expire on the last day of the month the animal reaches six (6) months of
age;
      2.   If the animal adopted is over six (6) months of age, the voucher
will expire at the end of thirty (30) days from the time of adoption. (Ord.
558, 12-14-2009; amd. Res 2021- , 9-2-2022)
9-2-26: POULTRY AND FOWL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl, guineas, chickens,
ducks, turkeys, geese, or other fowl and/or poultry unless such fowl, guineas,
chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese or other fowl and/or poultry are at all times
kept upon his/her own premises, within a shed, pen or other enclosure
sufficient to restrain said fowl, guineas, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese or
poultry from trespassing upon the property of others.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in excess of twelve (12)
fowl and/or poultry within the corporate city limits at any time at any one
parcel.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain any
fowl or poultry, or any pen, yard, enclosure or building in which such fowl or
poultry are kept, in such a manner as to be nauseous, foul or offensive to an
ordinary and reasonable person. Any violation of this section is an infraction.
Any fowl or poultry kept contrary to this section are subject to impoundment at
the expense of the owner. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
9-2-27: RABBITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than six (6) rabbits or not to
maintain the rabbits in individual hutches at all times and/or failure to keep
the rabbits in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord. 558, 12-14-
2009)
9-2-28: OTHER ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No owner or keeper of any fowl or animals, other than felines, shall permit or
fail to prevent such fowl or animals to run at large within the corporate
limits of the city. Any owner or keeper found violating any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished in accordance with section 9-2-29 of this chapter. (Ord. 558, 12-14-
2009)
9-2-29: UNIFORM SUMMONS; PROSECUTION; FINE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Violations; Citation:
      1.   Violations: Unless specifically provided otherwise, violations of
the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
as set forth in Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended, or in accordance with
any more specific section(s) of this chapter.
      2.   Citation: The Idaho uniform citation shall be used by the animal
control officers and peace officers in the enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Fine Schedule: The fine schedule for no license, canine at large, and
no rabies shot shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus court costs, for each
offense and may be paid to the court or as provided by rule 14 of the
misdemeanor criminal rules. The fine schedule for a second such offense within
five (5) years shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fine
schedule for a third and any subsequent offense within five (5) years shall be
a minimum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The court may also impose
community service, preferably at the Canyon County animal shelter, in addition
to the above fines. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2009)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Prohibited Acts
9-3-2: Breach Of The Peace
9-3-3: Offenses Relating To Property
9-3-3-1: Water Flowing Upon Streets
9-3-3-2: Deposits Of Injurious Material On Thoroughfares
9-3-3-3: Petit Larceny
9-3-4: Public Indecency
9-3-5: Public Disturbance Noises
9-3-6: Weapons
9-3-7: Disorderly Conduct
9-3-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement within the City which is prohibited or required by State law,
insofar as such laws are applicable to Municipal government. (Ord. 562, 1-10-
2011)
9-3-2: BREACH OF THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a breach of the peace by loud or
vulgar language, noisy acclamations or by doing anything that shall be
offensive to the sense or dangerous to the peace. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-3: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:
9-3-3-1: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or allow any water used by such
person for irrigation or any other purpose or to cause any water to flow into
or upon any public thoroughfare of the City. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-3-2: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or
upon any public thoroughfare of the City any material or substance injurious to
person or property. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-3-3: PETIT LARCENY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit petit larceny as defined within
the City. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-4: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   A person commits the crime of public indecency, a misdemeanor, if while
in, or in plain view of a public place the person:
      1.   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   Engages in an act of deviate sexual intercourse as defined by the
Idaho Code; or
      3.   Appears in a state of nudity with the intent that he or she be seen
by another person under circumstances that are likely to cause affront or
alarm; or
      4.   Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
   B.   "Nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic hair or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal
region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   C.   For purposes of this section, "public place" includes, but is not
limited to, motor vehicles that are on a public way, all outdoor places owned
by or open to the general public, including such places of entertainment,
taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms
or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons
invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.
   D.   The prohibition set forth in subsection A3 of this section shall not
apply to:
      1.   Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
      2.   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding an
infant under two (2) years of age.
   E.   If any provision of this section shall be held invalid, its invalidity
shall not affect any other provisions of this section that can be given effect
without the invalid provisions, and for this purpose the provisions of this
section are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-5: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISES:
   A.   Prohibited Noises: It is an infraction for any person to cause, or for
any person in possession of property to allow originating from the property,
sound that is a public disturbance noise. The following sounds are determined
to be public disturbance noises:
      1.   Horns And Sirens: The frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounding
of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger
or as specifically permitted or required by law;
      2.   Repetitive Motor Vehicle Sounds: The creation of frequent,
repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation,
repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, off
highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so
as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of
owners or possessors of real property;
      3.   Yelling Or Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on or near the public streets, particularly between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or at any time and place so
as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of
owners or possessors of real property;
      4.   Noise From Buildings: The creation of frequent, repetitive or
continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment, or
condominium, which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort, and repose
of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from audio equipment,
musical instruments, band sessions, or social gatherings;
      5.   Motor Vehicle Sound Systems: Sound from motor vehicle sound systems,
such as tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so
as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the vehicle itself;
      6.   Audio Equipment: Sound from audio equipment, or any device that
amplifies sound, such as tape players, radios, or compact disc players,
operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the
source, and if not operated upon the property of the operator.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Emergency Vehicles: Sounds caused by an emergency vehicle or
personnel when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
      2.   Outdoor Events: Sounds caused by parades, fireworks displays, or any
other event for which a permit for that type of activity is required and has
been obtained from the authorized governmental entity within such hours as may
be imposed as a condition for the issuance of said permit.
      3.   Private Or Public Property: Sounds caused by activities upon any
outdoor municipal, school, religious, or publicly owned property, park, or
facility, provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of
such property or facility or its agent.
      4.   Locomotives: Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad
equipment.
      5.   Warning Devices: Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by
law.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord.
562, 1-10-2011)
9-3-6: WEAPONS:
   A.   Definitions: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this chapter, the
term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets
or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder within it, or by the action
of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including what are
commonly known as air rifles and BB guns.
   B.   Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry
concealed upon his person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol, dagger,
stiletto or other deadly weapon except for as provided in Idaho Code section
18-3302.
   C.   Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to discharge, within the limits of the City of Parma, a firearm of any kind or
description as defined in subsection A of this section, slingshots, bow and
arrow, or zip guns; provided however, that this prohibition shall not apply to
peace officers in the discharge of their duties, nor shall this section be
construed to prohibit any person from discharging a firearm when lawfully
defending any person or property.
   D.   Exceptions; Permits: The Mayor and City Council may, at any time, upon
receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs,
archery ranges, and others within the City limits in localities satisfactory
and under rules decided by the Mayor and City Council. Such permits shall be in
writing and issued by the City Clerk under his or her signature and shall be
subject to revocation at any time by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 584, 10-
23-2017)
9-3-7: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to conduct
himself or herself in a violent, noisy, or riotous manner, or in any way which
commits a breach of the peace of another person or to conduct himself or
herself in a manner that endangers the health and safety of another person.
Every person is guilty of disorderly conduct when he or she:
      1.   Begs from any other person(s), whether by words, bodily gestures,
signs or other means, in any place open to the public with the intent to
intimidate another into giving money or goods, or obstructs pedestrian or
vehicular traffic in a public place by rendering traffic impassable or
unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous for another person or vehicle; or
      2.   Wilfully and lewdly, either: a) exposes his or her genitals, in any
public place or in any place where there is present another person or persons
who are offended or annoyed; or b) procures, counsels or assists any person so
to expose his or her genitals, where there is present another person or persons
who are offended or annoyed thereby; or
      3.   Occupies, lodges or sleeps in any building, structure or place,
whether public or private, or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
similar vehicle or equipment without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or in control thereof; or
      4.   Uses any motor vehicle, camper, motor home, or travel trailer as a
residence while it is located upon any public street, alley or other public
way, or upon any other premises under the ownership and/or control of the City
of Parma or any other governmental subdivision of the State of Idaho; or
      5.   Loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another,
without lawful business, permission or invitation by the owner or the lawful
occupants thereof, including, but not limited to, those persons who refuse to
vacate a Municipal park facility which they have not reserved and paid the
appropriate fee, and is at a time that the facility has been reserved for
another person; or
      6.   Loiters or remains in or about school grounds or buildings, without
having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
pupil or student, school authorized functions, activities or use; or
      7.   Is in public and intoxicated at a level that presents a danger to
others or creates a disturbance of the peace; or
      8.   Enters upon the private property of another person without lawful
business with the owner or occupant of the private property and peers, peeks or
looks through a door or window of that property with the intent to intrude upon
or interfere with a person's privacy; or within a public place, to peer, peep
or look into an area where a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and
has taken steps to conceal themselves from the general public, such as a
restroom, locker room, or changing room, without that person's consent and with
the intent to invade that person's privacy; or
      9.   Wilfully resists, delays or obstructs any public officer, in the
discharge, or attempt to discharge, of any duty of his office or who refuses a
lawful order of a public officer; or
      10.   Maliciously and wilfully disturbs the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood, family or person by loud or unusual noise, or by tumultuous or
offensive conduct, or by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to
fight or fighting, or fires any gun or pistol; or
      11.   Excretes human waste, including urine or feces, upon the ground,
into a body of water, or upon anything attached or setting upon said surfaces
within the city of Parma, except for toilet facilities used as receptacles for
human waste.
   B.   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine and/
or imprisonment up to but not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in
Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. (Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Curfew
9-4-2: Failure To Supervise Minors
9-4-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
 
            An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that
            calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
EMERGENCY:  fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
            immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life or
            property.
            1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
GUARDIAN:   minor; or
            2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
            court.
MINOR:      Any person under the age of sixteen (16) years.
PARENT:     A person who is a natural parent or adoptive parent, or stepparent of a
            minor.
            Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
PUBLIC      access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the
PLACE:      common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
            transportation facilities and retail or service based commercial
            establishments.
RESPONSIBLE A person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or
ADULT:      guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
 
   B.   Curfew For Minors: It shall be unlawful for any minor to be in or upon
any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following morning.
A minor shall not be considered in violation if such minor is:
      1.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or responsible adult;
      2.   Engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity that requires the minor's
presence in such public place and is authorized by the parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any stop or detour;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Parma, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, recreational, or other activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city of Parma, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.
   C.   Separate Violations: Each violation of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
   D.   Permitting Violation Of Curfew: It shall be unlawful for anyone having
the legal care and custody of any minor, as described above, to allow or permit
such person to go or be upon any public street, alley or other public place in
the city as restricted in subsection B of this section, without having
designated an adult person or said parent, guardian or other legal custodian to
be with and supervise said minor, except in the circumstances set forth herein.
   E.   Authority Of Police To Detain: Every member of the police force, while
on duty, is hereby authorized to detain any such minor wilfully violating the
provisions of this section until the parent or guardian of the child shall take
him or her into custody; but such officer shall immediately, upon taking
custody of the child, communicate with the parent and guardian.
   F.   Violations By Parent, Guardian Or Legal Custodian: A violation of any
of the provisions of this section by a parent, guardian or legal custodian is a
misdemeanor and punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 32-
1301, as amended, with the following qualifications:
      1.   Upon the first offense of a parent, guardian or legal custodian for
a violation of this section, the parent, guardian or legal custodian may be
served with a copy of the ordinance as a warning of the penalties. Said service
shall be documented by the officer.
      2.   If a person is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the offense of
failure to supervise a child, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). In
lieu of imposing a fine, the court may, with the consent of the person, order
the person to complete parenting classes or undertake other treatment or
counseling, as approved by the court, and upon the person's completion of the
classes, treatment or counseling to the satisfaction of the court, the court
may discharge the person or if the person fails to complete the program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court may impose the penalty provided in this
section. Any person violating the orders of the court entered under this
Section shall be subject to contempt proceedings in accordance with chapter 6,
title 7, Idaho Code, in addition to any other penalties authorized pursuant to
this Section.
   G.   Violations By Juveniles: Upon conviction of a violation of any
provisions of this section, juveniles shall be punished in accordance with
Idaho Code section 20-549, and the other applicable rules and regulations
pertaining to juvenile offenders in the state.
   H.   Severability: Should any provision of this section be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, unlawful or invalid,
such decision should not affect the validity of this section in whole or in
part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional, unlawful
or invalid. (Ord. 514, 3-24-2003; amd. Ord. 601, 10-1-2019)
9-4-2: FAILURE TO SUPERVISE MINORS:
   A.   Any person who is the parent, lawful guardian with legal and physical
custody or other person, except a foster parent, lawfully charged with the care
or custody of a child under sixteen (16) years of age commits the offense of
failure to supervise a child if the child:
      1.   Commits an act bringing the child within the purview of the juvenile
corrections act, chapter 5, title 20, Idaho Code, or commits a crime for which
the child is required to be tried as an adult, or for which jurisdiction under
the juvenile corrections act is subject to waiver pursuant to chapter 5, title
20, Idaho Code; or
      2.   Fails to attend school or is not comparably instructed, as provided
in section 33-202, Idaho Code; or
      3.   Violates curfew as established under section
9-4-1B above. (1959 Code §6-118; amd. 1990 Code; Ord. 601, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 5
WEAPONS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 562, 1-10-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-3-6 of this title.
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED VEHICLES AND PERSONALTY
(Rep. by Ord. 553, 3-23-2009)
CHAPTER 7
SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Prohibited Acts
9-7-3: Accessibility Of Methamphetamine Precursor Drugs
9-7-4: Penalty
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUG(S): Any substance that is:
   A.   A drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers; or
   B.   A combination drug or product containing as one of its active
ingredients ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their
salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
   OVER THE COUNTER SALES: A retail sale of a drug or product but does not
include the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.
   RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity
conducting business within the Parma city limits who sells or furnishes any
over the counter drug product containing methamphetamine precursor drugs to any
person who is the ultimate user or consumer of the product. (Ord. 533, 9-12-
2005)
9-7-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city for any
retailer or employee thereof to knowingly sell, transfer, or to otherwise
furnish in a single transaction:
   A.   More than three (3) packages of any product that he or she knows to
contain methamphetamine precursor drugs.
   B.   A methamphetamine precursor drug to a person under the age of eighteen
(18) years.
The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity of
methamphetamine precursor drugs dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.
(Ord. 533, 9-12-2005)
9-7-3: ACCESSIBILITY OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS:
A business establishment that offers for sale methamphetamine precursor drugs
shall ensure that all packages of the drugs are displayed and offered for sale
only:
   A.   Behind a checkout counter where the public is not permitted; or
   B.   Inside a locked display case; and
   C.   All sales shall be conducted with an employee of the retailer and
cannot be conducted by a self-service system. (Ord. 533, 9-12-2005)
9-7-4: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 533, 9-12-2005)
TITLE 10
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 469, 4-22-1996)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-2: Obedience To Traffic Regulations And Officials
10-2-3: Accidents
10-2-4: One-Way Streets And Alleys
10-2-5: Speed Limits On Certain Streets
10-2-6: U-Turn
10-2-7: Trains Blocking Streets
10-2-8: Air Compression Brakes
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose
of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   ALLEY: That thoroughfare which intersects blocks at the rear of the lot of
said blocks or transverses blocks between regularly established streets.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol),
police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of the municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the director of the department of the law enforcement or the chief of police.
   BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over twenty inches (20")
in diameter.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.
   CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalk on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
   B.   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
   INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of the two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
   LANED ROADWAY A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric motor obtained from overhead trolley wires but not
operated upon rails.
   MOTORCYCLE Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground
but excluding a tractor.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
City.
   PARK When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN Any person afoot.
   PERSON Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
   POLICE OFFICER Every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violation of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary
rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
   RIGHT OF WAY The privilege of the immediate use of the road.
   ROADWAY That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
   SIDEWALK That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STOP When required, means complete cessation of movement.
   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING When prohibited, means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purpose of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances
to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by
law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are
erected as provided in this Title.
   TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any public thoroughfare for
purpose of travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   TRAFFIC DIVISION: The traffic division of the Police Department, or in the
event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used
herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department.
   VEHICLES: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary tracks or rails. (1959 Code §10-201; 1990
Code)
10-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND OFFICIALS:
   A.   Required Obedience To Traffic Regulations: It is a misdemeanor for any
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
Title.
   B.   Obedience To Police And Fire Department Officials: No person shall
wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer or Fire Department official.
   C.   Push Carts, Animals: Every person propelling any push cart or driving
any animal-drawn vehicle, or riding an animal upon a roadway, shall be subject
to the provisions of this Title which by their very nature can have no
application.
   D.   Public Employees: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the
driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States
Government, this State, County or City, and it shall be unlawful for any said
driver to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise
permitted in this Chapter or by State statute. (1959 Code §10-203)
10-2-3: ACCIDENTS:
   A.   Immediate Notification Of Accident: The driver of a vehicle involved in
an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to
an apparent extent of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall
immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident
to the Police Department. (1959 Code §10-203; 1990 Code)
   B.   Investigation Of Accidents: It shall be the duty of the Traffic
Division, assisted by other police officers, to investigate traffic accidents,
to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. (1959 Code §10-
202)
10-2-4: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Upon those streets and parts of streets proclaimed by resolution of the
Council, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1959 Code
§10-207; 1990 Code)
Vehicular traffic shall proceed in the direction indicated on the following
streets or parts of streets:
Third Street between Grove and Main Streets shall be a one-way street in the
southern direction. (Ord. 422, 9-11-1989)
10-2-5: SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   Speed Laws Applicable: The traffic laws regulating speed of vehicles
shall be determined in accordance with Idaho Code section 49-654 or its
replacement section, unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 469, 4-22-1996)
10-2-6: U-TURNS:
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic. It shall be unlawful for any driver
of a motor vehicle to make a U-turn at the intersections of Grave and Main
Streets with:
First Street
Second Street
Third Street
Fourth Street
(Ord. 177, 3-3-1947; amd. 1990 Code)
10-2-7: TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS:
No railroad company or corporation or their engineers, agents or other
employees managing or controlling any locomotive, train, car or other vehicle
upon any railroad track shall cause or permit any locomotive, train, car or
other obstruction to stand across any street or avenue or part thereof for a
longer period of time than five (5) minutes. (1959 Code §10-225)
10-2-8: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
   A.   Use Of Air Compression Brakes Prohibited: The use of air compression
brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by vehicles or trucks, as defined in Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 1, within city limits is hereby prohibited and shall be
unlawful, except under emergency circumstances where the use of air compression
brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or property.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 521, 4-14-2003)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 469, 4-22-1996)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Parking Zones, Signs And Curb Markings
10-4-3: Manner Of Parking
10-4-4: Loading Zones
10-4-5: Stopping, Standing Or Parking
10-4-6: Officers Authorized To Remove Illegally Stopped Vehicles
10-4-7: Restricted Parking Areas
10-4-8: Disabled Persons Parking
10-4-9: Parking Of Overweight Commercial Vehicles In Residential Districts
Prohibited
10-4-10: Parking In City Parks
10-4-11: Temporary "No Parking" Zones; Barricades And Signs; Authority; Towing
10-4-12: Parking Tickets And Procedure; Fines
10-4-13: Removal Of Abandoned And Unlawfully Parked Vehicles
10-4-14: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except for the following words or terms used in this title, which shall have
the meaning herein ascribed to them, all words and phrases used in this title,
shall be as defined in title 49, chapter 1, Idaho Code:
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase
"abandoned motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is left, or which is
parked upon any street, alley, public or private property for a period of
seventy two (72) hours or longer within a residential district, or for a period
of ninety six (96) hours or longer within any other part of the city, and the
owner of such vehicle cannot be found, located or determined, or the owner of
which refuses to remove such vehicle from such street, alley or public property
upon notice, oral or written.
   CAMPER: A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which can be
attached or detached from a motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property or persons for hire, compensation or profit.
   DOUBLE PARKED: Stopped or parked on the roadway side of a vehicle which is
stopped or parked in an officially designated parking space; or adjacent to the
curb line of a street. The term "double parking" also describes parking over
the lines of any designated parking space, whether such space is separating two
(2) designated parking spaces or not.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any police officer or city employee assigned the
responsibility of enforcing parking regulations.
   LOADING ZONE: A space or section of a street which has been set aside for
the exclusive purpose of loading and unloading of persons, supplies and/or
merchandise. Such zone shall be marked by the appropriate signage, curb
markings, or diagonal street striping.
   MOTOR HOME: A self-contained vehicle, designed for human habitation, with
its own motor power, and with a passageway from the body of the home to the
driver's and front passenger's seat.
   PARKING SPACES (ACCESSIBLE): Accessible parking spaces shall include the
width required for the parking stall and the required parking access aisles.
Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or
facility entrance. Parked vehicles shall not reduce the clear width of an
accessible route.
   TRAILER: A vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons or
property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motor power.
The term trailer shall include trailer coach, boat trailer, semitrailer, travel
trailer or utility trailer.
   VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon rails,
except vehicles moved solely by human power. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-2: PARKING ZONES, SIGNS AND CURB MARKINGS:
   A.   Diagonal parking, no parking, loading zones, limited time, and any
other parking related zones shall be established by resolution of the council
upon the recommendation of the chief of police and the city engineer. Upon
passage of such resolution the public works department is authorized and
directed to indicate the zone with appropriate curb markings or signs.
   B.   The city may use curb markings or colors as substituting or
supplemental to standard signs. The colors shall be as follows:
      1.   No parking at any time: Red curbing.
      2.   Loading zone: Yellow curbing.
      3.   Limited time parking: Green curbing.
      4.   Handicapped parking: Blue curbing.
   C.   When official signs or curb markings regulating parking are used as
authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon a street in
violation of such sign or marking. When the parking sign states the duration of
time allowed for parking, for example, "Two-Hour Parking", then the regulation
shall be enforced only during operating time; when the sign forbids parking at
all times, or at designated times, the regulation is in force at all times or
as stated.
   D.   If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in violation of
this section and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner,
person, corporation, or named lessee in whose name said vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-3: MANNER OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of
the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the
right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or
edge of the roadway.
   B.   Diagonal Parking: On the east side of Third Street between Main and
Grove Streets parking shall be diagonal to the curbs within the striping.
   C.   City Owned Lots: Any vehicle parked within a city owned lot shall be
parked entirely within the markings designating one parking space; shall be
parked facing the direction of such markings and/or signs within the lot; and
in the case of diagonal parking, shall be parked so that the rear of the
vehicle is nearest the drive aisles or entry to such parking stall. (Ord. 575,
4-27-2015)
10-4-4: LOADING ZONES:
A loading zone or space that is not a part of an accessible parking stall may
be occupied by a vehicle while actually engaged in loading and unloading
persons, materials, supplies and merchandise, or other property at stores or
places of business adjacent to said loading zones for such periods of time only
as is set forth on the loading zone sign. Parking in a loading zone or space
during the time period set forth on the loading zone for any purpose other than
loading is unlawful, and punishable as a parking ticket pursuant to section
10-4-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-5: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:
   A.   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled portion of any street
or highway within the city when it is practicable to stop, park or leave the
vehicle off the street or highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of
the street opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of
other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available
from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such street
or highway.
   B.   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in
such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord. 575, 4-27-
2015)
10-4-6: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES:
   A.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or
highway in violation of any of the provisions of section
10-4-3 of this chapter such officer is authorized to move such vehicle, or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same,
to a position off the paved or main traveled part of such street or highway.
   B.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-7: RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Prohibited Places: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in
any of the following places:
      1.   On or across sidewalks, or in such a manner as to obstruct the route
of passage between such sidewalks.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Relation to intersection:
         a.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection,
except at those intersections controlled by a pedestrian control signal.
         b.   Within twenty five feet (25') of the corner of the intersection
at an intersection where no crosswalk is indicated. The said corner of the
intersection shall be the intersection of the projected edge of paving.
      7.   Within twenty feet (20') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings.
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entranceway to any fire
station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly posted.
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
highway or within a street or highway tunnel.
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking.
      15.   On a bike lane or bike path.
      16.   On commercial vehicle lots at locations where vehicles are
displayed for sale in that area located between the roadway and back of
sidewalk or back of projected sidewalk.
      17.   Adjacent to any yellow painted curb or fire lane.
   B.   Grove Street: There shall be no parking on Grove Street in its entirety
within the whole city limits.
   C.   Alleys: No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in or upon
any alley for a period of time longer than reasonably necessary for the purpose
of loading or unloading the vehicle. Such vehicles must utilize hazard lights
during such time they are stopped, standing, or parked in the alley. In no case
shall the stop exceed thirty (30) minutes.
   D.   Additional Parking Restrictions: The city council may, by resolution,
from time to time designate restricted parking in areas on any city street as
it deems fit. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-8: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
   A.   Disabled or handicapped parking spaces shall be identified by a sign
posted in front of the designated parking space and located so that it cannot
be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space, and a painted international
symbol of accessibility on each parking space surface. The sign and the space
surface symbol for designated handicapped parking spaces shall be the
international symbol of accessibility as depicted in Idaho Code section 49-410
or 28 CFR part 36, appendix A, section 4.30.7. In addition, designated
handicapped parking spaces that are van accessible shall include adjacent
access aisles or areas necessary for loading, unloading and transit, and the
sign for the designated handicapped parking space shall have an additional
sign, "Van Accessible" mounted below the international symbol of accessibility.
   B.   The parking or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, in a
space reserved for persons with disabilities, including adjacent access aisles
or areas necessary for loading, unloading and transit designated with a sign
and space surface symbol as provided for in subsection A of this section is
prohibited, unless the vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of
allowing a person with a disability to enter or leave the vehicle, or unless
special license plates or card or temporary card for the disabled is displayed
on the vehicle. The operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle or,
if an operator or person in charge is not present, the registered owner of a
vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this subsection is guilty of
an infraction.
   C.   Any unauthorized use of a disabled person's license plate or card shall
constitute an infraction. Law enforcement officials or enforcement officers
shall enforce the provisions of this section and are empowered, using
reasonable discretion, to check personal identification to determine if the
user of the disabled person's license plate or card is the disabled person so
authorized to use such disabled person's parking privileges. (Ord. 575, 4-27-
2015)
10-4-9: PARKING OF OVERWEIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall park any commercial vehicle having a gross weight
capacity in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, whether attended or
unattended, upon the streets in any residential district within the city for a
period in excess of two (2) hours, except:
      1.   For the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, materials or
merchandise; or
      2.   For any purpose incident to any lawful construction project located
within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle; or
      3.   For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial operation located in
any residential district within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle.
(Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-10: PARKING IN CITY PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any city park between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except where
prior written permission has been granted therefor by the mayor, city council
or the chief of police for special events held at any park. (Ord. 575, 4-27-
2015)
10-4-11: TEMPORARY "NO PARKING" ZONES; BARRICADES AND SIGNS; AUTHORITY; TOWING:
The police department is authorized to indicate temporary zones where vehicles
shall not be parked when, in the opinion of the police officer, it is necessary
to prevent temporarily the parking of vehicles on any street or portion of such
street. The chief of police may do so either by placing appropriate signs
(orange "Police Temporary No Parking") or by placing barricades or officers at
such places. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle at such time and
at such designated places. The police department is authorized to remove such
illegally parked vehicles and the owner thereof shall pay the cost of such
removal. It is also deemed illegal to remove or tamper with such signs. (Ord.
575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-12: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURE; FINES:
   A.   Any enforcement officer observing a violation of the provisions of this
chapter may leave upon the violating vehicle a parking ticket which shall
provide the ticket number, the date and hour, license number, make of vehicle,
fine amount, and the enforcement officer's or designated person's name or
identification number. The parking ticket shall notify the owner or operator of
the fine for the violation, and the method of payment. If a vehicle upon which
a parking ticket has been attached remains in the same location for a period of
two (2) hours after the parking ticket has been attached, additional parking
tickets may be attached to the vehicle for each two (2) hour period of
violation. When the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or
person or the corporation in whose name the said vehicle is registered or the
named lessees in a rental or lease agreement of said vehicle shall be presumed
prima facie responsible for said violation. If a vehicle upon which a violation
has been observed leaves the location prior to the enforcement officer being
able to leave the parking ticket upon the vehicle, such ticket shall be mailed
to the registered owner or the named lessees in a rental or lease agreement of
said vehicle.
   B.   In order to eliminate burdening courts with misdemeanor violations of
ordinances and to eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience, each
person receiving a parking ticket under this chapter shall pay at the address
listed on such ticket the appropriate fine for the parking violations for which
a parking ticket may be issued as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Fines for parking violations listed in this chapter shall be
established by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the chief of
police.
   D.   Enhanced fines for second, third, fourth and subsequent overtime
parking violations occurring within thirty (30) days of the first parking
violation may be established by resolution of the council upon recommendation
of the chief of police.
   E.   The failure of the owner or operator to pay the required fine within
seven (7) calendar days, shall be an infraction punishable as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015; amd. Ord. 602, 7-1-2019)
10-4-13: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED AND UNLAWFULLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Abandoned Motor Vehicles And Trailers: The police department is hereby
authorized, in addition to any penalty, citation, parking ticket or fine that
may be provided therefor, to remove any unidentified, stolen, wrecked or
abandoned motor vehicles and trailers, as defined in this chapter, found upon
any public thoroughfare or other property of the city.
   B.   Unlawfully Parked Vehicles: The police department may likewise remove
all motor vehicles unlawfully parked upon all spaces between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. when the hours of parking have
been posted in a conspicuous place.
   C.   Removal: Such vehicles so removed shall be taken to either a public
garage or storage place for safekeeping. All costs and expenses incidental to
such removal shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle, pursuant to the
procedures contained in title 49, chapter 18, Idaho Code, regardless of whether
the removal is because of a parking offense or abandonment. Removal shall be a
cumulative remedy and shall not preclude issuance of any other citation or
parking ticket as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
10-4-14: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or public right of way for the
principal purpose of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   B.   Greasing, changing oil or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 575, 4-27-2015)
 
