CITY CODE
of
PRIEST RIVER
IDAHO
2005
Code current through:
Ord. 635, passed 6-17-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Priest River, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 635, passed June 17, 2024. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ORDINANCE NO. 642
Title 10, Land Use Regulations
Priest River City Code
 
An Ordinance of the City of Priest River, Idaho, setting forth its authority;
amending Priest River City Code Title 10 (Land Use Regulations), to make the
following changes to Chapter 2, and to Chapter 10. The changes are detailed in
this ordinance.
 
Whereas, The City of Priest River has previously adopted Municipal Code
provisions, rules, regulations, and procedures in the City of Priest River;
and,
 
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, provides for the adoption of land
use standards for the purposes of protecting property rights and enhancing
property values, together with the purposes of promoting the health, safety,
and general welfare of the people; and
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, Section 6518 authorizes governing
boards to adopt standards for public and private development; and
Whereas, The City Council has adopted a comprehensive plan to guide development
within the incorporated area of Priest River; and
Whereas, the City Council did hold a public hearing on October 20, 2025, and
did find the proposed amendment to the land use codes in accord with the Priest
River Comprehensive Plan and Idaho Code.
Now, therefore be it ordained by the City Council of Priest River, Idaho that
the following be and is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the City of Priest
River:
SECTION 1: Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted at Chapter 65,
Title 67, Idaho Code, and pursuant to the procedural requirements contained at
Section 67- 6509, Idaho Code.
 
SECTION 2: Amending Priest River City Code, Chapter 2 and Chapter 10.
 
PRCC CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
10-2-2: SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS
SMALL SUBDIVISION:
The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel of land into
two (2) to four (4) lots for sale, lease, financing, gift or building
construction, whether immediate or future.
 
SUBDIVISION:
The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel of land into
five (5) or more lots or parcels for sale, lease, financing, gift or building
construction, whether immediate or future.
 
(No additional changes to the remainder of the Section)
 
PRCC CHAPTER 10: SUBDIVIONS
10-10-2: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT/MINOR NOTATIONAL CHANGE:
 
A. Lot Line Adjustment Within Platted Subdivisions: The procedures set forth in
this section shall be used to process applications for minor notational changes
as defined, and any adjustment of platted lot lines between two (2) or more
existing lots or parcels, where land taken from one lot or parcel is added to
an adjacent lot or parcel. Applications for lot line adjustments may include:
1. The combining of two (2) or more lots;
2. Any adjustment of existing subdivision plat lot lines where lots are
eliminated and where no lot or parcel is reduced below the minimum lot or
parcel size for zoning district in which the lots or parcels are located; and
which no new public roads or City utility main line extensions are required;
and when notice of such division has been supplied to landowners as elsewhere
provided for in this Chapter.
 
B.   Application For Adjustment Of Lot Lines/Minor Notational Changes: All
applications made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the City
Planning and Zoning Department. Any person contemplating a lot line adjustment/
minor notational change is encouraged to contact the Administrator prior to
submission of the application for discussion of procedures, standards and
criteria which are applicable to the proposed application.
      1.   All applications for adjustment of lot lines and minor notational
changes shall include:
         a.   Two (2) full sized copies and one reduced 11"x17" copy of the
final plat, prepared and stamped by an Idaho licensed professional land
surveyor and containing:
            (1)   The location of existing structures;
            (2)   Location, dimensions and area (in acres) of proposed lots.
All proposed lots shall be numbered in a systematic order;
            (3)   Name of the larger subdivision or tract of which it forms a
part;
            (4)   Names of the subdivider and surveyor;
            (5)   The "initial point" and description thereof, shall be
indicated on the drawing in conformance with Idaho Code;
            (6)   Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal
property lines, Township lines, or section lines, intersecting, crossing or
contiguous to the subdivision, and the status of adjoining property shall be
indicated (name of subdivision or un- platted area);
            (7)   The accurate location and description and filing of all
monuments shall be in accordance with "the Corner Perpetuation Act", title 55,
chapter 16, Idaho Code;
            (8)   The length and bearings of the lines of all lots, streets,
alleys and easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvature, radii and
tangent bearings in the case of curved lines (the system of lengths and
bearings of the boundary lines);
            (9)   All lots shall be numbered consecutively in each block, and
each block lettered or numbered as set forth at 50-1304, Idaho Code. All
streets shall bear the street or road name as it appears on the official road
name list;
            (10)   The accurate outline of all property that is offered for
dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon and all property
owners in the division;
            (11)   Private restrictions if any;
            (12)   North point, graphic scale and date (whether true north or
magnetic north shall be indicated);
            (13)   A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor of the
State of Idaho to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him that
all the monuments, shown thereon, actually exist and that their positions are
shown;
            (14)   Location of all watercourses, base flood elevations, the
elevations derived from flood insurance rate maps, and approximate area subject
to inundation of stormwater overflow;
            (15)   Wetland boundaries as depicted on national wetland inventory
maps or as delineated by a professional authorized by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers to perform wetland delineations, and any proposed easements or
easements of record for drainage channels, overhead and underground utility
lines, sanitary sewers, and water systems within the tract;
            (16)   Owner's certificate. A notarized description of the property
encompassed by the plat, dedications and restrictions; and
            (17)   All plat certificates required by this Code.
         b.   A copy of the preliminary title report;
         c.   A copy of the current recorded deed for the subject property;
         d.   Applications shall additionally include one copy of the plat,
currently recorded, marked with distinguishable lines as to clearly indicate
the existing and proposed lot lines;
         e.   A letter from Panhandle Health District or the City stating the
requirements for sanitary restrictions are not affected by the adjustment of
the lot lines; and
         f.   Additional information reasonably required for a thorough review
of the application, as may be asked by the Administrator.
No application submitted pursuant to this subsection B shall be deemed complete
nor any plat recorded, until all fees have been paid.
        
C. Procedures For Administrative Review And Approval Of Lot Line Adjustment/
Minor Notational Changes:
1. The applicant shall file an application for a lot line adjustment or minor
notational change with the Administrator, who shall have thirty (30) days to
examine the application to determine its completeness. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Administrator shall inform the applicant in
writing of additional items or information necessary to complete the
application.
2. Upon the determination of the Administrator that an application is complete,
the Administrator shall cause a report to be made specifying whether the
application is in conformance with the provisions of this section, and if not,
the changes that could be made in the application to bring it into conformance.
3. The Administrator shall consider the facts of the application and relevant
Code standards and shall approve the application as submitted or subject to
specific modifications upon finding adequate evidence that:
a. No additional lots are being created and no lot is being reduced below the
minimum lot size required by zoning; and
b. The proposed lot line adjustment is in accord with the purpose of this
chapter and of the zone district in which it is located.
4. The Administrator shall set forth the decision in writing explaining the
reasons for the decision, and the City Code standards used in making the
decision and findings of fact and conclusions in support of the decision. If
the Administrator denies the application, the Administrator shall also set
forth in writing the actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
5. Changes in an approved application, resulting in the modification of the
terms and conditions of approval may be approved by the Administrator upon a
written request by the applicant, provided:
a. No additional lots are created;
b. The changes are consistent, and substantially conform, with the original
preliminary plat approval; and
c. The changes do not result in any violation of this Code.
6. Any decision or determination made by the Administrator in the
administration of this section may be appealed to the City Council. The appeal
must be submitted to the City Council, in accordance with Section 10-16-1 of
this Title.
 
   D.   Final Plat For Lot Line Adjustments, Notational Changes To Be Drawn,
Time For Filing, Signing: Upon approval of the paper copy of the final plat,
the applicant shall cause a final plat to be drawn, suitable for recording and
in compliance with the requirements for plats set forth at title 50, chapter
13, Idaho Code. The Administrator shall be authorized to sign the final plat
upon the confirmation that:
      1.   The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this
Code;
      2.   The final plat conforms with the approved application; and
      3.   The conditions of approval have been completed.
 
   E.   Property Line Adjustment Within Un-Platted Lands: The procedure for
property line adjustments for un-platted lands shall be the same as platted
lands except that a record of survey shall be used when no additional parcels
or lots are created. When additional parcels or lots are created with un-
platted lands the properties shall be divided as a platted subdivision as is
elsewhere provided for in the City Municipal Code.
 
(NEW SECTION)
 
10-10-3: SMALL SUBDIVISION
 
A. Small Subdivision Purpose: The procedures set forth in this section shall be
used to process applications for small subdivisions as defined, an applicant
may use the small subdivision process when the proposed application:
1. Will contain four (4) or fewer lots and all lots will meet minimum standards
in size as set forth in this title,
2. Lands divided using a small subdivision are not eligible for further
division by the small subdivision process. This restriction shall be noted on
the plat. Future divisions of any lot created by small subdivisions must
proceed through the Subdivision process as found in 10-10-1 of this Chapter.
3. No new public roads or City utility main line extensions are required.
4. The procedure may not be used where it creates or expands nonconformity with
land use pursuant to this title or any applicable Land Use Ordinances.
B. Application for Small Subdivisions: All applications made pursuant to this
section shall be submitted to the City Planning and Zoning Department. Any
person contemplating a small subdivision is encouraged to contact the
Administrator prior to submission of the application for discussion of
procedures, standards and criteria which are applicable to the proposed
application.
1. All applications for small subdivision shall include:
a. Two (2) full sized copies and one reduced “11x17" copy of the final plat,
prepared and stamped by an Idaho licensed professional land surveyor and
containing:
(1) The location of existing structures;
(2) Location, dimensions and area (in acres) of proposed lots. All proposed
lots shall be numbered in a systematic order;
(3) Name of the larger subdivision or tract of which it forms a part;
(4) Names of the subdivider and surveyor;
(5) The "initial point" and description thereof, shall be indicated on the
drawing in conformance with Idaho Code;
(6) Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal property lines,
Township lines, or section lines, intersecting, crossing or contiguous to the
subdivision, and the status of adjoining property shall be indicated (name of
subdivision or un- platted area);
(7) The accurate location and description and filing of all monuments shall be
in accordance with "the Corner Perpetuation Act", title 55, chapter 16, Idaho
Code;
(8) The length and bearings of the lines of all lots, streets, alleys and
easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvature, radii and tangent
bearings in the case of curved lines (the system of lengths and bearings of the
boundary lines);
(9) All lots shall be numbered consecutively in each block, and each block
lettered or numbered as set forth at 50-1304, Idaho Code. All streets shall
bear the street or road name as it appears on the official road name list;
(10) The accurate outline of all property that is offered for dedication for
public use, with the purpose indicated thereon and all property owners in the
division;
(11) Private restrictions, if any;
(12) North point, graphic scale and date (whether true north or magnetic north
shall be indicated);
(13) A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor of the State of Idaho to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him that all the
monuments, shown thereon, actually exist and that their positions are shown;
(14) Location of all watercourses, base flood elevations, the elevations
derived from flood insurance rate maps, and approximate area subject to
inundation of stormwater overflow;
(15) Wetland boundaries as depicted on national wetland inventory maps or as
delineated by a professional authorized by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
perform wetland delineations, and any proposed easements or easements of record
for drainage channels, overhead and underground utility lines, sanitary sewers,
and water systems within the tract;
(16) Owner's certificate. A notarized description of the property encompassed
by the plat, dedications and restrictions; and
(17) All plat certificates required by this Code.
b. A copy of the preliminary title report;
c. A copy of the current recorded deed for the subject property;
d. Applications shall additionally include one copy of the plat, currently
recorded, marked with distinguishable lines as to clearly indicate the existing
and proposed lot lines;
e. A letter from Panhandle Health District or the City stating the requirements
for sanitary restrictions are not affected by the small subdivision; and
f. Additional information reasonably required for a thorough review of the
application, as may be asked by the Administrator.
 
No application submitted pursuant to this subsection B shall be deemed complete
nor any plat recorded, until all fees have been paid.
 
C. Procedures for Administrative Review of a Small Subdivision:
1. The applicant shall file an application for a small subdivision with the
Administrator, who shall have thirty (30) days to examine the application to
determine its completeness. If the application is determined to be incomplete,
the Administrator shall inform the applicant in writing of additional items or
information necessary to complete the application.
2. Upon the determination of the Administrator that an application is complete,
the city shall:
a. Send public notices, pursuant to Idaho Code 67-6509 and 67-6511, that the
small subdivision application has been made, and a means for them to review it;
   b. Provide notice to the official city newspaper of record. The notice shall
provide a summary of the proposal and advise of the fifteen (15) day comment
period;
   c. At the close of the comment and review period the Administrator shall
cause a report to be made specifying whether the application is in conformance
with the provisions of this section, and if not, the changes that could be made
in the application to bring it into conformance.
3. The Administrator shall consider the facts of the application and relevant
Code standards and shall approve the application as submitted or subject to
specific modifications upon finding adequate evidence that:
a. The proposed lots meet the required standards of the applicable zone;
b. The request is in accord with the purpose of this chapter and of the zone
district in which it is located;
c. All proposed lots will be served by city water and sewer with individual
utility connection to each lot, in accordance with Title 8 of this code; and
d. The application meets the standards and provision of this section.
4. The Administrator shall set forth the decision in writing explaining the
reasons for the decision, and the City Code standards used in making the
decision and findings of fact and conclusions in support of the decision. If
the Administrator denies the application, the Administrator shall also set
forth in writing the actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
5. Changes to an approved application, resulting in the modification of the
terms and conditions of approval, may be approved by the Administrator upon a
written request by the applicant, provided:
a. The changes are consistent, and substantially conform with the original
preliminary plat approval; and
b. The changes do not result in any violation of this Code.
6. Any decision or determination made by the Administrator in the
administration of this section may be appealed to the City Council, in
accordance with Section 10-16-1 of this Title.
7. The small subdivision application approval shall be valid for a period not
to exceed two calendar years from the date of approval. Within two years of the
approval, the applicant shall submit the final plat to the Administrator. At
any time prior to the expiration of the application approval, an applicant may
make a written request to the Administrator for a single extension of the
application approval for a period of up to two years. The Administrator may
consider such request for extension. The extension request must be approved or
denied prior to the expiration date of the approval.
 
D. Final Plat for Small Subdivisions to be Drawn, Time for Filing, Signing:
Upon approval of the paper copy of the final plat, the applicant shall cause a
final plat to be drawn, suitable for recording and in compliance with the
requirements for plats set forth at title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code. The
Administrator shall be authorized to sign the final plat upon the confirmation
that:
1. The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this Code;
2. The final plat conforms with the approved application; and
3. The conditions of approval have been completed.
The final plat shall be transmitted to the City Council for review and possible
approval at a future Council meeting.
 
SECTION 3: Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be individually
severable. Should any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the remaining provisions.
SECTION 4: Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication of the ordinance or ordinance summary in one (1) issue of the
Bonner County Daily Bee Newspaper.
SECTION 5: Adoption of Ordinance
Any provision of any Ordinance or Code section of the City of Priest River in
conflict herewith, or contrary hereto, is hereby repealed.
 
Passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor, under suspension of the
rules, as an Ordinance of the City of Priest River, Bonner County, Idaho, at a
regular meeting of the Priest River City Council held on the 20th day of
October, 2025.
 
 
_____________________________
Jeff Connolly
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
_______________________________
Laurel Thomas, CMC
City Clerk/Treasurer
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
PRIEST RIVER CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Priest
River, Idaho. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the
PRIEST RIVER CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council
and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the
city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; ordinances relating to the transfer or
acceptance of real estate by or from the city; ordinances authorizing a zone
change; ordinances authorizing a bond issue; and all special ordinances. (Ord.
475, 3-7-2005)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, services or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The mayor and city council hereby declare that
they would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases
be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Tense; Gender: Whenever any word in any section of this code importing
the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular
number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included;
provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section
of this code which contains any express provision excluding such construction
or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
   C.   Shall/May: When used in this code, the word "shall" is mandatory and
the word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Priest River, county of Bonner, state of Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the elected city council of the city.
CODE: The city code of Priest River, Idaho, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Bonner, state of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the city of
Priest River".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of each year
and end on September 30 1 .
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
for which no period of incarceration may be imposed 2 .
LICENSE: The permission granted for automobiles, domestic pets or the carrying
on of a business, profession or occupation.
MAYOR: The elected mayor of the city of Priest River.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not constituting a felony or infraction 3 .
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city, or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Priest River".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with others.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1001.
2 2. IC § 18-111.
3 3. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: General Appeal Procedures
1-4-5: Code Enforcement
1-4-6: Collections
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of the provisions of this Code is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any
ordinance provision of the City, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under
the provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of the provisions of this Code that have been designated
an infraction shall be subject to a financial penalty as set forth in section
1-4-5 below.
Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed,
continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished
accordingly. (Ord. 591, 10-2-2017; amd. Ord. 614, 10-5-2020)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically provided in
this Code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (Ord. 560, 10-21-
2013)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 560,
10-21-2013)
1-4-4: GENERAL APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Unless other appeal provisions apply, any person aggrieved by any decision or
other act of an authorized employee or officer of the city (other than
allegation of violation of law resulting in prosecution) shall have the right
to appeal such act or decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be
initiated by submitting a written notice of appeal to the city clerk within
fourteen (14) business days from the date you were served and on the form
provided by the city clerk. The fourteen (14) days begins to count from (1) the
date you were served with your citation; (2) the date the citation was served
at your residence; or (3) the date the citation was placed in the mail. Failure
to timely file your Appeal will result in your Appeal being denied. Only the
person listed on the citation may file an Appeal.
Once the City Clerk has received a timely and complete Notice of Appeal, the
matter will be scheduled for a hearing in front of the Appeals Board. At the
conclusion of the Hearing, the Appeals Board will deliberate and issue a ruling
on the matter. The decision is final.
The Appeals Board shall consist of one (1) City Council Member, the City Clerk,
and (1) City Attorney. (Ord. 560, 10-21-2013; amd. Ord. 614, 10-5-2020)
1-4-5: CODE ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of
this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this chapter. However, the city's prosecuting attorney may elect to
refrain from initiating criminal prosecution when the code enforcement officer
first issues an infraction citation describing the violation and the charge
assessed to the offending party. The guilty party may settle such violation by
paying to the city clerk, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the complaint
of such violation a civil assessment in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for a first offense, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second offense
and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third offense. (Ord. 560, 10-21-2013;
amd. Ord. 614, 10-5-2020)
1-4-6: COLLECTIONS:
   A.   In the event any person fails or refuses to pay the civil penalty, the
city shall take such action as is necessary for collection of the civil
assessment.
   B.   Collection actions may include, but are not limited to, initiating
collection procedures via a debt collection service, and filing a civil lawsuit
for collection of the unpaid penalty(ies). Provided, further, the city shall be
entitled to all fees, costs, and attorney fees incurred in the collection of
such fees and, upon entry of judgment, the city shall have each, every, and all
rights of enforcement of a judgment as provided by Idaho Code. (Ord. 560, 10-
21-2013)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Composition; Terms:
1-5-2: Mayor
1-5-3: City Council
1-5-4: Meetings
1-5-5: Compensation
1-5-1: COMPOSITION; TERMS:
   A.   Mayor And City Council Members: The legislative authority for the city
shall be vested in a city council consisting of four (4) members and the mayor,
each to be qualified as provided by law.
   B.   Terms: The mayor shall serve for a term of four (4) years, and city
council members shall each serve a term of four (4) years, with their terms to
be staggered. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-5-2: MAYOR:
   A.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   General: The mayor shall be the chief administrative official of the
city, preside over meetings of the city council and determine the order of
business, subject to such rules as the city council may prescribe, have a vote
only when the city council is equally divided, have the superintending control
of all the officers and affairs in the city, preserve order and take care that
the ordinances of the city and provisions of state law are complied with and
enforced 1 .
      2.   Contracts; Borrow Money: The mayor is authorized and empowered to
officially sign his name for and on behalf of the city on all contracts,
including deeds, bonds, bills, notes, obligations and other agreements,
documents and papers to which the city is a party, and to require that the
conditions in the said instruments are faithfully performed, and to borrow
money on the credit of the city when authorized by the city council.
      3.   Accounts And Reports Of Officers: The mayor shall have the power,
when he deems it necessary, to require any officer of the city to exhibit his
accounts or other papers and to make reports to the city council in writing,
touching any subject or matter he may require pertaining to his office.
      4.   Ordinances: The mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any
ordinance passed by the city council, provided that any ordinance vetoed by the
mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the
members of the full city council, notwithstanding the veto; and should the
mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance, and return the same with his
objections in writing at the next regular meeting of the city council, the same
shall become law without his signature 2 .
      5.   Additional Powers: The mayor shall perform all other duties required
and necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the city, and
shall have all other powers granted by the laws of the state.
   B.   Police Powers, Jurisdiction 3 : The mayor shall have such jurisdiction
as may be vested in him by ordinance over all places within five (5) miles of
the corporate limits of the city for the enforcement of any health or
quarantine ordinance and regulation thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all
matters vested in him by ordinance, except taxation, within one mile of the
corporate limits of the city and over such properties as may be owned by the
city outside of the corporate limits. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-602.
2 1. IC § 50-611.
3 2. IC § 50-606.
1-5-3: CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Powers And Duties: Members of the city council, the legislative and
policy making branch of the city, shall devote as much of their time to the
duties of their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may
require. They shall attend all meetings of the city council unless lawfully
excused therefrom by the mayor or by a majority of the remaining members, and
perform all duties which by the nature of their office they should reasonably
perform.
   B.   City Council President: At the time of taking office, the city council
shall elect one of its members president of the city council, who shall preside
at all meetings of the city council and perform all other duties of the mayor
in the absence of the mayor; and, in the absence of the council president, the
city council shall elect one of its members to temporarily occupy his place.
When occupying the place of mayor, the council president and acting council
president shall have the same privileges as other members of the city council,
and all actions of the council president and acting council president, while so
acting, shall be binding upon the city council and upon the city, as if
performed by the mayor.
   C.   Vacancies In Office: In the event an office of city council person
becomes vacant, through death, removal of residence or for any other cause, the
mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a resident of the
city to fill the vacancy, which appointee shall serve only until the next
general city election at which such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of
the original term. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-5-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on
the first and third Mondays of each month at the hour of six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. at the Priest River City Hall. Should such a regular meeting fall on a
holiday, the meeting shall be canceled. (Ord. 521, 2-2-2009)
   B.   Special Meetings: The mayor or one-half (1/2) plus one of the members
of the full city council shall have the power to call special meetings of the
city council, the object of which shall be submitted to the city council in
writing; the call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be
entered upon the journal of the city clerk.
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the city council shall be open to the
public, except as provided in Idaho Code 67-2345 et seq.
   D.   Rules Of Order: The most recent edition of "Robert's Rules Of Order" is
hereby adopted as fully as if set out at length herein, for the purpose of
establishing rules for the conduct of all meetings of the city, including all
councils, commissions and committees. A copy of "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall
be kept in the city clerk's office and an additional copy shall be provided to
the mayor and chair of the planning and zoning commission and other commissions
and committees as determined by the mayor. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Mayor And City Council: Commencing January 1, 2016, the salaries of the
mayor and of the members of the Priest River city council shall be as follows:
      1.   The mayor shall receive an annual salary in the sum of nine thousand
six hundred dollars ($9,600.00); and
      2.   Each member of the council shall receive an annual salary in the sum
of four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00). (Ord. 575, 8-3-2015)
      3.   The mayor and/or city council members may choose to have their
monthly salary applied toward city provided medical insurance, if allowable by
the city's insurance company. Any cost above the monthly salary would be paid
for by the individual. (Ord. 500, 8-6-2007)
   B.   Other Officers And Employees: All other salaries shall be set by
resolution of the mayor and city council.
   C.   Past Due Accounts:
      1.   It is declared to be the public policy of the city not to allow the
mayor or members of the city council to collect and receive their regular pay
for the performance of their elective duties at such times as they may owe the
city unpaid utility billings and/or other sums.
      2.   From and after the effective date of this section, the city clerk
shall cause to be withheld from pay for services due the mayor or members of
the city council any sums due the city for unpaid utility billings and/or other
sums. Such deductions shall be from the net pay due said individuals, after the
deduction of required federal and state payroll withholding amounts. In the
event the amount of net pay shall be inadequate, the city clerk shall withhold
from successive payments due said elected officials until all amounts due the
city have been fully paid, including any interest and/or other penalties and
service charges regularly charged to other persons. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointments
1-6-2: Official Bonds
1-6-3: City Clerk
1-6-4: City Treasurer
1-6-5: City Attorney
1-6-6: City Administrator
1-6-1: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, a city
clerk, city treasurer, city attorney, chief of police and such other officers
as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the city, each
officer to serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Any appointed officer of the
city may be removed from office by the same authority and in the same manner as
he was originally appointed. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-6-2: OFFICIAL BONDS:
Before entering upon the duties of their office, the city clerk, city treasurer
and such other officers as are designated by the city council shall execute a
bond to the city in such penal sum as the city council may by ordinance
determine, conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. All official
bonds shall be approved by the city council and when so approved shall be filed
with the city clerk, except the bond of the city clerk which shall be filed
with the mayor 1 . (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-204.
1-6-3: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Powers And Duties: In all cases where duties are not expressly charged
to any other department or office, the city clerk shall have supervision,
control and responsibility of all the records of the city. He shall serve as
city clerk for the mayor and city council and perform such other duties of a
like nature as shall be required by the mayor and city council. In the absence
of the city clerk, the council president shall act in his stead.
   B.   Signature: The city clerk shall sign and attest to all ordinances,
resolutions, documents, checks and other necessary financial instruments, as
required by law or action of the mayor and city council.
   C.   City Seal: The city clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal
of the city, and shall affix the same to all instruments and papers to which it
is required by law or ordinance.
   D.   Copies Of Records: Copies of materials and documents part of the
official records of the city shall be available to interested parties upon
payment of the normal charges for research and copying made by the city. (Ord.
475, 3-7-2005)
1-6-4: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Powers And Duties: In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged
to any other department or office, the city treasurer shall act to promote,
secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city.
      1.   Accounts: He shall keep proper books of a full and accurate account
of all monies received and disbursed by him on behalf of the city.
      2.   Claims: He shall demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the
city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner, and the means
of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law. When any claim
shall not be collectible by other methods, the city treasurer shall report the
same to the city attorney for prosecution.
   B.   Reports: The city treasurer shall make a detailed report to the mayor
and city council the second meeting of each month showing the business of his
office during the preceding month, the balance on hand to the credit of the
various funds, the amounts received during the month and on what account,
together with such other information as may be required by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-6-5: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to:
      1.   Prosecute Suits And Actions: Prosecute or defend any and all suits
or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the
city on behalf of the city or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the city.
      2.   Judgments And Orders: To see to the full enforcement of all
judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city and of all
similar interlocutory orders.
      3.   Ordinances And Documents: Draft or supervise the phraseology of any
contract, lease or other documents or instruments to which the city may be a
party, and upon request of the city council to draft ordinances covering any
subjects over which the city is authorized to pass.
      4.   Special Assessments: To see to the completion of all special
assessment and condemnation proceedings.
   B.   Legal Advice: The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city
and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city whenever
requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or by the
city council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-6-6: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor,
subject to the removal provisions set forth in Idaho Code section 50-206 or its
successor, unless the city administrator is party to an express employment
contract, approved by the mayor and city council, which provides otherwise.
Such a contract is authorized hereby. The city administrator shall be subject
to policy direction by the city council through its official actions and to
supervision by the mayor.
   B.   The city administrator shall be responsible for management and
supervision of departments designated by the mayor, this code or city council
resolution. Such duties may be changed at any time by direction of the mayor or
by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Unless otherwise directed by
the mayor or by formal city council action, the city administrator shall have
supervisory authority concerning the activities of all city operating
departments. Any rights or administrative prerogatives established by such
resolutions shall inure to the administrative position held by the city
administrator and shall be personal rights of the individual appointed to the
position. (Ord. 539, 6-6-2011)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Corporate Seal
1-7-2: Official Newspaper
1-7-3: Official Depositories
1-7-4: Municipal Elections
1-7-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
There is hereby adopted for the City a corporate seal which shall be circular
in form, with inner and outer circles, containing the words "City of Priest
River, Idaho" and "Corporate Seal", respectively. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-7-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-213, the Bonner County Daily Bee is
hereby designated as the official newspaper of the City, and such ordinances,
notices and other documents requiring publication, shall be published in said
newspaper. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005; amd. Ord. 593, 3-19-2018)
1-7-3: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-1013, the City Treasurer shall
deposit all monies coming into his official custody in the following financial
institutions:
   Idaho State Investment Pool
   Panhandle State Bank (Ord. 559, 10-7-2013)
1-7-4: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
The polls for all general and special City elections shall be open from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M., Pacific time and remain open until eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. Pacific time. The locations of election polls shall be designated by the
City Clerk. (Ord. 476, 4-18-2005)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Purpose
1-8-2: Area Of City Impact Boundaries
1-8-3: Applicability Of Regulations
1-8-4: City Council Review
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of establishing an area of city impact is to identify a logical
fringe area adjoining the city of Priest River. The fringe area includes the
unincorporated area surrounding Priest River that has a potential for
development that could affect the provision of public services or the quality
of life in Priest River. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-8-2: AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARIES:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 67-6526, the city defines the
following as its area of city impact within the unincorporated areas of Bonner
County:
Beginning at the northwest corner of section 14, township 56 north, range 5
west, B.M.; thence east to the northwest corner of section 18, township 56
north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence south to the southwest corner of section 18,
township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence east to the northeast corner of
government lot 1 of section 19, township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence
south to a point where two county roads (Eastside) and the Settlement Road
intersect; thence southeasterly along the centerline of the Settlement Road to
a point of intersection with the west line of the northeast quarter of section
19, township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence south to the southwest corner
of the K.D. Naccarato property, described in book 92 at page 549; thence east
to the centerline of Settlement Road; thence southeasterly along said road
centerline to the west line of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter;
thence south to the southwest corner of government lot 1 of section 30,
township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence west to the southwest corner of
section 26, township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; thence north to the
northwest corner of section 14, township 56 north, range 4 west, B.M.; and the
place of beginning; less the incorporated areas of the city of Priest River.
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-8-3: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments
thereto, as official adopted by the Bonner County board of commissioners shall
apply to the area of city impact.
   B.   Zoning And Subdivision Regulations: The zoning and subdivision
ordinances and subsequent amendments thereto, as officially adopted by the
Bonner County board of commissioners, shall apply to the area of city impact.
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-8-4: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
Any request for development, zone change, conditional use permit or variance
within the area of city impact shall be referred to the city council for review
and comment. The city council shall have forty (40) days to consider the
request and submit a reply to the board of county commissioners. If no reply is
received by the board within the forty (40) day period, the city council shall
forfeit its right to comment on the request, and processing shall continue
under the board's administration. Both the city council and the board of county
commissioners shall approve all subdivision plats within the area of city
impact, pursuant to Idaho Code 50-1306 and 50-1308. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 9
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Chief Of Police
1-9-2: Police Officer's Training
1-9-3: Custody Of Lost Or Stolen Property
1-9-1: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Supervise Police Department: The chief of police shall be the head
of the police department and have supervision over all the officers and members
thereof.
      2.   Peace And Good Order: The chief of police shall preserve the peace
and good order of the city, quell all riots, arrest and bring all violators of
this code before the proper magistrate for trial, serve all processes directed
to him and enforce all orders and judgments and take such measures as shall
secure the peace and good order of all public meetings.
      3.   Records: The chief of police shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by
statute or by the mayor. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-9-2: POLICE OFFICER'S TRAINING:
   A.   Qualifications: the city declares that it desires to qualify to receive
aid for police training from the law enforcement planning commission under the
provisions of Idaho Code 19-5109(10).
   B.   Pursuant to Idaho Code 19-5110, the city, while receiving aid from the
law enforcement planning commission pursuant to said statute, will adhere to
the standards for employment and training established by the Idaho peace
officer standards and training advisory council. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
1-9-3: CUSTODY OF LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY:
The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property recovered within the city. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 10
FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
1-10-1: Adoption
1-10-1: ADOPTION:
The Priest River permit fee schedule is incorporated herein by reference and
shall be reviewed at least annually and may be amended or modified from time to
time by resolution of the city council according to law. (Ord. 492, 2-12-2006)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Membership
2-1-2: Organization And Meetings
2-1-3: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created and planning and zoning commission for the city to
consist of not less than three (3) members. The members shall be appointed by
the mayor and confirmed by the city council. All members must meet state
residency requirements and shall be selected without respect to political
affiliations. The terms of office shall be three (3) years, and no person shall
serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms. Members may be removed for
cause by a majority vote of the city council, and vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner as original appointments. Members shall serve without
compensation except for necessary expenses approved by the city council.
Should the city be unable to fill the membership of the planning and zoning
commission, the city council shall, in that case and until such time as full
membership is obtained, hear all planning and zoning matters that may come
before said commission. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   The commission shall elect its own chair and create and fill such
offices as it may determine necessary for the proper conduct of the affairs and
business of the commission.
   B.   Meetings of the commission shall be held when duly called by the chair
by written or oral notice. At least one regular meeting shall be held each
month for not less than nine (9) months of the year. A majority of voting
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, with the chair not being
counted in determining a quorum. As the presiding officer over the meeting, the
chair may only vote when necessary to break a tie vote of the voting members.
All meetings shall be open to the public. Written rules consistent with this
chapter and the laws of the state for the transaction of business of the
commission shall be adopted. Written records of meetings, hearings,
resolutions, findings, studies, permits and actions shall be maintained and be
open to the public. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Planning Commission: It shall be the duty of the planning commission
to:
      1.   Conduct a planning process designed to prepare, implement, review
and update a comprehensive plan that includes all lands within the city
council's jurisdiction;
      2.   Hold public hearings prior to recommending the comprehensive plan,
changes to the plan and ordinances;
      3.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the
planning process;
      4.   Recommend subdivision and zoning ordinances;
      5.   Recommend changes to a comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance prior
to annexation of an unincorporated area; and
      6.   Recommend a map, a governing plan and ordinances for an area of city
impact that is within the unincorporated area of the county.
   B.   Zoning Commission: It shall be the duty of the zoning commission to:
      1.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the
administration of ordinances;
      2.   Prepare, periodically review and recommend changes, as needed, to
the city council, to the existing procedures for processing zoning permits,
special user permits, rezone applications, planned unit development proposals,
conditional use applications and variance applications;
      3.   Recommend changes to a comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance prior
to annexation of an unincorporated area;
      4.   Hear all requests for amendment to the zoning ordinance, hold at
least one public hearing and make its recommendation to the city council;
      5.   Recommend changes to the zoning ordinance to the city council; and
      6.   Refer all information received concerning infractions or violations
of the zoning ordinance to the city council for appropriate action.
   C.   Approval Of Maps, Plats And Replats: Any and all maps, plats and
replats of land which require approval of a city council or of an officer or
employee, shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for
its suggestions within a time frame specified within the city subdivision and
zoning ordinances. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND TREE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Created; Membership
2-2-2: Organization And Meetings
2-2-3: Powers And Duties
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a Parks and Tree Commission to be composed of those
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Member terms
shall be for two (2) years. Members shall serve without compensation. (Ord.
588, 7-5-2017)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   Chair: The members shall appoint a Chair who shall act as the
coordinator of the activities of the Parks and Tree Commission.
   B.   Meetings: Regular meetings of the Parks and Tree Commission shall be
held at such times as the members shall deem necessary, or on call of the
Chair. (Ord. 588, 7-5-2017)
2-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the Parks and Tree Commission shall be as follows:
   A.   To provide for all the rules and regulations necessary under which park
and recreational areas of the City may be used by the general public, subject
to any limitations established by the commission, and to enforce such rules and
regulations.
   B.   To provide for any voluntary committee that may be necessary for the
maintenance and operation of the park and recreational areas of the City, and
delegate any authority for the proper operation of the Recreational Program.
   C.   To license or lease any concessionaire or concessionaires that it might
determine necessary for the operation of the park and recreational areas.
   D.   To receive donations from any person, group or association of money or
property that is to be used in the development or maintenance of the park or
recreational areas.
   E.   To recommend to the Mayor and City Council any improvements needed for
the park and recreational areas of the City, and to assist in applying for
grants and funding for such areas.
   F.   To recommend to the Mayor and City Council as to the preservation,
protection and management of the community forest of the City, in particular
its public trees.
   G.   To review all manuals, plans and policies of the City relating to the
community forest and make recommendations to the City Council. (Ord. 588, 7-5-
2017)
CHAPTER 3
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Commission Established; Membership
2-3-4: Organization And Meetings
2-3-5: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
Under Idaho Code 67-4612, the city may provide by ordinance special conditions
or restrictions for the protection, enhancement and preservation of historic
properties. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to promote the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through
identification, evaluation, designation and protection of those buildings,
sites, areas, structures and objects which reflect significant elements of the
city's, state's and nation's historic, architectural, archaeological and
cultural heritage. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state
or the nation. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
2-3-3: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   There is hereby created an historic preservation commission for the
city which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
   B.   All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest,
competence or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The city council
shall endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training
or experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural
history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law or other historic
preservation related disciplines.
   C.   Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one 1-
year term; two (2) 2-year terms; and two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Commission members may be
reappointed to serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments, and the appointee shall serve for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   D.   Members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
2-3-4: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   Organization: The commission shall have the power to make whatever
rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this
chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be
available for public inspection. The commission shall elect officers from among
its membership. The chair shall preside at meetings, and the vice chair, in the
absence of the chair, shall perform the duties of the chair.
   B.   Meetings: The meetings of the commission shall be open to the public
and follow he requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws 1 . The commission
shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions,
proceedings and actions.
   C.   The commission may recommend to the city council, within the limits of
its funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the
services of technical experts or other persons as it deems necessary to carry
on the functions of the commission. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-2340 et seq.
2-3-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the city council and shall be authorized
to:
   A.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequests or
donation.
   C.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
   D.   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   With the approval of the city council, contract with the state or
federal government or any agency of either or with any other organization.
   F.   Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   G.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the city, the state or the federal government and the agencies of these
entities.
   H.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes
of historic preservation in the city.
   I.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in the city.
   J.   Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter
private property, buildings or structures in the performance of its official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   K.   Review nominations of properties to the national register of historic
places for properties within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Business Registration Required
3-1-3: Application
3-1-4: Change Of Address; Change Of Designated Agent
3-1-5: Registration Fees
3-1-6: Expiration; Renewal
3-1-7: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: Any employment, occupation or commercial activity engaged in for the
purpose of realizing gain or for livelihood that is operated, conducted,
located, based, or domiciled in the city of Priest River.
BUSINESS REGISTRATION: A registration required under this chapter.
CITY: The city of Priest River.
ENTITY: A corporation, partnership or other legal form, other than an
individual, authorized by law to conduct a business, trade or profession that
is operated, conducted, located, based, or domiciled in the city.
PROFESSION: A vocation or occupation requiring special education and skill,
including, but not limited to, the practice of law, the practice of medicine,
the practice of dentistry and the practice of chiropractic that is operated,
conducted, located, based, or domiciled in the city.
TRADE: An occupation or activity which a person has learned and which they
carry on for the purpose of realizing gain or for livelihood that is operated,
conducted, located, based, or domiciled in the city. (Ord. 535, 11-15-2010)
3-1-2: BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in any business, trade
or profession within the limits of the city until they shall have first
registered their business as required under this chapter. A business
registration shall be required only for those businesses, trades or professions
that are operated, conducted, located, based, or domiciled in the city. This
chapter shall not apply to home based activities when no part of the home is
used regularly or exclusively for a business, profession or trade. (Ord. 535,
11-15-2010)
3-1-3: APPLICATION:
Verified applications to register a business shall be made by the owner of the
business, trade or profession, or by a designated agent, upon a form to be
furnished by the city clerk. Such application shall contain the following
information:
   A.   The business name, physical and mailing addresses, and phone number;
   B.   The full name, physical and mailing addresses, and phone number of the
owner of the business, trade or profession;
   C.   The name and address of an agent of the business, trade or profession,
who is designated by the owner as authorized to receive any notices permitted
or required by law to be provided to the business, trade or profession;
   D.   The name, address, and phone number of an emergency contact person, who
is designated by the owner to respond to emergencies at the business location
(e.g., fire, burglaries, etc.);
   E.   A description of the nature and purpose of the business, trade or
profession to be registered;
   F.   The signature of the owner of the business, trade or profession, or the
owner's designated agent; and
   G.   If applicable, a copy of the business's Idaho State Tax Commission
seller's permit shall be submitted with the registration application. (Ord.
535, 11-15-2010)
3-1-4: CHANGE OF ADDRESS; CHANGE OF DESIGNATED AGENT:
   A.   Change In Location: If the business, trade or profession closed any
location described in the application for a business registration, or if the
business, trade or profession intends to conduct any activity at a location not
described in the application for the business registration, the owner or the
owner's designated agent shall notify the City Clerk of the change, in writing,
who shall note the same in the register of registrations.
   B.   Change Of Agent: If the business, trade or profession changes the agent
described in the application for a business registration who is authorized to
receive any notices permitted or required by law, or if the designated agent
changes their address as described in the application for the business
registration, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall notify the City
Clerk of the change, in writing, who shall note the same in the register of
registrations.
   C.   Change Of Emergency Contact Person: If the business, trade or
profession changes the emergency contact person described in the application
for a business registration who is authorized to respond to emergencies at the
business location, or if the designated contact person changes their address or
phone number, the owner, the owner's designated agent, or the emergency contact
person shall notify the City Clerk of the change, in writing, who shall note
the same in the register of registrations.
   D.   Notice: Any notice required by this section shall be physically filed
with the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the change becomes
effective. (Ord. 535, 11-15-2010)
3-1-5: REGISTRATION FEES:
   A.   Payment Required: Every individual or entity required by this chapter
to register to engage in any business, trade or profession shall pay to the
City Clerk the fee for business registration as set forth below. There shall be
no proration of said fee for individuals or entities which engage in
businesses, trades or professions for a period of less than the registration
year.
   B.   Fees: Fees for business registration shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 600, 10-1-2018)
3-1-6: EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
   A.   Term Of Registration: All business registration issued pursuant to this
chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year.
   B.   Renewal: Any person or entity who engages in a business, trade or
profession within the City, and who holds a business registration pursuant to
this chapter, shall renew said registration on a form provided by the City and
accompanied by the appropriate fee prior to January 31 of each year. No new
application need be filed if the information required by this chapter, and
which is in the possession of the City Clerk, is current. Upon receipt of the
form and fee, the City Clerk shall endorse the business registration for the
person or entity for the next calendar year.
   C.   Notice: The City Clerk shall cause notice of the required renewal and
the appropriate fee, together with a renewal form, to be sent to each business
no later than December 1 of each year to the business address listed in the
City records. If a business registration is not renewed by January 31, the City
Clerk shall cause a second notice of the required renewal and the appropriate
fee, together with a renewal form, to be sent to such business. Provided,
nothing herein shall relieve a business of renewing its business registration
as required by this section, whether it receives any notice or not. Failure to
renew a business registration in the time provided in the second notice shall
result in a penalty fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be assessed and collected.
(Ord. 573, 5-4-2015)
3-1-7: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise noted, any person or entity who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be assessed a civil assessment, payable to the City Clerk
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the complaint of such violation, and in
the amount set forth in section
1-4-5  of this code. Upon a fourth violation the person or entity shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this Code for each violation.
   A.   False Information: Any person who provides false information on the
registration applications shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this Code.
   B.   Separate Offense: Each day that a person or entity engages in a
business, trade or profession in violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
   C.   Additional Remedies: The City, in addition to the fine described in
this section, may take whatever steps it deems appropriate to civilly enjoin
any further violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 535, 11-15-2010; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Purpose
3-2-3: Idaho Laws Adopted
3-2-4: Beer Regulations
3-2-5: Wine Regulations
3-2-6: Liquor Regulations
3-2-7: Catering Permits
3-2-8: Open Containers At Catered Events
3-2-9: Open Containers On Public Property For Seating And Dining
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter will be known as the LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE of the City. (Ord.
475, 3-7-2005)
3-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and public
welfare of City residents and visitors by regulating the hours, places and
conditions of the sale of alcoholic beverages in the City. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-2-3: IDAHO LAWS ADOPTED:
There is adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and use of
alcoholic beverages within the City the laws of the State, being particularly
Idaho Code title 23, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended by
the Idaho legislation, the same adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the
City as fully as though set forth at length herein. Copies of said laws shall
be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the
public. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-2-4: BEER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
   BEER: Shall be defined as provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as
amended from time to time.
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the
consumer.
   B.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell beer without
first obtaining a proper license.
   C.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for the retail sale of beer shall be made and filed with
the City Clerk in such form and manner as provided herein. The application
shall provide for the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed
business, the information required to show that the applicant meets the
qualifications required by this chapter, and such other information as may be
prescribed and required by the Governing Body. At the time the application is
filed, the applicant shall also present a copy of a license to sell beer
obtained from the County. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
      2.   All applications received and approved by the City Clerk shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for review and final approval. (Ord. 514, 9-
15-2008)
      3.   Licenses will be for a period of no longer than one year and shall
expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on the first day of the renewal month for a
State license as determined by the director of Idaho State Police.
   D.   Qualifications: No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who
is not qualified under Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
   E.   Fee For License: The fee for a license for the sale of beer shall be
established by resolution of the City Council, and shall be consistent with the
limitations provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as amended from time
to time.
   F.   Revocation Of License:
      1.   The City Council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and
cancel any license.
      2.   If any licensee or employee of a business licensed to sell beer by
the drink violates any of the provisions of this chapter or is convicted of
violation of any of the provisions of the laws of the State relating to the
sale of alcoholic beverages, the City Council is authorized to revoke the
license issued to the licensee; provided, however, that in the event it is
brought to the attention of the city council that a violation has taken place,
before revoking such license, the city council shall cause notice to be served
upon the licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or violations
claimed to have been committed, and such notice shall provide a time for
hearing thereon by the city council, which date of hearing shall not be less
than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service of
the notice, and upon or following the hearing, the city council, if they shall
find that the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the laws of the
state have been violated, shall revoke such license theretofore issued, and no
refund of any unused portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee.
      3.   A revocation by the state or the county of any license to sell any
alcoholic beverages shall automatically revoke the license issued by the city.
   G.   Restrictions:
      1.   It is unlawful to sell or dispense beer to be consumed on the
premises at any time between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day.
      2.   No license shall be issued for the sale of beer upon premises in
locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as
amended from time to time.
   H.   Regulations: It is unlawful for any person to sell beer to any person
to whom the sale of the same is prohibited by the laws of the state. Any
violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any such sale by any
person licensed to sell or a person working at a business licensed to sell one
or more beverages shall be considered cause for cancellation of such license or
licenses as such person may be issued.
   I.   Renewal Of License:
      1.   Application for renewal of a license to sell beer shall be on the
same form as the application for the initial license.
      2.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in
the application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal
of the license may be issued by the city clerk without the application being
referred to the city council. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-2-5: WINE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of wine to the
consumer.
   WINE: Shall be defined as provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13, as
amended from time to time.
   B.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell wine without
first obtaining a proper license.
   C.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for the retail sale of wine shall be made and filed with
the city clerk in the same form and manner as a license to sell beer. At the
time the application is filed, the applicant shall also present a copy of a
license to sell wine obtained from the state. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
      2.   All applications received and approved by the city clerk shall be
forwarded to the chief of police for review and final approval. (Ord. 514, 9-
15-2008)
      3.   Licenses will be for a period of no longer than one year and shall
expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on the first day of the renewal month for a
state license as determined by the director of Idaho state police.
   D.   Qualifications: No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who
is not qualified under Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
   E.   Fee For License: The fee for a license for the sale of wine shall be
established by resolution of the city council.
   F.   Revocation Of License: The city council shall retain the right at all
times to revoke and cancel any license, subject to the same rights to appeal as
set forth in subsection
3-2-4F of this chapter relating to a license to sell beer.
   G.   Hours Of Sale Restricted: Wine sold for consumption on licensed
premises may be sold only during the hours that beer can be sold pursuant to
subsection
3-2-4G1 of this chapter.
   H.   Regulations: The sale of wine is subject to the same regulations as set
forth in subsection
3-2-4H of this chapter relating to the sale of beer.
   I.   Renewal Of License: Renewal of a license shall be accomplished in the
same manner as provided in subsection
3-2-4I of this chapter relating to renewal of a beer license. (Ord. 475, 3-7-
2005)
3-2-6: LIQUOR REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
   LIQUOR: Shall be defined as provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as
amended from time to time.
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of liquor to the
consumer.
   B.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell liquor without
first obtaining a proper license.
   C.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for the retail sale of liquor shall be made and filed
with the city clerk in the same form and manner as a license to sell beer. At
the time the application is filed, the applicant shall also present a copy of a
license to sell liquor obtained from the state. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
      2.   All applications received and approved by the city clerk shall be
forwarded to the chief of police for review and final approval. (Ord. 514, 9-
15-2008)
      3.   Licenses will be for a period of no longer than one year and shall
expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on the first day of the renewal month for a
state license as determined by the director of Idaho state police.
   D.   Qualifications: No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who
is not qualified under Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
   E.   Fee For License: The fee for a license for the sale of liquor shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be in conformance with
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as amended from time to time.
   F.   Revocation Of License: The city council shall retain the right at all
times to revoke and cancel any license, subject to the same rights to appeal as
set forth in subsection
3-2-4F of this chapter relating to a license to sell beer.
   G.   Restrictions:
      1.   No liquor may be sold, offered for sale or given away on any
licensed premises during the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. of any day, except for Christmas Day when the sale of liquor is
prohibited.
      2.   No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor upon premises in
locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as
amended from time to time.
   H.   Regulations: The sale of liquor is subject to the same regulations as
set forth in subsection
3-2-4H of this chapter relating to the sale of beer.
   I.   Renewal Of License: Renewal of a license shall be accomplished in the
same manner as provided in subsection
3-2-4I of this chapter relating to renewal of a beer license. (Ord. 475, 3-7-
2005)
3-2-7: CATERING PERMITS:
   A.   Application For Permit: Application shall be made to the city clerk for
the sale of beer, wine or liquor under a catering permit.
   B.   Signatures Required: The city clerk, sheriff or chief of police and the
license holder shall sign the catering permit.
   C.   Fees: Fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of
the city council.
   D.   Restrictions: The holder of a catering permit shall comply with the
regulations of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-2-8: OPEN CONTAINERS AT CATERED EVENTS:
By resolution, the City Clerk with the concurrence of the Police Department may
authorize the possession of an "open container of an alcoholic beverage" (as
defined in section
5-2-7 of this Code), and suspend the effect of section
5-2-7 of this Code, for a specified temporary period, upon specified portions
of the public streets, ways, parking lots open to the public, parks or places:
   A.   Upon condition that a catering permit or a permit under title 23 of
Idaho Code has been issued or be obtained for the same time and place;
   B.   Upon finding such temporary and limited suspension would be in the
public interest and would further Priest River's economic well being or
development; and
   C.   Upon providing the City Clerk with a certificate of insurance showing
that the City is an additional insured on a liquor liability policy with a
combined single limit in an amount satisfactory to the City Clerk.
Specified portions shall be clearly delineated using a physical barrier such
as, but not limited to, rope or temporary fencing. (Ord. 564, 6-2-2014)
3-2-9: OPEN CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR SEATING AND DINING:
The City Clerk with the concurrence of the Police Department may authorize the
possession of an "open container of an alcoholic beverage" (as defined in
section
5-2-7 of this Code), and suspend the effect of section
5-2-7 of this Code, for up to one year at a time, upon specified portions of
the public sidewalk upon documentation of the necessary liquor license, liquor
liability policy, and a specific map showing what area of the sidewalk will be
utilized. Specified portions shall be clearly delineated using a physical
barrier such as, but not limited to, rope or temporary fencing and shall not
impede pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 606, 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Application Of Provisions
3-3-2: Registration Required
3-3-3: Registration Application
3-3-4: Investigation Of Applicant
3-3-5: Bond Requirements
3-3-6: Registration Fee
3-3-7: Exhibition Of Registration
3-3-8: Nuisances Prohibited
3-3-9: Appeal From Denial Of Registration
3-3-10: Revocation Of Registration
3-3-11: Penalty
3-3-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter applies throughout the city. Unless exempt by state and federal
law, every person peddling or soliciting door to door is responsible for
compliance with its terms. Fundraising activities for students from local
schools are exempt from these requirements. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-
2012)
3-3-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: Unless exempt by state and federal law, it is unlawful for
any person to peddle or to solicit door to door without first registering with
the city. "Door to door solicitation" shall mean any unsolicited contact by a
person with any person at a residence or dwelling in the city for the purpose
of selling any product or service, or soliciting orders for any product or
service.
   B.   Fees: Fees for business licenses for peddlers and solicitors shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and shall be
tendered at the time of submitting a registration application. (Ord. 550, 9-4-
2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-3: REGISTRATION APPLICATION:
Applicants for registration under this chapter must file with the city clerk an
application furnished by the city, which shall contain, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information:
   A.   The name of the applicant. If the applicant is employed by an
association, company, corporation or individual, its name shall be stated with
the name of each person who will be soliciting in the city on its behalf
together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
   B.   The applicant's place and date of birth.
   C.   The applicant's social security number.
   D.   The applicant's driver's license number.
   E.   The applicant's permanent home address, permanent mailing address,
permanent telephone number, full local address and local telephone number.
   F.   A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two
inches by two inches (2"x2") showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in
a clear and distinguishing manner.
   G.   A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold.
If goods are products of a farm or orchard, the name of the producer.
   H.   Proposed method of operation.
   I.   The length of time for which the right to do business is requested.
   J.   The applicant's Idaho state sales tax certificate or temporary sales
tax permit.
   K.   If a vehicle is to be used, the description of the vehicle including
the license number.
   L.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.
   M.   When food or other products for human consumption are to be sold, a
certification by the applicable health agency shall be required prior to
issuance of a registration.
   N.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any misdemeanor or felony, the date and nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
   O.   For purposes of conducting the investigation provided for herein, each
applicant shall sign a waiver authorizing the chief of police or his designated
agent to conduct the investigation including, but not limited to, a criminal
history background check through local, state, or national law enforcement
agencies.
   P.   A new registration application shall be filed with the city clerk every
one hundred twenty (120) days for solicitation of sales of the same product or
service by the same person. A new registration shall be required when a person
who has previously registered within the last one hundred twenty (120) days
desires to sell door to door any products or services not listed on the
original registration application. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of a completed registration application, the city clerk shall
refer it to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation to be
conducted within five (5) days to determine the validity and completeness of
the information presented on the application, thereafter endorsing upon the
application his approval or disapproval of the application.
If the application is approved, the applicant shall be so notified by the city
clerk, and upon payment of the prescribed registration fee, the registration
shall be issued. Such registration shall show the name, address and photograph
of the applicant, the kind of goods to be sold or the type of sales to be
solicited thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance and the
date of expiration, and the license number and other identifying description of
any vehicle used. A permanent record of all licenses issued shall be kept by
the city clerk.
If the application is denied, the city clerk shall provide written notification
to the applicant, providing the reasons therefor, and advising the applicant of
appeal procedures. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-5: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Before any registration as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the
business of peddling or soliciting, every business, firm, company, corporation
or individual which has one or more employees or agents acting in such capacity
shall file with the city a surety bond covering all such employees or agents
and assuring compliance and to the benefit of the city, or a cashier's check,
in the amount and pursuant to the procedure established by resolution adopted
by the city council. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-6: REGISTRATION FEE:
Registration fees shall be payable in advance in the amount and pursuant to the
procedure to be established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord.
550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-7: EXHIBITION OF REGISTRATION:
The registration issued to the applicant hereunder shall be carried on the
person and exhibited at any time upon request. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-
2012)
3-3-8: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person, registered or not, shall solicit business at any home or business
when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that solicitation or
peddling is prohibited. No person, registered or not, shall continue with door
to door solicitation at any home or business when requested to leave by the
owner, authorized agent, or any other person who resides or works on the
premises. Peddling and solicitation may occur only between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012,
eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-9: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF REGISTRATION:
An applicant aggrieved by the denial by the city to issue a registration under
this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal
shall be filed with the city clerk within five (5) days from the date of the
denial and must be in writing, setting forth the reasons such registration
should not have been denied. The city council shall hear the appeal within
fourteen (14) days after the filing thereof, and shall render its decision
immediately following the hearing. The decision of the majority of the city
council shall be final. Appeal of the city council's decision may be made in
accordance with Idaho law. (Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-10: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
The city council shall have the power to revoke any registration granted in
accordance with this chapter for any violation of this chapter or the
commission of any criminal act by the registered company or person. (Ord. 550,
9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
3-3-11: PENALTY:
The person who engages in peddling or solicitation as defined in this chapter
in violation of any provision of this chapter or fails in any way to comply
with the requirements and procedures of this chapter shall be served with a
notice of violation and shall thereafter be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
However, the city's prosecuting attorney may elect to refrain from initiating
criminal prosecution on the violation or failure to comply if the violator
comes into compliance and pays to the city clerk a civil assessment in the
amount set forth in section
1-4-5 of this code.
If there is not compliance and payment of the applicable penalties and
assessments as set forth above, or upon any third offense, the offense shall be
punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 550, 9-4-2012, eff. 10-1-2012; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
CHAPTER 4
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Licensing Regulations
3-4-3: General Business Regulations
3-4-4: Records
3-4-5: Stolen Property
3-4-6: Enforcement
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
CHATTEL MORTGAGE: A transfer of a legal right in personal property as security
for payment of money.
CITY: The city of Priest River, Idaho.
DEPOSIT: A delivery of goods or property to be held in trust as security for
payment of money. Also includes the term bailment.
MONEY: Includes United States currency, money orders, certified checks,
traveler's check and any other circulating medium of exchange.
PAWNBROKER: A person whose business is to lend money on security of personal
property deposited with him or pledged to him. A person licensed to conduct
such business in the city of Priest River.
PAWNSHOP: The room, store or place licensed as the business location for a
pawnbroker in the city of Priest River.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, trust, or any other group acting as a unit.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: All property subject to ownership, except real estate.
PLEDGE: A promise to deliver goods or property as security for payment of
money.
REGULATED TRANSACTION: A business dealing conducted by a pawnbroker or designee
that is regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 562, 4-7-2014)
3-4-2: LICENSING REGULATIONS:
All persons engaged in the business of a pawnbroker shall maintain a valid
Priest River city pawnbroker license.
   A.   Pawnbroker Transactions Further Defined: The following transactions
constitute the business of a pawnbroker, and any and all such transactions
require a valid Priest River city license:
      1.   Loaning or advancing money to any person on the deposit of personal
property of any kind as security for such loan or advancement, when the
personal property may be repurchased by the party upon paying a sum of money;
      2.   Loaning or advancing money upon a chattel mortgage on personal
property, where the said property is taken into the possession of the lender as
security for the advancement or loan upon an assignment or pledge of future
earnings;
      3.   Purchasing previously owned or used personal property on the
condition that it may be repurchased by the seller within a fixed period of
time for a fixed sum of money. For purpose of this chapter, purchasing shall
also include trade.
   B.   Prima Facie Evidence Of Pawnbroker Business: It shall be prima facie
evidence of a pawnbroker business for any person or place of business to
advertise for any of the transactions listed in subsection A of this section,
regardless of any other name, term or phrase by which the business can be
described.
   C.   Single Act May Constitute Pawnbroker Business: The doing of any single
act enumerated in subsection A of this section shall constitute a pawnbroker
business within the meaning of this chapter.
   D.   License Application Procedure:
      1.   An application to conduct pawnbroker business shall be made to the
city clerk in the form and manner as prescribed by that office.
      2.   An applicant who did not have a previous pawnbroker license within
the year immediately preceding the current application shall be required to
submit their fingerprints, obtained through an approved agency, with the
completed application.
      3.   Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall cause an
investigation to be made by the Priest River police department to determine if
the applicant meets the qualifications enumerated in subsection E of this
section. In addition, the premises which the applicant seeks to use must be
deemed suitably located for enforcement purposes having due regard to the type
and character of business and traffic in the locale of the proposed business.
The proposed premises must also comply with all zoning regulations of the city
of Priest River, and all state and local fire regulations.
      4.   If upon a completed investigation the applicant is determined to be
qualified for a pawnbroker license, and the premises are deemed suitable, the
city clerk shall tender the license upon payment of the annual nonrefundable
licensing fee in an amount established by the Priest River city council and
listed on the most current general fee schedule.
      5.   The pawnbroker's license shall expire at the end of one year from
the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked, suspended or relinquished.
Licenses shall not be transferable either as to person or place.
      6.   The successful applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall be
considered a pawnbroker for purposes of the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   License Qualifications:
      1.   The applicant and the person who will be principally in charge of
the business must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      2.   The applicant must not have had a previous business license of any
type denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local
agency within the five (5) years prior to the application date.
      3.   The applicant must not have been convicted of a felony or theft
related offense within the five (5) years prior to the application date.
   F.   Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: A violation of the provisions of this
chapter may result in suspension, revocation, or denial of a pawnbroker
license. The procedures, rights and responsibilities enumerated in section
1-4-4 of this code shall apply to any such denial, suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 562, 4-7-2014)
3-4-3: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Display Of License: It shall be the duty of every person to whom a
pawnbroker license is issued to prominently display such license in a
conspicuous manner at all times on the premises to which the license relates.
   B.   Inspection Of Premises: Upon request of the chief of police or
designee, the pawnbroker or anyone acting on behalf of the pawnbroker shall
permit the inspection of the licensed pawnshop premises and all property kept
or stored therein. Any such inspection shall occur during the pawnshop's
regular and usual business hours.
   C.   Minors: Minors may not enter into any transactions regulated by this
chapter.
   D.   Pawnshop Employees: No pawnbroker shall employ a person under the age
of eighteen (18) to conduct transactions regulated by this chapter. In
addition, any employee conducting transactions regulated by this chapter shall
meet the qualifications enumerated in subsection 3-4-2E of this chapter.
   E.   Intoxicated Persons: No pawnbroker or a person acting on behalf of a
pawnbroker shall enter into a transaction regulated by this chapter with a
person under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
   F.   Prohibited Transaction: No pawnbroker or a person acting on behalf of
the pawnbroker shall enter into any regulated transaction in which the property
at interest is property that is manufactured or produced with a serial or
identification number, and the said number has been removed, altered or
rendered unreadable.
   G.   Property Retention/Restriction On Subsequent Sales: Property received
by the pawnshop through a regulated transaction must be retained by the
pawnbroker, free of any subsequent sales agreement, for thirty (30) days,
except purchase transactions, which property must be retained for ten (10)
days. (Ord. 578, 11-16-2015)
3-4-4: RECORDS:
   A.   Records Inspection: Upon request of the chief of police or designee,
the pawnbroker or anyone acting on behalf of the pawnbroker shall produce any
records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter and shall permit the chief
of police or designee to examine them. Any such inspection shall occur during
the pawnshop's regular and usual business hours.
   B.   Details Of Transactions: It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to
maintain in his place of business a permanent electronic record of the complete
description of all transactions and of all parties entering into transactions
regulated by this chapter. This record shall include all voided and deleted
transactions. The pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's designee shall require a
person's photo identification issued by a governmental agency before conducting
a transaction with that same person. The following information must be included
in the required records:
      1.   Name, address, telephone number, and store number of the pawnshop in
which the transaction took place; and the name of the employee conducting the
transaction.
      2.   Full name, complete current residential address, current phone
number, date of birth, race, sex, height, weight, hair and eye color of the
person or persons with whom the transaction is made.
      3.   Type, including state or governmental agency of issue, and
identifying number of the personal photo identification used by the person with
whom the transaction is made.
      4.   Nature and date of the transaction and an identification number for
the transaction.
      5.   Complete description of the property purchased, pledged, traded or
cosigned including as applicable: brand name, make, model, serial number, and
owner applied number or other identifying marks. Jewelry shall be described
with the type, weight, color, number and description of stones, style, size or
length, any engraving, and whether it is considered a man's, woman's or child's
piece. CDs, DVDs, videos, tapes, records, etc., shall be described with any
owner identification marks and the category of movie or music to which it
belongs. The title and artist should also be documented if practicable.
Vehicles shall be described with the VIN, make, model and color. Firearms shall
be described with the make, brand, model number, serial number, caliber, type,
barrel length, finish.
   C.   Transaction Document: Every transaction shall be memorialized in
writing and signed by the person with whom the transaction is made. This
transaction document shall include a digitalized photo or thumbprint of the
person with whom the transaction is made, along with the date of the
transaction, the term of the loan or repurchase period, and the date on which
the loan is due and payable or the repurchase option expires. All parties to
the transaction are entitled to receive a copy of this document, and the
original shall remain on file at the pawnshop for a minimum of one year.
   D.   Records Transmittal: All records described in this section shall be
electronically stored in addition to paper records. These electronic records
shall be transmitted by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day to
the Priest River police department in a method and fashion approved by the
chief of police or his designee.
   E.   Records Retention: All records described in this section shall be
retained by the pawnbroker at the licensed pawnshop for a minimum of one year;
except that records pertaining to firearms transactions shall be kept for a
minimum of twenty (20) years pursuant to federal regulations. (Ord. 562, 4-7-
2014)
3-4-5: STOLEN PROPERTY:
   A.   Upon verbal notification from the chief of police or designee that the
pawnshop or pawnbroker has received allegedly stolen or lost property, the
pawnbroker shall not sell or permit to be redeemed the property in question for
a period of ten (10) working days, pending written notification of the property
status. If written notification of the same is received within the ten (10) day
period, or if written notification is received in lieu of a verbal
notification, the property shall be held separate from other property, safe
from alteration or damage, and with a clearly identifiable marking as to the
hold status. It shall remain in this condition, without being sold or redeemed,
for a period of forty five (45) days from the date of written notification. The
pawnbroker shall notify the police of the impending release date no later than
ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the hold period to gain approval to
release the hold. At such time, the police may renew this hold for an
additional forty five (45) day period by responding in writing with such
request. The police may cancel this hold at any time by issuing written
notification to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall not sell or allow to be
redeemed any property held in this fashion without notification by the police
that the property may be released.
   B.   It is the responsibility of every pawnbroker to notify police whenever
they have reason to believe they or the pawnshop are in receipt of property
that may have been lost or stolen. This notification shall include the
documents on file pertaining to the transaction which resulted in the receipt
of said property. The property shall not be sold or allowed to be redeemed
until the police have notified the pawnshop that the property may be released.
   C.   The police shall provide written notification to pawnshops when
property can be released which is being held pursuant to these provisions. This
notification shall be made as soon as practical after a finding that the held
property is not stolen or lost, or other circumstances exist that lead police
to allow the release.
   D.   Any property determined to be stolen or lost shall be transferred to
the custody of the Priest River police department upon request. The police
shall retain custody of the property pending a court determination of the
rightful owner. This may include a criminal conviction for the theft of the
property in which the rightful owner has taken part in the prosecution of the
crime.
   E.   The rightful owner of stolen or lost property shall not be liable to
the pawnshop for any amounts expended with respects to the stolen or lost
property.
   F.   A pawnbroker shall not be responsible for returning stolen or lost
property directly to a rightful owner. (Ord. 562, 4-7-2014)
3-4-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Unlawful Acts: The following acts by a pawnbroker or any person acting
on behalf of the pawnbroker, including the employees and agents of a
pawnbroker, will constitute a violation of this chapter:
      1.   Failure to make a record of any transaction as described in this
chapter.
      2.   Falsifying any official record or entry on an official record
required to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   Obliterating, destroying, or removing from the place of business any
records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
      4.   Refusing to allow the chief of police or designee to inspect the
business premises, or any books, records or other goods located or required to
be located at the place of business, during regular and usual business hours.
      5.   Transmittal of any false record to the police.
      6.   Failure to report the possession of property that may be lost or
stolen.
      7.   Removal or allowing removal of property from the business premises
within thirty (30) days after the receipt of said property, or ten (10) days if
the property was obtained through a purchase, unless redeemed by the rightful
owner.
      8.   Receipt of property from a person under the age of eighteen (18).
      9.   Receipt of property from a known thief or receiver of stolen
property, or known associates of such, whether the person is acting on their
own behalf or as the agent of another.
      10.   Employment of a person not meeting the qualifications of this
chapter.
      11.   Any other violation of the specific provisions of this chapter not
specifically enumerated above. (Ord. 578, 11-16-2015)
CHAPTER 5
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: General Requirements
3-5-4: Appearance Standards
3-5-5: Site Development Standards
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
Wireless communication facilities include antennas (attached and freestanding),
with or without equipment buildings, constructed for the purpose of
transmitting signals for the operation of personal communication systems. These
types of uses are necessary for the day to day function of everyday living and
commerce. Although necessary, these uses can have negative visual impacts to
the community. This chapter is intended to provide standards and a process for
permitting wireless communication facilities to assess and minimize negative
visual impacts, with the maximum number of towers permitted to be three (3).
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, discs or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF)
signals through electromagnetic energy, which may include omnidirectional
antenna (whip), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (dish).
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FREESTANDING FACILITY: A wireless communication
transmission and/or reception device(s) that is affixed to a structure erected
to support said transmission and/or reception device equipment structure, and
equipment structures and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types
include, but are not limited to, metal poles, lattice towers, wood poles and
guy wires. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-5-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A wireless communication facility shall constitute a special use and
shall be considered under the conditional use section of the commercial and
industrial zoning districts. Conditions that may be appropriate for wireless
communication facilities may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Modification of the required lot size or setbacks in the zoning
district to accommodate the use;
      2.   Control the location and number of access points to the property;
      3.   Limit the coverage or height of equipment/building structures,
because of obstructions to views or incompatibility with surrounding uses;
      4.   Reduce or expand requirements for screening or landscaping to
maintain the property in character with the surrounding area;
      5.   Establish regulations to protect property or existing improvements
from detrimental effects of the proposed use.
   B.   Parabolic antennas, that are a component of a wireless communication
facility, shall not exceed a diameter of six feet (6').
   C.   Freestanding support structures for wireless communication facilities
shall be monopole structures unless a different structure is approved by the
planning and zoning commission and city council, upon good cause shown.
   D.   Communication antenna arrays may be located on an existing support
structure or building. Location of any antenna array on said existing facility
shall be permitted without a conditional use permit or a site plan review
contingent that there are no substantial changes to the existing support
structure. The antenna array shall not increase the height of said freestanding
facility or facility located on an existing building more than fifteen feet
(15'). Any antenna array that increases the height of said freestanding
facility more than fifteen feet (15') will require a conditional use permit.
   E.   Minor modifications of existing wireless communication facilities are
permitted, provided that there are no significant changes in the visual
appearance of the facility. Minor modifications include, but are not limited
to, the addition of transmission and/or reception device(s) to wireless
communication facilities that meet the provisions of this section.
   F.   If any antenna or tower is not operated for a continuous period of six
(6) months, it shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such antenna or
tower, or property owner, shall remove the same within sixty (60) days after
notice and an opportunity to be heard. If such antenna or tower is not removed
within said sixty (60) days, the city may, at the property owner's expense,
remove the antenna or tower and file a lien on the subject property for
expenses incurred in the removal and any attorney fees associated with the due
process or judicial process incurred by the city. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
3-5-4: APPEARANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Wireless communication facilities, whether constructed as a permitted
use or as a conditional use, shall be designed to be compatible with and blend
with the natural and built environment. This design includes, but is not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   Building and structure design;
      2.   The use of exterior materials;
      3.   Landscaping and fencing.
   B.   All equipment and associated cabling shall be enclosed within a
structure or shall be concealed, camouflaged or placed underground. (Ord. 475,
3-7-2005)
3-5-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Landscaping And Screening: The site shall be screened with landscaping
according to the zone in which it is located. Within three hundred feet (300')
of an existing residential use or a residentially zoned lot, the perimeter of
the site shall be landscaped with shrubs and trees that will provide a visual
screening or a visual screening fence. The height of the fence or landscaping
shall be a minimum of six feet (6') and be maintained by the property owner.
   B.   Setback Requirements: Support tower structures shall be set back from
all property lines as required by the building code of the city 1  or two feet
(2') for every ten feet (10') of total tower height, whichever produces the
greater setback, as long as they are constructed to the electronic industries
association/telecommunications industries association (EIA/TIA) 222 revision E
standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna
Supporting Structures".
   C.   Perimeter Fencing: At a minimum, the entire communications facility
shall be fenced with a six foot (6') high chainlink fence at its perimeter. If
the site is adjacent to a residential use or zone, refer to subsection A of
this section.
   D.   Electromagnetic Field/Radio Frequency Radiation Standards: Installation
of a wireless communication antenna array shall conform to standards as
required by federal communication commission's (FCC) regulations.
   E.   Sharing Of Support Towers And Colocation Of Facilities: It is the
policy of the city to minimize the number of wireless communication support
towers and to encourage the colocation of antenna arrays of more than one
wireless communication service provider on a single support tower. (Ord. 475,
3-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
(Rep. by Ord. 545, 3-5-2012, eff. 12-31-2012)
CHAPTER 7
PRIVATE PROPERTY SALES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Length And Frequency Restrictions
3-7-2: Signage
3-7-1: LENGTH AND FREQUENCY RESTRICTIONS:
Occasional sales on private property, such as garage, rummage and/or yard
sales, shall be permitted for two (2) consecutive days between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and sunset each day. Not more than three (3) such
occasional sales shall be conducted on the same premises within any calendar
year, except that four (4) such sales may be conducted on the same premises
within any calendar year if the owner or tenant is moving or vacating the
premises. The purpose of this chapter is to control the yard sales from
becoming an every day occurrence. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
3-7-2: SIGNAGE:
No signs, including balloons, realtor signs, or clowns or other people in
costumes, advertising an occasional sale shall be placed on any utility pole or
traffic sign, nor on any other private property without the consent of the
owner of such property. Signs may be placed on streets and sidewalks so long as
they do not interfere with the movement of traffic and pedestrians. All such
signs shall be removed no later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on the day the
sale ends. Placement of signs on public walkways, street corners or on top of
buildings is not allowed. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
4-1-1: General Rules And Regulations
4-1-2: Unauthorized Collections
4-1-3: Mandatory Collection
4-1-4: Collection Fees (Rep. by Ord. 532, 5-3-2010)
4-1-5: Container Requirements
4-1-6: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-1-7: Violation; Penalty
4-1-1: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as it shall deem
advisable for the enforcement and implementation of this chapter. The rules and
regulations may cover charges for services for residents and for business
premises, applications for exemptions from charges, and method of established
rates for a multiple residence. Such rules and regulations shall be in
accordance with the state department of environmental protection and health
rules and regulations. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-1-2: UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTIONS:
No person shall collect, transport or dispose of garbage or other refuse within
the city limits who has not contracted with the city to provide such service,
and who does not possess a license or franchise from the city, and no person
shall be granted such contract, permit or license who is not capable of
complying with the requirements established by the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-1-3: MANDATORY COLLECTION:
All occupied premises, including residence and business premises within the
city, shall be required to subscribe to and make use of the garbage collection
and disposal system utilized within the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-1-4: COLLECTION FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 532, 5-3-2010)
4-1-5: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Containers Required:
      1.   No owner, tenant or lessee of any public or private premises shall
permit to accumulate upon his premises any garbage or refuse except in covered
containers approved by the city. In the event that garbage and one or more
types of refuse are disposed of separately, separate containers may be required
by the city.
      2.   Boxes, papers, tree cuttings and all odd articles shall be crushed
and/or bundled in lengths not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, except
articles in special hauls.
   B.   Storage Location: When not put out for collection, containers shall be
stored according to the requirements as established by the city.
   C.   Location For Pick Up:
      1.   Where an alley is accessible, containers for garbage and all types
of rubbish, and rubbish not placed in containers as prescribed by this chapter,
shall be located on the private premises adjacent to the property line on the
alley, and at a point readily accessible to the collectors.
      2.   No garbage containers or rubbish containers or piles of rubbish
shall be placed in or upon the alley right of way.
      3.   Where no alley is accessible, containers or rubbish shall be placed
in front of the premises by the owners or occupants of the premises on the
morning of the day scheduled for collection, and the empty containers shall be
withdrawn from the front of the premises as soon after collection as possible
on the same day. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-1-6: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Accumulations Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to permit or
suffer to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any
street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to such lot, yard, place or premises owned
or occupied by such person, any garbage, refuse, junk storage, motor vehicle
parts and accessories, construction and building materials, salvage materials,
wood, newspapers or boxes or any other item, so as to cause such yard, lot or
premises owned or occupied by such person to be or remain in such condition as
to cause or create a nuisance or offensive odor, atmosphere or rodent
harborage, or thereby be or become or cause or create a public nuisance.
   B.   Dumping Prohibited: It is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor
for any person to throw away, dump or discard any type or nature of garbage or
refuse on any public lands, rights of way or private land belonging to another.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Upon conviction of violations of this chapter or any part hereof, the violator
may be fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, the court shall have power to issue an
injunction against further or continued violation of the terms or intent of
this chapter. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Nuisances Declared
4-2-4: Responsibility
4-2-5: Inspection Of Premises
4-2-6: Complaints
4-2-7: Abatement Procedures
4-2-8: Penalty
4-2-9: State Law Provisions
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect any person on any public or private
property from anything that is injurious to the senses or an obstruction to the
free use of property, so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any
condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to
the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution
in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-2-3: NUISANCES DECLARED:
The city council hereby finds, declares and determines that the existence of a
nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land is a detriment or menace to neighboring
property and the health, safety and welfare of the residents in the vicinity,
and as such, shall be abated in the manner provided in this chapter.
No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any nuisance to remain on said
property. Items must be placed neatly on the side of the property behind the
front line of the house. Firewood neatly stacked is exempt and may be in the
front of the house. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the
depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following:
   A.   Materials: Junk, trash, debris, salvage materials, wood, newspapers,
boxes and the like. Exception to these restrictions are houses under
construction.
   B.   Offensive Debris: Any compost pile or liquid/semi-liquid waste which is
of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or
harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease carrying pests,
animals or insects; provided, that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile
shall not constitute a nuisance, nor shall a properly maintained garden compost
facility.
   C.   Unsanitary Premises: Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep or permit another to keep upon any premises
deleterious or septic material which causes adverse effects upon the occupancy
or use of neighboring lands. Such materials must generally be retained in
containers or vessels which deny access by humans, flies, insects, rodents and
animals.
   D.   Weeds And Plants: All uncultivated unmowed grasses, noxious weeds and
all other rank uncultivated vegetation over eight inches (8") tall, other than
trees, shrubs and cultivated plants, flowers and agricultural products.
In addition to vegetation listed under this subsection, any tree, shrub or
other plant material that meets any of the following definitions shall be
considered a nuisance under this chapter:
      1.   Puncture vines;
      2.   Poison oak, poison ivy or other rank, noxious and dangerous
vegetation; and
      3.   Thorned plants that extend into a public way or pathway, cross a
property line or that are used for habitation for trespassers; or
      4.   Any vegetation that is:
         a.   A health hazard;
         b.   A fire hazard. In determining whether a fire hazard exists, the
code enforcement officer may consider the following factors:
            (1)   Whether the situation is present during the dry season, May 1
through October 30;
            (2)   Whether the lack of rain for ten (10) continuous days has
negatively affected soil moisture content;
            (3)   Whether the average air temperature has been above seventy
degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) for ten (10) continuous days; and
            (4)   Whether the vegetation is within ten feet (10') of any
combustible material or other structure or property which could be damaged by
fire.
         c.   A traffic hazard, because it impairs the view of a public street,
or impairs the view of any traffic control device, or otherwise makes use of
the street hazardous. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
   E.   Abandoned, Wrecked Personal Property: No person in charge of or in
control of premises, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise,
shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise
nonoperating and/or unlicensed vehicle (including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, trailers, ATVs, snowmobiles, motorcycles, campers),
machinery, implement and/or equipment and personal property of any kind, which
is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured,
specifically any vehicle that does not have affixed to the vehicle a current
state of Idaho license tag, off road vehicle registration and/or recreational
vehicle license to remain on such property longer than fifteen (15) days unless
such vehicle, equipment, etc., is maintained in an enclosed building, as
defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, such that the materials are not
readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property.
Allowing such materials to remain unenclosed shall constitute a nuisance. The
absence of a current state of Idaho license from any vehicle shall be
presumptive evidence that such vehicle is abandoned, discarded, scrapped,
ruined or junked.
This subsection shall not apply with regard to any vehicle, equipment or other
personal property on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place, other than in a residential district, and operated in a lawful manner,
when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle, equipment or other damaged and
abandoned personal property is necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise and is not in violation of other provisions of law so long as the
vehicles, equipment or other personal property on the premises of the business
enterprise is located within a sight obscured fenced enclosure. (Ord. 541, 7-5-
2011)
4-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY:
Pursuant to authority vested by Idaho Code 50-317 and Idaho constitution
article XII, section 2, any owner, lessee, occupant or any agent or
representative of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any
occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land shall be responsible for
immediately remedying any conditions that violate the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-2-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
City staff may determine by inspection of any property within the city whether
a nuisance exists and is in violation of the provisions of this chapter. It
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any authorized staff member
or agent making an inspection permitted under this section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006)
4-2-6: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint on any condition addressed by any provisions of
this chapter by filing a written complaint with the city clerk. The city clerk
shall forward all such complaints to the staff members assigned responsibility
for enforcement of this chapter by the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-2-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority: Upon notice to the owner, the city is empowered to abate any
violation of this chapter by causing the cutting and removal of trees, weeds
and grass, and the removal of rubbish upon and from private property within the
city and the parking within the curbing abutting same, and to assess the cost
thereof against the private property so cleared, and that which is adjacent to
the parking/landscape strip between the sidewalks and curb and any alley so
cleaned pursuant to Idaho Code 50-317. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter, nothing addressed hereby shall preclude the city from acting upon
conditions that constitute a nuisance pursuant to provisions of Idaho Code and
pursuing abatement as provided thereby.
   B.   Notice: Whenever a city staff member or authorized agent finds that a
violation does exist, pursuant to any provisions of this chapter, he may
initiate enforcement by giving notice, by certified and first class mail
addressed to the last known address of the owner of record or by personally
serving the notice upon the owner of record, and if there is more than one
owner of record, by such mail or personal service to any one of such owners.
Said notice shall be mailed to the owner, agent or person in charge of such
property, if such owner, agent or person in charge can be found. If an owner,
agent or person in charge cannot be found, then notice shall be provided by
posting a notice upon a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of
said notice by certified mail to the owner or agent of the same at such owner's
or agent's last known address. Such notice shall specify the violations
required to be abated and the manner and time limits by which the owner of the
property is required to achieve compliance.
   C.   Owner To Abate: It shall be the duty of the owner of private property
whose use constitutes a violation of this chapter to cut, trim or remove such
accumulations or growth immediately upon receipt of notice from the city, in no
case less than the time frame stated in the notice which shall provide at least
seven (7) days for performance unless an emergency is found to exist.
   D.   Appeals: If the property owner receiving notice to abate a violation of
this chapter contests the determination, a written appeal of the notice may be
filed with the city clerk within no more than seven (7) days of transmittal of
the notice to abate a violation. The city council shall hear the appeal as soon
as possible. A decision shall be rendered in writing as soon as practical. Any
decision rendered by the city shall be final.
   E.   Abatement By City; Collection Of Costs:
      1.   In any case where a person required under this chapter does not
abate the violation, the city, through its own personnel, contractor and/or
agents, may enter upon the premises to cut, trim or remove weeds, brush piles,
vegetative litter or nuisance tree or shrub growth, remove trash and abate all
nuisances described in this chapter.
      2.   The total cost of the abatement shall be billed to the owner of the
property for payment. In the event payment is not made within thirty (30) days,
or if the owner or whereabouts of the owner are not known, the cost of
abatement may be certified by the city clerk and forwarded to the county
treasurer for inclusion in the county property tax assessment pursuant to Idaho
Code 50-1008. Pursuit of the abatement by the city shall not preclude
prosecution of violations of this chapter.
      3.   An error in the name of the responsible person shall not void the
assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment
render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid assessment against the
property.
      4.   The lien shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per
annum, with interest to commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien
docket. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any owner or other person notified to abate the described nuisance who shall
fail to abate such violation within the time specified in the notice, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. However, the city's prosecuting attorney may
elect to refrain from initiating criminal prosecution on the violation if the
violator pays to the city clerk, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
complaint of such violation a civil assessment in the amount set forth in
section
1-4-5 of this code.
Every day such violation continues after the date specified in the notice shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable as provided in the
general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 541, 7-5-2011; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
4-2-9: STATE LAW PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not compromise or otherwise adversely
affect the applicability of provisions of state law regarding the designation
of nuisances and their abatement. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Authorization
4-3-2: Purpose And Intent
4-3-3: Definitions
4-3-4: Compliance Required
4-3-5: Permit Required
4-3-6: Violations And Penalties
4-3-1: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the general police power and the authority
granted to cities by Idaho constitution article 12, section 2 and Idaho Code
title 39, chapter 26. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-3-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the residents of the city and to foster the safe sale and
use of fireworks within the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, words, terms and phrases, and their derivations,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26 or
as otherwise appropriate to their context. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-3-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, possess,
store, discharge or use fireworks as defined in Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26
except in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and requirements of
Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26, or its successor.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess or use any of the
following dangerous fireworks at any time within the city:
      1.   Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube
salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardment, grasshoppers and other
explosive articles of similar nature;
      2.   Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
      3.   Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire
into the air;
      4.   Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel
about the surface of the ground during discharge;
      5.   Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
      6.   Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch
(1/4") in diameter or made with other than iron wires;
      7.   All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes,
flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, mines and similar devices;
      8.   All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain
arsenic, and all other similar fireworks devices including cracker balls;
      9.   Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of
any kind attached thereto.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to use, or in any way prepare to use, any
fireworks described in this chapter or Idaho Code within the boundaries of any
public park within the city, or public park under the control of the city, if
outside the city, or on any publicly owned property of the city. "Public
property" shall include, but not be limited to, parks, playgrounds, trails,
public rights of way and streets, curbs and sidewalks, parking lots, alleys and
the grounds of public buildings and schools. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-3-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person, without having a valid fireworks permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, shall import, export, possess for purpose of
sale, offer for sale, or sell any fireworks for any use or purpose including
agricultural purposes or wildlife control, make a public display of fireworks
within the city or transport fireworks in violation of state or federal law.
Sales and use of fireworks shall not contravene the provisions of Idaho Code
with respect to the permitted time and type of fireworks to be used.
   B.   Applicants desiring to sell nonaerial common fireworks as defined in
state law for the time period allowed by state law, or make a public display of
fireworks must first obtain a fireworks permit from the city and approval by
the appropriate fire officials as authorized by state law and the uniform fire
code. The fee for the fireworks permit shall be set by resolution and may
increase by appropriate action of the city council. Evidence of the possession
of any such required permit must be demonstrated by the stand owner or operator
on request by officials of the city or appropriate fire official.
   C.   Both nonaerial common fireworks sales and fireworks displays shall
comply with the terms of issued permits and with provisions of this chapter and
state law. Failure to so comply shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 584, 8-15-2016)
4-3-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be a violation of the law to fail to comply with any provision
of this chapter, that is, to do that which is described as unlawful or to
violate the requirements established by this chapter or to fail to comply with
any lawful order of the city.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in the general penalty in
section
1-4-1 of this code. The city may undertake civil legal action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions
of this chapter and/or to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed
necessary to bring about compliance herewith. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 4
EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Transporting Explosives
4-4-2: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-4-1: TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful to operate any vehicle containing explosives on any street in
the municipality except in compliance with the following rules:
   A.   No such vehicle shall be so operated unless it is marked, loaded and
equipped in full compliance with all laws of the state relating thereto;
   B.   No trailer shall be used for the conveyance of explosives in the city,
but semitrailers, as defined by statute, may be so used;
   C.   No vehicle carrying explosives shall be parked or permitted to stand
anywhere in the city longer than is necessary to make a lawful delivery;
provided, that the standing of such vehicle made necessary by mechanical
trouble, traffic conditions, accident, or in obedience to the direction of a
police officer or traffic signals shall not be considered a violation of this
section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-4-2: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Driver Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person in charge of a
vehicle containing explosives to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle; to drive,
load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated; to drive the vehicle in a
careless or reckless manner, or to unload or load such vehicle in a careless or
reckless manner.
   B.   Manufacture: The manufacture or storage of explosives within the limits
of the city is prohibited. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 5
OUTDOOR BURNING
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Authority
4-5-3: Burning Season
4-5-4: Permits
4-5-5: Categories And Regulations
4-5-6: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to control unrestricted outdoor burning in order
to prevent fires and to ensure the public health and safety. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006)
4-5-2: AUTHORITY:
The city council has empowered the West Pend Oreille fire department fire
chief, or his designee, to control open burning within the limits of the city.
Enforcement of these regulations will be by the city code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
4-5-3: BURNING SEASON:
   A.   All burns may be conducted year round with a required burn permit. The
fire chief is empowered to allow or stop all burning due to weather conditions.
(Ord. 491, 12-4-2006)
4-5-4: PERMITS:
All burns conducted year round require a numbered burn permit.
   A.   A burn permit may be obtained at city hall and is valid for ten (10)
days from the time of issuance.
   B.   The city must be notified each time a burn is scheduled within the year
referring to the valid burn permit number for the address of the burn.
   C.   A permit fee is due at the time of issuance of the burn permit. Permits
must be renewed on or after January 1 of each year. The fee can be found in the
schedule of fees.
   D.   Requests for burn permits for burns within the commercial district must
be made forty eight (48) hours prior to a scheduled burn to allow the fire
chief time to conduct a site inspection. Burn permits for burns within the
commercial district may be denied if the fire chief determines that the burn
will detrimentally impact businesses or the motoring public within the
commercial district.
   E.   At no time shall any burn be started when the wind is blowing to such
an extent as to cause a danger of the fire getting out of control.
   F.   At no time shall any burn be started when the quality of the air is
affected in the surrounding area in which citizens or businesses cannot operate
as normal.
   G.   At no time shall any burn be started when visibility is impaired due to
fog. (Ord. 491, 12-4-2006)
4-5-5: CATEGORIES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Burn Barrels: Burn barrels are prohibited in the city of Priest River.
   B.   Yard Waste Cleanup:
      1.   City hall must be notified prior to commencement of the burn. The
time, date, and address of the burn must be supplied.
      2.   The fire shall be located at least fifteen feet (15') away from any
structures regardless of the size of the fire. Maximum fire size shall be no
larger than a four foot (4') diameter and no higher than three feet (3'). (Ord.
491, 12-4-2006)
      3.   Burning shall be conducted during daylight hours only.
      4.   The fire must be attended at all times and must be out and cold to
the touch before leaving the burn unattended.
      5.   Attendant must have a hose connected to a water supply and a shovel
readily available at all times.
      6.   The fire chief or his designee is authorized to require that open
burning be immediately discontinued if smoke emissions are offensive to
occupants or surrounding property or may pose a hazard to the motoring public.
      7.   Items that can be burned: wood products, leaves, dry pine needles,
tree pruning, dry lawn clippings and dry garden waste.
      8.   Items that cannot be burned: any type of household garbage,
plastics, rubber products, paint, paint cans, fiberglass products, carpeting,
furniture, stumps, plywood, particle board, pressure treated wood products,
cardboard, green lawn clippings or any noncombustible items. Household garbage
must be placed in designated garbage collection receptacles. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006)
      9.   A valid burn permit must be on site during the time of burning.
(Ord. 491, 12-4-2006)
   C.   Controlled Field Burning:
      1.   Allowed at the discretion of the fire chief. The fire chief will
advise if any other agency must be contacted. Burning will be conducted during
daylight hours only and must be attended at all times.
      2.   There must be a firebreak plowed or disked around the area to be
burned.
      3.   Equipment and people capable of controlling the fire must be on
site. A minimum of three hundred (300) gallons of water and a ten (10) gallon
per minute pump equipped with two hundred feet (200') of hose must be on site.
      4.   Items that cannot be burned: any types of household garbage,
plastics, rubber products, paint, paint cans, fiberglass products, carpeting,
furniture, stumps or any other noncombustible items.
      5.   A fee will be charged as determined by the fire chief based on
deployment of personnel and equipment.
      6.   A valid burning permit must be annually obtained from the city and
must be on site. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
   D.   Miscellaneous Burning:
      1.   Allowed at the discretion of the fire chief:
         a.   Slash burn, for slash cleanup from logging operations and must be
inspected by the fire chief prior to the burn. Limbs and tree trunks over three
inches (3") in diameter must be hauled away and properly disposed.
         b.   Special burn requires a special permit issued for activities that
are school or nonprofit organization sponsored, such as bonfires for
homecoming, or special events.
         c.   Construction site cleanup burn, for cleanup of building
construction debris is prohibited per department of environmental quality
rules.
         d.   Burning of trade waste materials generated during the course of
operation, a business is prohibited from such burning per department of
environmental quality rules. Common business waste materials are cardboard,
plastics, paper, lumber, pallets, and other shipping materials. (Ord. 491, 12-
4-2006)
      2.   The site must be inspected by the fire department before the permit
is issued.
      3.   Burning shall be conducted during the daylight hours only and the
fire must be totally out by dark, except that special burns may be conducted at
night with the permission of the fire chief.
      4.   The fire must be attended at all times.
      5.   Permit holder must make arrangements with the West Pend Oreille fire
department to have the proper equipment on site to control the fire.
      6.   The fire chief is authorized to require that burning be immediately
discontinued if smoke emissions are offensive to occupants or surrounding
property or pose a hazard to the motoring public.
      7.   Materials that can be burned: wood building materials.
      8.   Materials that cannot be burned: pressure treated wood products,
wiring, tar paper, tar shingles, products containing asbestos, carpeting and
other floor coverings, insulation, plastic pipe, fiberglass roofing, plywood
and particle board.
      9.   A fee will be charged as determined by the fire chief based on
deployment of personnel and equipment.
      10.   A valid burn permit must be on site.
   E.   BBQ Pits: Citizens desiring to burn in BBQ pits, must obtain an annual
burn permit from the city and must have an inspection done by the fire chief
prior to burning.
   F.   Firefighter Training: Fires used by qualified personnel to train
firefighters in the methods of fire suppression and firefighting techniques, or
to display certain fire ecology or fire behavior effects, are allowable forms
of open burning. Training facilities shall notify the department prior to
igniting any training fires. Training fires shall not be allowed to smolder
after the training session has terminated. Training fires are exempt from Idaho
state statutes subsections 603.01.c and 603.01.e through 603.01.j. (Ord. 482,
6-5-2006)
4-5-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall
be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any existing permit will be immediately revoked. The
violator may also be charged for the personnel and equipment required to
extinguish the fire, and any of the burns described in this chapter may be
declared a "nuisance" as defined in section
4-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 6
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Restrictions
4-6-3: Exceptions
4-6-4: Penalties
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY WATER CONNECTION: Shall mean a metered connection to the Municipal water
system of the City of Priest River.
OCCUPIED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Shall mean recreational vehicle being utilized
in any manner other than storage.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Shall mean an enclosed piece of equipment, with or
without motor power, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping, or travel use including but not limited to: motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, and camping trailer. (Ord. 601, 12-3-2018)
4-6-2: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any landowner to have an occupied recreational
vehicle on the landowner's parcel for a period of greater than seven (7)
consecutive days.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Municipal boundaries of
the City of Priest River to have an occupied recreational vehicle for any
period of time that is parked, located, or situated on the City's right-of-way.
   C.   Unless otherwise allowed outright or by conditional use permit, no more
than two (2) recreational vehicles, as defined in
4-6-1, boats, or other large recreational unit or combination of recreational
units, shall be allowed per addressed single-family dwelling unit. The
recreational vehicles must be parked in the side or back yard only, maintain
current registration, and be maintained to not become an unsightly condition
within the neighborhood. (Ord. 601, 12-3-2018; amd. Ord. 635, 6-17-2024)
4-6-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Seasonal Exception: Landowners of a parcel of land that does not have
any dwelling on the parcel can have an occupied recreational vehicle from May
15th through September 15th if the occupied recreational vehicle has a City
water connection and the occupied recreational vehicle is currently registered.
   B.   Temporary Occupancy Exception: Landowners of a parcel of land that does
not have any dwelling on the parcel can have an occupied recreational vehicle
on the parcel for one year after the issuance of a building permit for a
single-family dwelling if the occupied recreational vehicle has a City water
connection and the occupied recreational vehicle is currently registered. This
exception is only valid for one calendar year after the first building permit
is issued to landowners for a single-family dwelling. (Ord. 601, 12-3-2018)
4-6-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any landowner that allows an occupied recreational vehicle on the
landowner's parcel of property for a period of longer than seven (7)
consecutive days, that does not meet an exception in section
4-6-3 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject
to punishment in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Such persons
shall also be subject to a civil action by the City to abate continued
occupancy and noncompliance with this chapter. Should the City elect to pursue
a civil action against any such person, such person shall be obligated to pay
court costs and such attorney's fees as the court may adjudge reasonable in the
premises.
   B.   Any person having an occupied recreational vehicle for any period of
time that is parked, located, or situated on the City's right-of-way, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to punishment in accordance with
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Such persons shall also be subject to a civil
action by the City to abate continued occupancy and noncompliance with this
chapter. Should the City elect to pursue a civil action against any such
person, such person shall be obligated to pay court costs and such attorney's
fees as the court may adjudge reasonable in the premises. (Ord. 601, 12-3-2018)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Purpose And Authority
5-1-2: Animal Control Officer
5-1-3: Definitions
5-1-4: Number Of Dogs And Cats Allowed
5-1-5: Prohibited Animals
5-1-6: Cruelty To Animals
5-1-7: Hunting Animals
5-1-8: Nuisance Animals
5-1-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code 50-319 prescribes that, in order to secure and maintain such levels
of animal control within the city limits, and to the greatest degree
practicable, prevent injury to persons and property; and to provide a means of
licensing of animals; and of controlling errant animal behavior so that it
shall not become a public nuisance, this chapter be promulgated and adopted.
(Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
5-1-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   Position Created; Authorization: There is created the position of
animal control officer, which shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with
the concurrence of the city council. The qualifications for holding of such
position and the remuneration thereof shall be as fixed by the city council
from time to time. The appointee to such office shall serve at the pleasure of
the mayor. Upon his appointment, the animal control officer shall have
jurisdiction in the enforcement of all ordinances affecting dogs and animals
within the city. The animal control officer is specifically authorized to
initiate the issuance of misdemeanor citations for violations of any city
animal control regulation.
   B.   Interference With Prohibited: It is unlawful for any individual to
interfere in any manner with the animal control officer while said officer is
carrying out his duties as prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
5-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
ABANDON: For any person to desert an animal in their custody or possession of
the owner without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care,
sustenance and shelter.
ABATEMENT: The termination of any violation by reasonable and lawful means
determined by the mayor or his designee in order that an owner, or a person
presumed to be the owner, shall comply with this chapter.
ADULT DOG OR CAT: Any dog or cat more than six (6) months of age.
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate creature except human being.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any individual employed, contracted or appointed by the
mayor for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other
law or ordinance relating to the licensing of animals, control of animals or
seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or municipal police
officer, sheriff, constable or other employee whose duties in whole or in part
include assignments that involve the seizure and taking into custody of
animals.
AT LARGE: Any animal being on public or private property without the permission
of the person who owns, or has a right to possess or use the property, or in
any other place or condition which presents substantial risk to animal or
public health, safety or welfare. "At large" shall also mean any dog
unrestrained by a leash on either public or private property other than the
property of the owner or without permission of the property owner.
ATTACK: Biting, attempted biting, infliction of severe injury, or aggressively
pursuing with the ability to bite or injure a person.
CITY CLERK: The Priest River city clerk or designated appointee of the city
clerk.
CONFINEMENT: A confining structure, used usually to confine an animal deemed a
vicious animal, which meets the following criteria: The structure must have
secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the structure has no
bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded to the ground no less
than one foot (1'). All such structures must be adequately lighted and kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
DEPARTMENT: The Priest River animal control department, its agents, or other
persons designated by the mayor.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL: Those domestic beasts such as any dog or cat (not running
at large).
EUTHANASIA: The humane destruction of an animal, accomplished by a method
involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death of an animal, or by
a method that causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss
of consciousness.
EXOTIC: Any nondomestic animal such as lions, tigers, monkeys, snakes, etc.
GROOMING PARLOR: Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals
are bathed, clipped or combed for any consideration, for the purpose of
enhancing their aesthetic value.
GUIDE DOG: A dog that has been properly identified as being from a recognized
school for seeing eye, hearing ear or guide dogs, and the dog is properly
harnessed or leashed so that a blind, physically disabled or hearing impaired
person may maintain control of the dog, and the dog has attached to its harness
or collar a special brightly colored fluorescent tag issued by the commission
for the blind and visually impaired under the provisions of Idaho Code 67-5407.
A "guide dog for the physically disabled" means any dog individually trained to
the physically participant's requirements including, but not limited to,
minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped
items.
HOUSE PET: A dog or a cat or other similar animal of a type customarily used
for a pet of an individual or family, except for potbellied swine.
KEEP: Is interchangeable with harbor and means possessing, controlling,
exercising, maintaining or allowing to run at large.
KENNEL: Any lot, building, enclosure or premises wherein four (4) or more
canines or felines or any combination thereof three (3) months of age or over
are kept.
LEASH: Any rope, chain, leather strap, or any other material not exceeding six
feet (6') in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling
and actually controlling the animal to which it is attached.
LIVESTOCK: Any domestic animal except a house pet.
NUISANCE ANIMAL: Any domesticated animal or feral cat of any age, male or
female, which molests passersby or passing vehicles, trespasses onto property
not owned by the animal's owner, is repeatedly at large, damages private or
public property, or emits sound in an excessive, or continuous fashion. It is
unlawful for any animal owner to allow any domesticated animal or feral cat to
unreasonably disturb others by frequently barking, yelping, howling or making
other noises or disturbing the peace of other citizens. The continual noise of
the domesticated animal or feral cat shall not be unreasonably audible off the
property where the domesticated animal or feral cat is kept nor shall it be of
such consistency and volume or at such time as to be likely to annoy a
reasonable person on the adjoining property or elsewhere in the city.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, harboring or responsible for one or more
animals. An animal shall be deemed to be kept or harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three (3) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any person, persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping
or harboring an animal.
PET SHOP: A person or establishment that acquires animals bred by others and/or
supplies whether as owner, agent, or on consignment, sells offers to sell such
animals and/or supplies to the public.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL: An animal acts like a vicious animal, but has not
bitten or injured a person.
POTENTIALLY VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal that when unprovoked:
   A.   Inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal either on public or
private property, but no skin is broken; or
   B.   Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
   C.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or otherwise threaten the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
PREMISES: All real property under one ownership inside the inner line of a
sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, inside the curb, ditch, or shoulder
making the edge of the used public right of way. "Premises" shall also be
intended to mean the inside of a closed motor vehicle.
RABIES TAG: A piece of metal or other durable material, inscribed with a date
and number, which has been issued by a veterinarian, as evidence that the dog
has been vaccinated for rabies.
RUNNING AT LARGE: To be off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of the owner or competent person authorized by the owner, either by leash or
other means.
SHELTER: A facility which is used to house or contain stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted animals and which is owned, operated, or maintained by a
public body, or established humane society, animal welfare society, society for
the prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit agency devoted to the
welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals.
UNCONFINED: An animal, which has been deemed to be a vicious animal, that is
not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked
confinement structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, because of its physical nature or vicious
propensity, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans
and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not
kept in the manner required by this chapter; or
   A.   Has twice, within a forty eight (48) month period and without
provocation bitten, attacked or otherwise caused injury to a person engaged in
lawful activity; or
   B.   Has once, without provocation, attacked or bitten a person engaged in a
lawful activity, causing death or severe injury;
   C.   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
animal fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting. (Ord. 563, 4-21-
2014)
5-1-4: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS ALLOWED:
   A.   The keeping of more than the number of dogs and cats, as described in
subsection B of this section, in the city for a considerable period of time
detracts from and in many instances is detrimental to the healthful and
comfortable life for which such areas were created.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) dogs or three
(3) cats, or a total of four (4) in the city, with the exception that a litter
of pups or a litter of kittens, or a portion of a litter may be kept for a
period of time not exceeding five (5) months from birth. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any establishment wherein dogs or cats are kept for
breeding, sale, sporting purposes or boarding; provided, that such an
establishment complies with city land use and zoning regulations and possesses
a city business license and kennel permit where applicable 1 . (Ord. 563, 4-21-
2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See article B of this chapter.
5-1-5: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
Except as provided by the zoning regulations of the city, the following animals
may not be kept in the city:
   A.   Horse, cow, pony, oxen, mules or llama, goats, sheep, swine or
potbellied swine and like animals.
   B.   Poultry including, but not limited to, ducks, guinea hens, geese,
swans, emu, pigeons, ostrich and turkeys. Chickens are permitted according to
article C of this chapter.
   C.   All exotic animals including, but not limited to, lions, tigers,
monkeys and like animals. (Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
5-1-6: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person, whether as owner or keeper of any animal, shall:
   A.   Food, Water And Shelter: Fail to provide his animal(s) with sufficient
food, water and proper shelter and, when required, adequate veterinary care.
   B.   Abuse: Beat, torment, restrictively chain, overwork or otherwise abuse
any animal.
   C.   Abandonment: Abandon any animal.
   D.   Leaving In Vehicles: Leave unattended any animal within the confines of
a vehicle when temperatures are such that the animal would be susceptible to
harm. (Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
5-1-7: HUNTING ANIMALS:
   A.   Hunting Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person (except as
herein specified) to chase, pursue, capture, trap, hunt, kill or attempt any of
the foregoing, any bird or wildlife within the city limits including animals
which have been classified by the Idaho department of fish and game as
predatory.
   B.   Exceptions: Nothing herein contained shall be considered to prohibit:
      1.   Fishing within any waters located within the city, lawfully open to
fishing by any method approved by the Idaho department of fish and game.
      2.   Any person within the city from using reasonable force against any
bird or animal for purposes of self-defense.
      3.   Any duly commissioned law enforcement officer of the state or any
officer of the Idaho department of fish and game from performing their duties
as such officer.
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of violation of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to the provisions of the
general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
5-1-8: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
   A.   Owning, Harboring, Or Possessing: It shall be unlawful for any person
to own, harbor or have in his/her possession any domesticated animal or feral
cat which acts in a manner consistent with the definition of a "nuisance
animal" as defined in section
5-1-3 of this chapter. Such domesticated animals and feral cats shall be deemed
a nuisance and shall be prohibited and may be subject to impound as follows.
   B.   Impoundment Procedures: The mayor or his designee is authorized and
empowered to secure and maintain a suitable pound for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Impoundment Authorized:
         a.   It shall be the duty of every animal control officer to apprehend
any nuisance animal found running at large or unlicensed, contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, and to impound such nuisance animals in the city
pound or other suitable place; provided, that if any fierce, dangerous or
vicious animal found running at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded,
such may be slain by any peace officer.
         b.   The animal control officer so impounding any nuisance animal
shall record a description of the animal, and whether licensed, in a book kept
for that purpose. If the animal is licensed and is wearing a license tag when
apprehended, the animal control officer shall also record the name and address
of the owner and the number of the tag.
      2.   Holding Period; Disposition:
         a.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all
animals so impounded for a period of three (3) days after the posting and
mailing of such notice. If the animal has not been redeemed by the owner, it
may be destroyed, or sold for a sum of money sufficient to discharge the costs
and charges incurred by the city for impounding and keeping the animal,
together with the license fee for the current year if unpaid. No animal, which
appears to be suffering from rabies, or any animal of fierce, dangerous or
vicious propensities shall be released from the pound, but shall be destroyed.
         b.   The buyer of any animal under the provisions of this section
shall become the owner of the animal, free from any claim or title of the
original owner or harborer.
      3.   Notice To Owner; Fees: Not later than one day after the impounding
of any animal, the animal control officer, or his designee, shall cause a
written notice of such impounding to be posted in a conspicuous place in the
office of the city clerk. Such notice shall be kept posted for a period of
three (3) days. If the animal is wearing a license tag when apprehended, the
animal control officer shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the
address shown on the application for license. The owner of any animal so
impounded may reclaim such animal upon the payment of license fee, if unpaid,
and all of the costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and
keeping costs and charges. If an owner of an animal is notified that the city
is in possession of their animal and the owner fails to claim the animal within
three (3) days, keeping charges and a disposal fee will be charged. Pound fees,
fees for an animal impounded, disposal charges and fees for notification of the
owner of an animal impounded will be set by resolution and reviewed on a
regular basis. (Ord. 563, 4-21-2014)
ARTICLE A.DOGS
SECTION:
5-1A-1: License Requirements
5-1A-2: Running At Large
5-1A-3: Nuisances And Offenses
5-1A-4: Dog Bites; Rabies Protection
5-1A-5: Impoundment Procedures
5-1A-6: Abatement And Enforcement
5-1A-7: Violations; Penalty
5-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Licenses Required:
      1.   All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners within the
city shall be registered and licensed. Dog licenses shall be issued by the city
clerk upon payment of a license fee as established by resolution for each
spayed or neutered dog (spay certificate and/or neuter certificate must be
shown at the time of application) and a fee as established by resolution for
each unspayed or unneutered dog, except that guide dogs shall be licensed
without charge. License fees may increase by appropriate action of the city
council. The owner shall state at the time application is being made for such
license, and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his name, address
and description of the dog to be licensed, in such manner that the dog may be
identified with reasonable certainty, and the name to which the dog answers.
      2.   Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be
valid for the lifetime of the dog.
   B.   Dog Tags:
      1.   On payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the
owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The
tag shall have stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number on the
certificate.
      2.   Each owner shall provide each dog with a collar to which the license
tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn
by the dog.
      3.   In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued
by the city clerk upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the
lifetime license fee and the payment of a fee as established by resolution for
each duplicate.
      4.   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the
owner leaving the city. (Ord. 582, 8-1-2016)
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   The above licensing provisions shall not apply to dogs whose owners
are nonresidents and are within the city limits for less than thirty (30) days.
      2.   New owners and new residents may purchase licenses at regular fees
if the license is purchased within thirty (30) days of acquisition of the dog
or establishment of residence. It shall be the owner's responsibility to show
proof of the date of ownership or establishment of residence. (Ord. 475, 3-7-
2005)
5-1A-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any dog or dogs to enter property other than its
owner without authorization of that person, or to enter public property and not
be under the control of the owner or other person responsible for said dog.
   B.   Leash requirements shall not apply to a dog under the control of the
owner within special areas designated by the city as dog training areas.
   C.   The owner or keeper of any at large or unrestrained dogs is in
violation of the provisions of this section. It shall be the duty of the animal
control officer who sees an at large or unrestrained dog in violation of the
provisions of this section to cause the owner of the dog, if the owner is
known, to be cited. In the event the owner of the dog is cited, the animal
control officer is not required to impound the dog. If the owner of the dog
running at large is not known, the dog shall in all cases be impounded. (Ord.
475, 3-7-2005)
5-1A-3: NUISANCES AND OFFENSES:
   A.   Nuisances Declared:
      1.   Noise: It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow a dog or other
animal to unreasonably disturb others by frequently barking, yelping, howling
or making other noises or disturbing the peace of other citizens. The continual
noise of the dog shall not be unreasonably audible off the property where the
dog is kept nor shall it be of such consistency and volume or at such time as
to be likely to annoy a reasonable person on the adjoining property or
elsewhere in the city.
      2.   Endangerment: It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow a dog to
unreasonably annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of
the citizens of Priest River.
      3.   Odors: It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow an animal to
create directly or indirectly any unreasonably nauseous, foul or offensive or
putrid smell.
      4.   Females In Heat: Each female dog, when in heat, shall be penned or
enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs from attacking or being
attracted to such female dog in such a manner so as to create a public
nuisance.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   Frighten Persons: It is unlawful for an animal owner to allow an
animal to render, in any way, any citizen of the city, or other person,
unreasonably insecure in life, limb or use of property.
      2.   Obstruct Passageways: It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow
an animal to unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous any passage a public park, street, sidewalk, alley, highway or other
public area.
      3.   Unsafe Keeping: It is unlawful for any animal owner to cage, house,
corral, fence in or maintain in any manner any animals in such numbers, crowded
conditions or other conditions as to unreasonably injure or endanger the
safety, health, comfort or life of any animal, person or property. The animal
control officer, at his discretion, may immediately release such animal.
      4.   Abandonment: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully abandon or
turn loose to run at large any animal unfit for use by reason of disease, old
age, injury or other reason. It will be the discretion of the animal control
officer to remove the animal from the premises after a twenty four (24) hour
warning notice to contact animal control is not complied with. This is in
accordance with keeping the animal safe, healthy and free of injury. Whenever
any such animal is taken for impounding, which is, in the opinion of a licensed
veterinarian, deemed unfit by reason of age, disease or injury for further use
or dangerous to be kept impounded, the animal control officer shall, within
seventy two (72) hours thereafter, cause the animal to be euthanized.
      5.   Quartering: It is unlawful to quarter animals that are natural
enemies or are otherwise incompatible together or so near each other as to
cause injury, fear or torment. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient
good food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals
require, but not less than two (2) times every twenty four (24) hours for
adults. All animals and animal enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary manner and in a state of good repair to protect the animals from
injury. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1A-4: DOG BITES; RABIES PROTECTION:
   A.   Biting Animals: Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal
that bites any person or any person bitten by such animal shall report the same
to the animal control officer who shall notify the county health officer. The
animal control officer shall notify the owner of the state quarantine
requirements. If the bite does not break the skin, the dog is considered
potentially dangerous. If the skin is broken, the dog is considered dangerous
and quarantine is required.
   B.   Rabid Animals: If an animal is believed to have rabies or has been
bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, or does not have a current
rabies vaccination and has bitten a person, such animal shall be confined to a
veterinary hospital, or appropriate animal pound or other suitable enclosure as
may be provided by the animal control officer for a period of ten (10)
consecutive calendar days or as otherwise required by law for observation. It
shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his designee to confine the
animal as required by this article. All such costs shall be at the owner's
expense. The owner shall notify the animal control officer of the fact that his
animal has been exposed to rabies.
   C.   Rabies Vaccination Required; Tag: It is unlawful for the owner of any
dog to keep or maintain such dog unless it has been vaccinated against rabies
by a licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian administering the vaccine shall
issue to the owner a certificate stating the date of vaccination and the date
of expiration, which shall be in compliance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in
either yearly or every three (3) years, but it shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's guidelines. The certificate of vaccination shall be presented at
the time of the application for a dog license. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1A-5: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
The mayor or his designee is authorized and empowered to secure and maintain a
suitable pound for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article.
   A.   Impoundment Authorized:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every the animal control officer to
apprehend any dog found running at large or unlicensed, contrary to the
provisions of this article, and to impound such dogs in the city pound or other
suitable place; provided, that if any fierce, dangerous or vicious dog found
running at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such may be slain by
any peace officer.
      2.   The animal control officer so impounding any dog shall record a
description of the dog, and whether licensed, in a book kept for that purpose.
If the dog is licensed and is wearing a license tag when apprehended, the
animal control officer shall also record the name and address of the owner and
the number of the tag.
   B.   Holding Period; Disposition:
      1.   It shall be duty of the animal control officer to keep all animals
so impounded for a period of three (3) days after the posting and mailing of
such notice. If the dog has not been redeemed by the owner, it may be
destroyed, or sold for a sum of money sufficient to discharge the costs and
charges incurred by the city for impounding and keeping the dog, together with
the license fee for the current year if unpaid. No dog, which appears to be
suffering from rabies, or any dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities
shall be released from the pound, but shall be destroyed.
      2.   The buyer of any dog under the provisions of this section shall
become the owner of the dog, free from any claim or title of the original owner
or harborer.
   C.   Notice To Owner; Fees: Not later than one day after the impounding of
any dog, the animal control officer, or his designee, shall cause a written
notice of such impounding to be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of
the city clerk. Such notice shall be kept posted for a period of three (3)
days. If the dog is wearing a license tag when apprehended, the animal control
officer shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the address shown on
the application for license. The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such
dog upon the payment of license fee, if unpaid, and all of the costs and
charges incurred by the city for impounding and keeping costs and charges. If
an owner of a dog is notified that the city is in possession of their dog and
the owner fails to claim the dog within three (3) days, keeping charges and a
disposal fee will be charged. Pound fees, fees for an animal impounded,
disposal charges and fees for notification of the owner of an animal impounded
will be set by resolution and reviewed on a regular basis. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1A-6: ABATEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Upon the first or any subsequent complaint, or upon the discovery of an
animal nuisance, the animal control officer of the city may order the owner of
the animal, or other person creating, keeping, maintaining or permitting, the
same to abate it, and in default thereof to undertake the abatement on behalf
of the city. At least ten (10) days before he commences abatement, save in
cases of immediate necessity, the officer shall notify the person creating,
keeping, maintaining or permitting the nuisance, the animal owner and any
person in possession of the animal, if known, of his intentions, and the notice
shall be served personally or by first class mail and shall describe with
particularity the nature of the violation of the sections of this code or other
law which is being violated and specifying a reasonable time within which the
abatement must be accomplished.
   B.   The order may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the
mayor or the city clerk within two (2) business days of the order having been
served. The appeal will be heard at the next regular city council meeting by
the city council who shall, after hearing, make findings, and enter an order
either affirming, repealing or changing the order.
   C.   In addition to such other penalties as may be imposed, a court entering
a judgment of guilty to a charge of creating an animal nuisance may order the
abatement of the same on such terms and conditions as may be just and
equitable.
   D.   By way of additional or alternate enforcement, it shall be a violation
of this article for an animal owner to allow the barking, yelping, howling or
other noise caused by the animal if the noises are unreasonable or frequently
and habitually occur at unreasonable periods of times of the day or continue
for unreasonable periods of time. Law enforcement of the city may issue a
criminal citation to the animal owner under this article upon any occurrence.
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1A-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Except as otherwise noted, any person violating any of the provisions
of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. However, the city's prosecuting attorney may elect to
refrain from initiating criminal prosecution on the violation if the violator
pays to the city clerk, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the complaint of
such violation a civil assessment in the amount set forth in section
1-4-5 of this code.
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
ARTICLE B.KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Definitions
5-1B-2: License Requirements
5-1B-3: Standards
5-1B-4: Primary Enclosures
5-1B-5: Feeding
5-1B-6: Enforcement
5-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the words and terms used in this
article:
KENNEL: Includes:
   A.   Commercial Kennel: An establishment primarily offering boarding,
training and/or breeding services and the associated sale of dogs, with the
exclusion of veterinary hospitals.
   B.   Noncommercial Kennel: Any one household that keeps, maintains, harbors
or possesses more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age. Incidental
sale of such animals shall not disqualify households from noncommercial kennel
status.
PET ANIMAL: Any domesticated or wild animal, including dogs, cats, birds, small
rodents or small nonpoisonous reptiles, which is fed, watered, harbored or
allowed by any person to remain at or in the vicinity of a residence or place
of business in the city.
PET SHOP: A retail or wholesale business primarily offering for sale pet
animals and/or pet animal products, excluding commercial kennels.
PRIMARY ENCLOSURE: A separate enclosure or cage which segregates one animal
from another animal or animals.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment in which the practice of veterinary
medicine is the primary business. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1B-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate, keep or
maintain within the city limits a kennel or pet shop without having first
obtained a license from the city and being in compliance with all provisions of
this article. The annual fee for a license, issued hereunder or any renewal
thereof, shall be established by resolution. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005; amd. Ord.
492, 2-12-2006)
   B.   Application For License: Any person applying for a license or renewal
thereof under this article shall file with the city clerk an application on a
form prescribed by the city clerk, accompanied by the annual license fee.
   C.   Procedure For Licensing: No license or renewal thereof shall be issued
hereunder until:
      1.   There has been an inspection by an animal control officer of the
premises being licensed and a determination by him that all requirements of
this article will be met;
      2.   There is an adequate means of restraining animals from running at
large or disturbing the peace;
      3.   The proposed facilities are located in an applicable zone under the
zoning regulations of the city.
   D.   Term Of License: Any license or renewal thereof issued hereunder shall
be for a calendar year or portion thereof and must be renewed each calendar
year on or before January 31. Such license shall not be assignable or
transferable either to another person or for another location.
   E.   Posting: When issued, a license shall be displayed in a manner and at a
location so as to be readily visible by the public. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1B-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   General Facilities: All licensed premises shall be provide the
following:
      1.   Water And Food: Adequate and potable water shall be available at all
times to pet animals kept longer than twenty four (24) hours unless veterinary
orders indicate to the contrary. Watering and feeding receptacles shall be
cleaned at least once daily.
      2.   Storage: Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored and adequately
protected against infestation or contamination by vermin. Refrigeration shall
be provided for perishable food.
      3.   Waste Disposal: Provisions shall be made for the removal and
disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal
facilities shall also be provided and operated as to minimize vermin
infestation, odors and disease hazards.
      4.   Washrooms And Sinks: Facilities such as washrooms, basins or sinks
shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among caretakers.
      5.   Communicable Disease: Animals with potential communicable diseases
shall be housed in separate rooms from healthy boarding animals.
   B.   Indoor Facilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection A of
this section, indoor facilities licensed hereunder shall provide the following:
      1.   Ventilation: Indoor housing for pet animals shall be adequately
ventilated to provide for health and comfort of the animals at all times. They
shall be provided with fresh air, either by means of windows, doors, vents or
air conditioning, and shall be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors and
moisture condensation. Auxiliary ventilation such as exhaust fans and vents or
air conditioning shall be provided when the ambient temperature is eighty five
degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) or higher unless the ambient temperature requirements
of the specific species differ.
      2.   Lighting: Indoor housing for pet animals shall have ample artificial
light which is of good quality and is well distributed. Such lighting shall
provide uniformly distributed illumination of sufficient intensity to permit
routine inspection and cleaning during the entire working period.
      3.   Interior Surfaces: The interior building surfaces of indoor housing
facilities and dog houses shall be constructed and maintained so that they are
impervious to moisture and may be readily cleaned.
      4.   Drainage: A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate
excess water from indoor housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall be
properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors therefrom. If
closed drainage systems are used, they shall be equipped with traps and so
installed as to prevent any backup of sewage and odors.
      5.   Dogs Four Months Or Older: Dogs four (4) months or older which are
housed longer than a twenty four (24) hour period shall be provided with
adequate, separate, cleanable cages and shall be permitted exercise periods at
least twice each day for a minimum of five (5) minutes each period unless an
exercise run is provided. Such an exercise run must have an area of twenty (20)
square feet for a dog of thirty (30) pounds or less, and a minimum of thirty
six (36) square feet for dogs over thirty (30) pounds.
   C.   Outdoor Facilities: In addition to the standards required under
subsection A of this section, outdoor facilities licensed hereunder shall
provide the following:
      1.   Shelter:
         a.   Sunlight: When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or
discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all pet animals kept
outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun.
         b.   Rain Or Snow: Pet animals kept outdoors shall be provided with
access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow.
         c.   Cold Weather: Shelter shall be provided for all pet animals kept
outdoors when the atmospheric temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(50°F). Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the
weather elements shall be provided with the ambient temperature falls below
that temperature to which the animal is acclimated.
      2.   Drainage: A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate
excess water.
      3.   Dogs Four Months Or Older: Dogs four (4) months or older which are
housed longer than a twenty four (24) period shall be provided with separate,
adequate, cleanable enclosures and shall be permitted exercise periods at least
twice a day for a minimum of five (5) minutes each period unless an exercise
run is provided. Such an exercise run must have an area of twenty (20) square
feet for a dog of thirty (30) pounds or less, and minimum of thirty six (36)
square feet for dogs over thirty (30) pounds.
      4.   Individual Cages: Individual cages shall not be required for
noncommercial kennels. (Ord. 475, 3-7-2005)
5-1B-4: PRIMARY ENCLOSURES:
   A.   General: Primary enclosures shall:
      1.   Not be required for noncommercial kennels;
      2.   Be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the
animals from injury, to contain them and to keep predators out. They shall be
constructed of a material that is easily cleanable and maintained so as to
enable the pet animals to remain dry and clean and provide convenient access to
clean food and water;
      3.   Be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to
allow each pet animal to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit and lie in
a comfortable, normal position;
      4.   For each animal housed therein, be provided a minimum square footage
of floor space equal to the mathematical square of the sum of the length of the
animal in inches, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail,
plus six inches (6"), expressed in square feet. This requirement may be
computed using the following equation: (length of animal in inches plus 6)
times (length of animal in inches plus 6) equals required area in square inches
(divided by 144) equals required square feet of floor space.
      5.   The height of any outdoor kennel shall be at least six feet (6');
      6.   Be used for housing not more than one animal unless requested by the
owners of each animal housed therein;
      7.   Subsections A3 and A4 of this section shall not apply to animals
being housed for medical or grooming purposes or for less than seventy two (72)
hours.
   B.   Sanitation:
      1.   Excreta shall be removed from primary enclosures as often as
necessary to prevent contamination of the pet animals contained therein and to
reduce disease, hazards and odors. When a hosing or flushing method is used for
cleaning a cage, the pet animals shall be removed during the cleaning process
and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the animals in other enclosures
from being contaminated with water and other wastes.
      2.   Cages, rooms, hard surfaced pens and runs shall be cleaned by
washing all soiled surfaces with a safe and effective disinfectant.
      3.   Pens and runs using gravel, sand or dirt shall be sanitized by
removing the soiled gravel, sand or dirt and replacing it as necessary.
      4.   An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasite, avian
and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained where indicated. (Ord.
475, 3-7-2005)
5-1B-5: FEEDING:
   A.   Pet animals which are housed for more than twenty four (24) hours shall
be fed at least once a day except as otherwise might be required to provide
adequate veterinary care. The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome,
palatable and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to meet the normal
daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
   B.   Food receptacles shall be accessible to the pet animal and shall be
located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be
durable and kept clean. The food receptacles shall be cleaned daily. Disposal
food receptacles may be used but must be discarded after each feeding. Self-
feeders may be used for the feeding of dry food and they shall be sanitized
regularly to prevent molding, deterioration or caking of feed. (Ord. 475, 3-7-
2005)
5-1B-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violation:
      1.   Any person violating any provisions of this article or who shall
hinder, impede or obstruct an enforcing officer in the performance of his duty
of enforcement, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   The animal control officer is the officer responsible for the
enforcement of this article and shall have the authority and duty to enter any
licensed premises at any reasonable hour to inspect the same.
   B.   Revocation, Denial Of License:
      1.   The city council shall have the right to revoke any license once
granted or deny annual renewal thereof when it appears that any operator or
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article or any ordinance of
the city, the state or the United States involving cruelty or mistreatment of
animals. Prior to the revocation of any license or the denial of an application
of a renewal thereof, written notice of the reason for such action shall be
given to the applicant or licensee by the city clerk. Such notice shall state
that the applicant or licensee may request a hearing on such decision by the
city council within ten (10) days of receiving the notice.
      2.   Should the applicant or licensee request a hearing within such ten
(10) day period, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city clerk
of the time and place of the hearing, and the license shall not be revoked
until after a decision is made by the city council that grounds exist for such
revocation or denial.
(Ord. 475, 3-7-2005; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
ARTICLE C.DOMESTIC FOWL
SECTION:
5-1C-1: Keeping Of Domestic Fowl
5-1C-1: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC FOWL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any household to own, harbor, or possess
domestic fowl other than authorized by this section and in accordance with
limitations and requirements established herein.
   B.   Chickens are permitted on any single-family detached lot in the city of
Priest River. Each property is permitted a maximum of six (6) hens. Roosters
are prohibited within the city limits.
   C.   Coops and all feed supply shall be secured to prevent mice and other
pests.
   D.   Coops, hutches, or similar containment structures must be kept at least
thirty feet (30') from the front property line, five feet (5') from the side
and rear property lines, at least fifteen feet (15') from the residence on
site, and at least twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residence.
   E.   Coops, hutches, or similar structures shall not be attached to a shared
fence.
   F.   No coop, hutch, or similar containment structure, nor any confinement
fence or pen shall be constructed or maintained over, on, or adjacent to any
septic tank or drain field.
   G.   It shall be the sole duty of the persons owning such chickens to keep
them in secure confinement sufficient to prevent them from roaming onto any
adjacent lands.
   H.   The persons owning such chickens shall keep them, and all grounds upon
or facilities within which they are housed, clean and sanitary. (Ord. 548, 6-
18-2012)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Trespassing
5-2-2: Damage To Property
5-2-3: Hazardous Fences
5-2-4: Human Powered Vehicles
5-2-5: Sports On Public Property
5-2-6: Graffiti
5-2-7: Possession Of An Open Container Of An Alcoholic Beverage In Public
Places
5-2-1: TRESPASSING:
It is unlawful for any person to take down any fence, or to let down any bars,
or to open any gate in or on the property of another without the consent of the
owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
5-2-2: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Malicious Injury: It is unlawful for any person wilfully and
maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any
manner interfere with or molest, or secrete or destroy any real or personal
property belonging to or under the control of another.
   B.   Depositing Injurious Substances On Public Thoroughfares: It is unlawful
for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain upon any public
thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to persons or property. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
5-2-3: HAZARDOUS FENCES:
   A.   Electric Fences: It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
fence, where any part of the fence may be electrified, in any area of the city
except as an animal impound fence on residential property zoned for the keeping
of large animals as defined in the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Barbed Wire Or Razor Wire Fences: It is unlawful for any person to
erect or maintain any fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of
barbed wire or razor wire except as a property guard on commercial, industrial
or municipal use zoned property or, with the approval of the public works
supervisor, as an animal impound fence on residential property zoned for the
keeping of large animals as defined in the zoning ordinance. Any person wanting
to use any barbed wire or razor wire fence used as a property guard on
commercial, industrial or municipal use zoned property that borders residential
property must submit a request to, and receive the approval of, the public
works supervisor. (Ord. 516, 10-6-2008)
5-2-4: HUMAN POWERED VEHICLES:
   A.   Definition: A "human powered vehicle" is a skateboard, roller skates,
in-line skates, scooters or other toy vehicle operated by human power excluding
perambulators or wheelchairs or other like vehicles being operated by
handicapped or infirm persons.
   B.   Riding On Public Property: Except to cross a sidewalk when entering or
exiting an alleyway, a private drive or a crosswalk, and where signs are
posted, it is unlawful to ride, operate or cause to be operated any human
powered vehicle on the sidewalks of the city.
   C.   Vehicle Demonstrations: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the
mayor and/or the city council from allowing bicycle, skateboard or other human
powered vehicle exhibits or demonstrations at designated locations by obtaining
a special event permit from the city. Security and porta potties are the
responsibility of the permit holder. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
5-2-5: SPORTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Sports Equipment: It is unlawful to set up, operate or use a skateboard
ramp, basketball hoop, or any other type of sports equipment on any public
property, nor within three feet (3') of each side of a paved road.
   B.   Playing Ball On Streets: It is unlawful for any person to play ball or
throw any ball to and fro upon any public thoroughfare. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
5-2-6: GRAFFITI:
   A.   Prohibited: It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to place or
put, by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, or mark or any
type commonly known as graffiti on any public or private property without the
permission of the owner of the premises on which the surface is located, or
upon any natural surfaces such as rocks or trees, or any other surface
whatsoever.
   B.   Removal Required: Any person found to be in violation of this section
shall be required to remove or cause to be removed the graffiti from the
surface on which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not possible to
determine the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it shall be the
duty of the owner or person in control of the premises on which the graffiti
has been applied to promptly remove the graffiti after notice as hereinafter
set forth. If, after notice as hereinafter provided, the graffiti nuisance is
not abated, the City shall proceed to abate the graffiti nuisance and the costs
of same shall be assessed against the property.
   C.   Notice To Remove:
      1.   Whenever the City discovers graffiti on any public or private
property or any surfaces visible to persons utilizing public rights-of-way
within the City, it shall, whenever seasonal temperatures permit the painting
of exterior surfaces, cause a notice to be issued to the owner or person in
control of the premises to remove the graffiti or cover it with paint or other
suitable substance.
      2.   Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected
premises, as shown on the last Property Tax assessment rolls of Bonner County,
Idaho, with a copy to the occupant of the premises. If there is no known
address for the owner, the notice shall be served at the property address.
Service of the notice may be accomplished through personal service on the
owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property or by certified
mail.
      3.   If the City removes the graffiti under the provisions of this
section, a statement of charges billed to the property owner shall be mailed or
personally delivered to the property owner. If payment is not received from the
property owner within thirty (30) days, the amount billed shall, in accordance
with State law, be assessed as a special assessment collectible against the
subject property as other State, County and Municipal taxes. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006)
5-2-7: POSSESSION OF AN OPEN CONTAINER OF AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN PUBLIC
PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or to
have in his or her possession any open container of any alcoholic beverage in a
public place within the City of Priest River, including any street, any public
or private parking lot, or any public or private property open to the public,
except as otherwise provided by law.
Nothing herein will be interpreted to prevent residents or their guests from
consuming alcoholic beverages or having an open container of any alcohol
beverage in public areas zoned Residential. This exception does not apply to
customers of any business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on premises
consumption when such alcoholic beverage is taken away from the premises so
licensed or in public areas within the design review overlay historic district.
"Container of an alcoholic beverage" includes, without limitation, a bottle or
can labeled as containing such a beverage, no matter what it in fact contains,
and a container containing such a beverage no matter how labeled. An "alcoholic
beverage" is any liquid or solid containing ethyl alcohol or synthetic ethyl
alcohol in an amount of three percent (3%) or more by weight (6 proof); a
manufacturer's label on the bottle or can or on a package out of which such
container came is conclusive evidence of content.
"Open container" shall be defined as the original receptacle of the alcoholic
beverage, whose seal has been broken or cap removed, or any other container
into which the alcoholic beverage has been placed which does not have affixed
thereon a permanent airtight seal or cap. (Ord. 606, 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew
5-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter:
   GUARDIAN: The legal guardian appointed by a court to have the control and
custody of the particular child that may be involved, or the person who may be
in the actual control and custody of such child by consent of the parents,
guardian or such minor, without court order.
   PARENT: The natural parent or stepparent of the particular child that may be
concerned.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes, but is not limited to, parks, playgrounds and
similar premises open to the general public.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: Any road, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or other course
of travel open to the general public.
   B.   Hours Of Curfew:
      1.   It is unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to
be in or upon, or to congregate or loiter in or upon any street, highway or
public place in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday.
      2.   The hours indicated in this section are with reference to the
standard time prevailing in the city, whether the same is Pacific Standard or
Pacific Daylight Saving Time.
   C.   Exceptions: The following described persons are excepted from the terms
of this section:
      1.   Children accompanied by their parents or guardians;
      2.   Children who have been sent by their parent or guardian on urgent
family business or errand;
      3.   Children in the course of employment or enroute to and from such
employment;
      4.   Children engaged in or going to or from activities sponsored by a
school or church;
      5.   Children engaged in or going to or from any private social affair;
provided, however, that in no event shall permission be granted for children to
attend any affair or to be going to and from such affair later than twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for any parent or guardian,
wilfully or negligently, to permit a child under the age of eighteen (18) years
to violate any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Designation Of Authority
6-1-2: Local Restrictions On Certain Streets
6-1-3: Reduction Of State Imposed Speed Limits
6-1-4: Recreational Vehicles
6-1-5: Violation
6-1-1: DESIGNATION OF AUTHORITY:
Whenever in the judgment of the City Council the operation of any vehicle on
any street or alley, or any portion thereof, of the sizes and weights and at
the rates of speed permissible by law, would interfere with the safe and
efficient use of such street or alley by the traveling public, or will cause
damage to said street or alley by reason of climatic or other conditions, the
City Council shall have authority to make regulations reducing the permissible
sizes, weights or speeds of vehicles operated on such street or alley, or any
portion thereof, for such periods as may be necessary for public safety or for
the protection of such street or alley, and shall erect and maintain signs
designating such regulations at each end of such street or alley, or any
portion thereof. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-1-2: LOCAL RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   Weight Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person to operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified when signs are
erected, by authority of the City Council, giving notice thereof.
   B.   Loaded Trucks Prohibited From Using Posted City Roads: When so posted
during the spring breakup, loaded trucks are prohibited from using posted City
streets. For the purposes of this section, a "truck" is defined as any vehicle
with a GVWR of twenty six thousand (26,000) pounds or greater and is licensed
with a commercial truck license plate or any vehicle that requires a commercial
driver's license to legally operate. A "loaded truck" is defined as any vehicle
with a GVWR of twenty six thousand (26,000) pounds or greater that is loaded
with any cargo for which it was designed to carry. Empty trucks shall be
allowed on posted City streets, but their speed shall be no greater than ten
(10) miles per hour. The Public Works Department may issue specific weight
exemptions for loaded trucks. Such exemptions shall be on a case by case basis
and shall not confer a continuing right to move loaded trucks on posted City
streets. Such exemptions shall be based on the expected temperature and street
conditions at the time of exemption, and such exemption shall be for weight
only and shall not exempt speed restrictions. The City Police Department shall
be notified of all such specific exemptions. Local deliveries of home heating
fuel, school supplies, critical healthcare supplies, restaurant and merchant
supplies, and public service and utility vehicles are exempt from the weight
restrictions imposed when streets are so posted but are not exempt from the
speed restrictions imposed when streets are so posted. School buses are exempt
from the weight restrictions and speed restrictions imposed when streets are so
posted when traveling on designated school bus routes.
   C.   Certain Vehicles On Heavily Traveled Streets: The City Council is
authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which
motor driven cycles, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic shall be
prohibited, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. When such
signs are so erected, it is unlawful for any person to disobey the restrictions
stated on such signs.
   D.   Special Purpose Vehicles: Special purpose vehicles, such as tow trucks,
dump trucks, truck trailers and construction equipment, are not permitted in
residential areas unless being used for their intended purpose. (Ord. 594, 3-5-
2018)
6-1-3: REDUCTION OF STATE IMPOSED SPEED LIMITS:
The City hereby enacts the provisions of Idaho Code 49-201(4) which grants
authority to duly elected officials of an incorporated city acting in their
capacity of a local authority, to establish lower speed limits for portions of
State highways, excluding controlled access and interstate highways, that pass
through residential, urban or business districts within the jurisdiction of the
incorporated city, for the purpose of enhancing motorist and pedestrian safety.
A reduction in speed limit on all State highways passing through the City to
thirty five (35) miles per hour is mandated as follows:
Beginning at all boundaries of the incorporated City accessed by State
highways, providing for a set speed limit within the City limits on all State
highways, unless otherwise posted, subject to current restrictions imposed by
local authority for such periods as may be necessary for public safety. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
6-1-4: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
No person shall operate an ATV (all-terrain vehicle) or any other type of
recreational vehicle that is not properly licensed upon any public ways and
property within the City. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-1-5: VIOLATION:
Unless otherwise provided for under Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable
in the manner provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
6-2-1: Authority
6-2-2: Obstructing Roadways
6-2-3: Prohibited Parking In Designated Locations
6-2-4: Parking Restrictions
6-2-5: Handicap Parking Spaces
6-2-6: Removal Of Improperly Parked Vehicles
6-2-7: Abandoned, Stolen Or Wrecked Vehicles On Public Property
6-2-8: Violation
6-2-1: AUTHORITY:
The city council is authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, any
street, alley, or any portion thereof, on which the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause an unusual delay in traffic. When official signs are erected at such
hazardous or congested places, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or
park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-2-2: OBSTRUCTING ROADWAYS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street in such
a manner or under such conditions as to obstruct the normally traveled portion
of the roadway, except as provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within
the city on a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a street, except as provided when:
      1.   It is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic;
      2.   It is in compliance with law or at the direction of a law
enforcement officer, a firefighter in the course of his duties, or a lawfully
established traffic control device;
      3.   It is for purposes of unloading a bona fide commercial vehicle for
the purposes of delivering goods or wares to a residence or commercial
establishment situated immediately adjacent thereto; provided, however, the
commercial vehicle exception created in this section shall not exceed a period
of fifteen (15) minutes from the time of stopping such vehicle to the time of
removing the same. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within six feet
(6') of the normally traveled portion of any city street at any place within
the residential area of the city at any time after snow has fallen, and the
accumulation of snow is such that it covers said street, or in such a way as to
disrupt normal snowplowing operations. Said parking restrictions shall remain
in effect after the snow has ceased to fall and until snow removal operations
have been completed. However, this provision shall not apply to physicians on
emergency calls. (Ord. 493, 12-18-2006)
6-2-3: PROHIBITED PARKING IN DESIGNATED LOCATIONS:
   A.   General: It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a
vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control
device, in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk;
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      5.   On a crosswalk;
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      7.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal;
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the chief of police has indicated a different length of a zone by signs
or markings;
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance, when properly signposted;
      11.   Alongside of or opposite any street obstruction or excavation when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      12.   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
      15.   Against the direction of lawful traffic movement.
   B.   Illegal Movement: It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not
lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area, or away from a curb
such distance as is unlawful.
   C.   Truck Parking In Business District: Parking of sixteen thousand
(16,000) GVW or larger trucks and/or truck trailers is prohibited within the
business district of the city.
   D.   Parking For Selling Or Repairing: It is unlawful for any person to park
a vehicle upon any roadway or public thoroughfare for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
      2.   Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by
an emergency. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-2-4: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   School Areas: The city council is authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation. When official signs are erected indicating no parking is allowed
upon either or both sides of a street adjacent to any school property, as
authorized in this subsection, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle
in any such designated place.
   B.   Narrow Streets: The city council is authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed twenty feet (20'). When official signs prohibiting parking are erected
upon narrow streets, as authorized in this subsection, it is unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such signs.
   C.   Alleys: It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and it is unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle
within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
   D.   All Night Parking: It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on
the following streets within the business district for a period of time longer
than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except for law enforcement or fire
department personnel performing their lawful duties and physicians on emergency
calls:
      1.   High Street between Church Street and Treat Street;
      2.   Main Street from Albeni Road to Montgomery Street. (Ord. 493, 12-18-
2006)
6-2-5: HANDICAP PARKING SPACES:
   A.   Parking Restrictions: It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to
park such vehicle in a parking space designated by sign or marking as reserved
for the handicapped unless such vehicle has then displayed upon it the special
license plate, or the special card pursuant to Idaho Code 49-410. Such
specially designated spaces shall conform to the requirements of Idaho Code 49-
213.
   B.   Penalty: The penalty for a violation of this section shall be the sum
of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be paid within seven (7) days of the
violation. If such sum is not paid within seven (7) days, the penalty shall be
the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid within fourteen (14) days of
such violation. If such sum is not paid within fourteen (14) days, the penalty
shall be the sum of one hundred forty one dollars and fifty cents ($141.50).
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
6-2-6: REMOVAL OF IMPROPERLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Any vehicle parked in violation of traffic regulations, or any vehicle
parked so as to obstruct the free movement of traffic or causing a traffic
hazard, may be removed upon order of the city law enforcement agency. Any such
vehicle so removed shall be kept under the control of the city law enforcement
agency until the owner or their authorized agent pays the reasonable cost of
removal and storage in addition to the penalty provided for such improper
parking.
   B.   Any such vehicle shall be deemed to be improperly parked after a period
of fifteen (15) minutes.
   C.   The cost of redemption shall include the actual cost and expense of the
removal in addition to a reasonable per day storage charge and such costs and
expenses shall be a lien in favor of the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-2-7: ABANDONED, STOLEN OR WRECKED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: An automobile or
personal property which remains upon the street or other public property for a
period of time longer than forty eight (48) hours, the owner of which cannot be
located or the owner of which refuses to remove the same.
   B.   Removal; Costs: The city law enforcement agency is hereby authorized,
in addition to any penalty that may be provided therefor, to remove an
unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle or other personal
property found upon any public thoroughfare or other property of the city, and
shall keep the same in its custody and control at such place as may be
designated by the city law enforcement agency until redeemed by the owner. All
such unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or other
personal property which now is in the possession of the city law enforcement
agency shall be subject to the actual cost of removal or tow in from the public
place, and a reasonable per day storage charge, for as long as the same is in
possession and custody.
   C.   Abandoning Vehicles Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner or any
person in charge of a motor vehicle or other personal property to abandon the
same upon the street or public places of the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
6-2-8: VIOLATION:
Unless otherwise provided for under Idaho motor vehicle laws, a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMIT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Purpose
6-3-2: Speed Limits
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt uniform traffic speed limits within the
city of Priest River. (Ord. 489, 9-18-2006)
6-3-2: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Streets: The uniform speed limit on all streets within the city of
Priest River shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour except as otherwise
legally posted.
   B.   Alleyways: The uniform speed limit for all alleyways within the city of
Priest River shall be ten (10) miles per hour.
   C.   School Zones: The uniform speed limit for all identified school zones
when children are present shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour except as
otherwise legally posted. (Ord. 489, 9-18-2006)
CHAPTER 4
VEHICLE SOUNDS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Air Compression Brakes
6-4-2: Violation
6-4-1: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
The use of air compression brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by motor
vehicles within the city limits of the city of Priest River is hereby
prohibited and shall be unlawful except under emergency circumstances where the
use of air compression brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to
persons or property. (Ord. 570, 3-2-2015)
6-4-2: VIOLATION:
Unless otherwise provided for under Idaho motor vehicle laws, a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be assessed a civil assessment, payable to
the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the complaint of such
violation, in the amount set forth in section
1-4-5 of this code. Upon a fourth violation the person or entity shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation.
(Ord. 570, 3-2-2015; amd. Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Standards Adopted
7-1-2: Encroachments
7-1-3: Snow And Ice Removal
7-1-4: Alley Maintenance And Snow Removal
7-1-1: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
   A.   There exist manuals, standards and specifications for uniform street
and sidewalk construction, repair, maintenance and traffic control published by
the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC), Idaho transportation
department (ITD), the Idaho standards for public works construction executive
committee (ISPWC) and the federal highway administration (FHA). More
specifically, these manuals, standards and specifications are:
      1.   Manual for use of public right of way permits for utilities and
encroachments, as published and periodically revised by the LHTAC;
      2.   Manual for use of public right of way standard approach policy, as
published and periodically revised by the LHTAC;
      3.   Manual for streets and highways, as published and periodically
revised by the LHTAC;
      4.   "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction", as published and
periodically revised by the ISPWC;
      5.   Idaho transportation department standards for highway construction,
as published and periodically revised by the ITD;
      6.   "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD), as published
and periodically revised by the FHA;
      7.   Idaho transportation department catalog of stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) for highway construction and maintenance, as
published and periodically revised by the ITD.
   B.   The most recent editions of these manuals, standards and specifications
are hereby adopted by reference as the street, sidewalk and public right of way
construction, repair and maintenance standards and specifications of the city.
   C.   A copy of all such manuals, standards and specifications shall be kept
on file by the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-1-2: ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   It is the responsibility of any person to first secure a right of
way encroachment permit from the city before beginning any construction,
maintenance or repair project within a city street, alley, sidewalk or right of
way.
      2.   Fees for encroachment permits shall be established by resolution of
the city council.
   B.   Utility Poles:
      1.   All utility poles hereafter set in the city shall be set within the
line established by the city. Upon proper notification by the city that any
street, alley or right of way is to be widened, vacated, paved or changed, any
person having poles set in said street, alley or right of way of the city shall
remove their poles therefrom and move them to the proper established line.
      2.   This subsection is intended to apply to all persons, companies or
corporations now having franchises granted to them by the city, or who may
hereafter obtain such franchise, or who may be operating or carrying on any
business within the city requiring use of such poles.
      3.   The right to amend, alter or repeal this section is hereby reserved.
   C.   Right Of Way Obstructions: No person shall obstruct any city sidewalk,
street, alley or right of way at any time for the sale or storage of any goods,
wares or merchandise or for any event or gathering of people without first
having obtained the permission of and having met the conditions set forth by
the city council.
Violations of any of the provisions of this section or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-1-3: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
   A.   Removal Requirements:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises
abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to remove all snow and/or ice from
such sidewalk whenever any such snow and/or ice reaches a depth of two inches
(2") or greater.
      2.   Unless otherwise provided, snow removed from any sidewalk or parking
area within the city shall not be thrown, shoveled or placed in the streets or
gutters of the city. In areas of the city where snow is regularly picked up by
the city and hauled from the streets, only snow removed from sidewalks within
the right of way shall be permitted to be placed in the streets and gutters.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
      3.   Except as provided under subsection A2 of this section, snow shall
not be thrown, shoveled or placed onto a city right of way or alley.
Furthermore, snow removed from any property, residential or commercial, shall
not be thrown, shoveled or placed on the property of another owner without the
permission of said property owner, nor shall snow be thrown, shoveled or placed
so as to block the view of drivers at street intersections. (Ord. 493, 12-18-
2006)
   B.   Failure To Comply: Upon failure of an owner or occupant to comply with
the provisions of this section, the city shall have the right to remove such
snow and/or ice and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the
sidewalk. Such assessment is to be certified to the county assessor and such
charge shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same manner
as other municipal taxes are collected.
Violations of any of the provisions of this section or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-1-4: ALLEY MAINTENANCE AND SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   A property owner may petition the City Council for alley maintenance
and snow removal if the following conditions exist:
      1.   The alley serves as sole vehicular access to a parcel of property,
and
      2.   The sole access to the property was in existence prior to December
31, 2019.
   B.   If a Petition is granted under Subsection A, the City shall ensure the
following:
      1.   The Alley will be graded annually on an as-needed basis, and
      2.   Snow will be removed from Alley in the same manner and time frame as
third priority streets.
   C.   If a Petition is granted under Subsection A, it shall not relieve
Property Owners of obligations under
10-5-1(F).
   D.   No Building Permits shall be issued to a property owner without access
from an existing road or a new proposed roadway approved by the City of Priest
River. (Ord. 610, 2-3-2020)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Owner's Responsibilities
7-2-2: Tree And Shrub Maintenance
7-2-3: Damage To Trees Or Shrubs
7-2-4: Prohibited Plantings And Species
7-2-5: Failure To Comply
7-2-6: Trees On City Property
7-2-1: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
Any owner or occupant of any real property within the city shall have the
following responsibilities, and a violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor:
   A.   Trim all trees overhanging any public sidewalk to a height of not less
than eight feet (8').
   B.   Trim all trees overhanging any public thoroughfare to a height of
fourteen feet (14').
   C.   Remove all hedges, shrubberies, fences, tree limbs or other obstruction
that may constitute a sight obstruction to the motoring public 1 . (Ord. 482,
6-5-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 7-2-2A2 of this chapter.
7-2-2: TREE AND SHRUB MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of such hedges and
shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk.
      2.   Any owner or occupant of any real property within the city shall
remove from his property any structure, hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall, tree
limbs or other sight obstruction of any nature, except public traffic signs,
buildings and trees, where the sight obstructions constitute a potential
traffic hazard. The above sight obstructions shall not extend more than three
feet (3') nor less than ten feet (10') in height above the existing centerline
roadway elevation within the vision triangle of vehicle operators. The
boundaries of the vision triangle are defined by measuring from the
intersection of the edges of the two (2) adjacent roadways forty feet (40')
along each roadway and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line. The
bushes, shrubs, plants and structures in the area of a corner lot that extends
thirty feet (30') back in both directions from the point of the intersection
along the gutter line must not be more than thirty inches (30") tall and cannot
obstruct clear vision.
   B.   Violations: Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor
and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-2-3: DAMAGE TO TREES OR SHRUBS:
It is unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful
authority to do so, wilfully to injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any tree
or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant located either
on private ground or on any public place or thoroughfare. A violation of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-2-4: PROHIBITED PLANTINGS AND SPECIES:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No person shall plant any tree, hedge or shrubbery within any city
right of way without first having received permission from the city council.
      2.   Under no circumstances shall a person plant any of the following
species of tree, hedge or shrubbery within a city right of way:
         Ailanthus
         American elm
         Box elder
         Cottonwood
         Fruit trees (except ornamental types)
         Mountain ash
         Nut trees
         Oregon or big leaf maple
         Poplar
         Willow
   B.   Violations: Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor
and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-2-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Upon failure of an owner or occupant to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, the city shall have the right to remove such tree branches, shrubbery
or hedge and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalk
or right of way. Such assessment shall be certified to the county assessor and
such charge shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same
manner as other municipal taxes are collected. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
7-2-6: TREES ON CITY PROPERTY:
The governing body of the city is provided full and complete control over all
trees which are outside the property lines of privately owned real estate.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 3
STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-3-1: Authority, Jurisdiction And Purpose
7-3-2: Implementation, Administration And Approvals
7-3-3: Language And Definitions
7-3-4: Procedures And Standards
7-3-5: Enforcement And Administration
7-3-1: AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the PRIEST RIVER STREET NAMING
AND ADDRESSING SYSTEM ORDINANCE.
   B.   Authority And Jurisdiction:
      1.   This chapter is authorized by article XII, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution and Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-801, 40-604 and 67-6518.
      2.   In addition to the general authorities set out above, this chapter
is authorized by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter 65. The
regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to the naming of all streets
and the addressing of all structures and parcels within the incorporated
territory of the city of Priest River, or as mutually defined by both city and
county under the requirements of Idaho Code 50-1306 or 67-6526.
   C.   Purpose And Applicability: This chapter further implements portions of
the Priest River comprehensive plan and supplements the zoning and subdivision
regulations. Its purpose is to provide city residents with a uniform and
standardized system of street naming and addressing to:
      1.   Minimize future street name and addressing conflicts.
      2.   Provide a database for city records and enhanced 911 service.
      3.   Expedite property identification by emergency services.
      4.   Comply with the following addressing guidelines: National Emergency
Number Association (NENA) addressing and mapping standards, Verizon E-
9-1-1 addressing guidelines "practice 444-400-015", and U.S. postal service
publication 28, "Postal Addressing Standards". (Ord. 523, 6-1-2009)
7-3-2: IMPLEMENTATION, ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVALS:
   A.   Implementation And Responsibilities:
      1.   The administrator and his/her designees shall have the
responsibility of implementing, enforcing, and maintaining an addressing and
street naming standard as defined by this chapter.
      2.   In the event that violations of this chapter are not corrected by
the date required herein, Priest River may perform the work and pursue remedies
as provided in this section.
      3.   Property owners are responsible for placing and maintaining numeric
identification and for erecting private street signs in accordance with this
chapter. Posting of addresses and street names should be done within four (4)
months of issuance of the address or street name. Private street signs shall be
erected under the guidelines of the current Priest River street standards
manual.
      4.   The Priest River public works department is responsible for erecting
and maintaining public street signs at street intersections.
      5.   The property owner is responsible for the designation of the access
points on the public or private street and installation and maintenance of all
required street signs. The access point(s) designated by the owner shall be
utilized to determine the address of the parcel. Such access points are subject
to review and approval of the city to ensure that they are accessible to
emergency service providers.
      6.   All addresses shall comply with the addressing guidelines outlined
in subsection
7-3-1C of this chapter. The order of precedence will be NENA, Verizon E-
9-1-1 addressing guidelines, and the United States post office addressing
standards.
      7.   For the purposes of addressing and street naming, the city clerk's
office will house and maintain all official data.
   B.   Administrator: The city public works supervisor shall be empowered to
exercise the powers delegated to him/her by this title of administrator. The
administrator may appoint specific designees to assist with carrying out the
duties set forth by this chapter.
   C.   Approvals Required:
      1.   Before any street is named, approval shall be obtained from the
administrator.
      2.   Official street names shall be maintained on the Priest River street
name list.
      3.   Before any addresses are posted, approval shall be obtained from the
administrator.
      4.   If, in any instance, the administrator fails to act or carry out
his/her responsibilities according to the regulations contained herein, the
council may assume the duties of the administrator, as herein specified. (Ord.
523, 6-1-2009)
7-3-3: LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Construction Of Language: The rules and definitions contained in this
section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates:
      1.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      2.   The words "should" and "may" indicate the use of discretion.
      3.   When consistent with this text, words used in the present tense
include the future; words used in the future tense include the present.
   B.   Definitions:
   ACCESS: The primary means of vehicular ingress/egress to a parcel or
structure.
   ADDRESS OR SERVICE ADDRESS: The official city assigned unique identification
number for a parcel and/or structure that uniquely defines its location within
the city. This address may be used for mail delivery if allowed by the U.S.
postal service.
   ADMINISTRATOR: Priest River staff appointed by the city council whose duties
are to exercise the powers delegated to him/her by this chapter.
   APPROACH: Any vehicular entrance upon a city right of way, other than a
"driveway".
   CITY COUNCIL: Elected officials who are vested with all executive and
legislative authority of the city and whose powers, authority and duties are
outlined in Idaho Code title 50.
   COMMON DRIVEWAY: A vehicular access serving three (3) or four (4) parcels,
which has an approach to a public street or connects to a private street.
Common driveways shall be named.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street that provides a turnaround at its terminus.
   DEVELOPER: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes applications and initiates
proceedings for subdivision of land. The developer need not be the owner of the
land, but he shall be the agent of the owner.
   DRIVEWAY: For the purposes of this chapter, the term "driveway" shall mean a
vehicular entrance upon a public or private streetway, or connects to a common
driveway, which provides access to a fourplex or smaller multi-family dwelling,
or two (2) or fewer single-family residential lots or parcels. Driveways shall
not be named.
   DWELLING: A habitable structure.
   LOT: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
   MUTCD: The latest edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
as published by the federal highway administration.
   OWNER: The legal property owner as shown by the latest information provided
by the Bonner County assessor's office.
   PLAT: A map of representation of a named subdivision of land into lots,
blocks, and streets to be recorded as a public document.
   PRIMARY ACCESS POINT: That primary point designated on a private or public
street, or common driveway from which the driveway to a parcel or structure
intersects the private or public street or common driveway.
   PRIVATE STREET: Means of vehicular access which has not been accepted for
maintenance by the board or a public highway agency and which does not meet the
definition of a "driveway", "common driveway" or "public street".
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY AGENCY: The public street agency having jurisdiction for
primary and secondary streets in the incorporated areas of the city.
   PUBLIC STREET: A street, thoroughfare, alley, or highway; a right of way for
public use that provides vehicular access, as defined by Idaho Code sections
40-117 and 50-1301.
   SERVIENT PROPERTY: Property over which a private street passes, or property
served by a private street easement. (Ord. 523, 6-1-2009)
7-3-4: PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Designations: Designation of new streets within the incorporated
areas of Priest River shall be in accordance with the following guidelines:
      1.   All named streets that extend from incorporated areas into
unincorporated areas shall retain the same name.
      2.   Streets which have a generally north-south directional course should
be designated as a street. Streets which have a generally east-west directional
course should be designated an avenue.
      3.   Streets which do not have a definite directional course shall be
assigned a designation at the discretion of the administrator.
      4.   A dead end street or cul-de-sac less than one thousand feet (1,000')
in length, when not an extension of an existing street or a continuation of a
proposed street, should be called a court.
      5.   A street that has its ingress and egress on the same street shall be
designated a circle or loop.
      6.   A street that circles back upon itself shall be designated as a
circle.
      7.   Special scenic routes or park drives may be designated parkway upon
review and approval by the administrator.
      8.   When a proposed street is in general alignment with an existing
street, and the proposed street is planned to be a continuation of the existing
street, the existing name and designation should be maintained given no
conflict with subsection B of this section.
      9.   Duplicate street names are prohibited. Existing duplicated names
should be corrected in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Addressing Procedures:
      1.   General Procedures: All address numbers shall conform to the
addressing system outlined by this chapter. The general standards to be used in
developing an address are as follows:
         a.   The address system shall be based on a mileage system by
measuring to the one one-thousandth (1/1,000) of a mile. The point of beginning
for generally north/south streets shall be U.S. 2 and the point of beginning
for generally east/west streets shall be SR 57. All streets that continue
across U.S. 2 shall be prefixed north or south and all streets that continue
across SR 57 shall be prefixed east or west.
         b.   Addressing for state highways shall be based on mile markers.
(Example: If a driveway is on Highway 2 and it is between mile marker 5 and 6
and the measurement from mile marker 5 to the driveway is 0.425 miles, the
address for this driveway is 5425 Highway 2.)
         c.   A standard of one thousand (1,000) addressing units per mile is
hereby established.
         d.   Even numbers shall be used on west and south sides of the street,
and odd numbers should be used on the east and north sides.
      2.   Streets:
         a.   If a building has a number of entrances, each serving separate
occupants, then the building shall be assigned an address and the individual
units assigned unit numbers. (Example: 24 Birch Rd., Suite 3.)
         b.   An addressing scheme for multi-family dwelling structures shall
be approved by the administrator that is in accord with the standards and
guidelines outlined in subsection
7-3-1C4 of this chapter. In general, a multi-family dwelling structure with one
main entrance should be assigned one number with the owner of the structure
responsible for providing designated individual numbering of each unit before
an address will be issued to the structure. (Example: 15864 Maas Loop, Apt.
101.) In some cases where there are several multi-family dwelling structures
sharing one main access, it may be necessary to name the streets within the
complex and provide individual street numbers to the buildings. This
determination will be made by the administrator on a case by case basis.
         c.   An addressing scheme for mobile home parks structures shall be
approved by the administrator that is in accord with E-
9-1-1 addressing standards. In general, mobile home parks should have names for
the streets within the complex and individual street numbers should be assigned
by the city for each mobile home space. Alphanumeric combinations shall not be
used for numbering individual spaces.
         d.   If a street or driveway accesses three (3) or more properties, it
shall be assigned a street name and the parcels shall be addressed in
accordance with this chapter.
         e.   Parcels with structure(s), or bare land parcels, which are
accessed by a driveway, shall be assigned an address at the point where the
driveway intersects a named street.
         f.   The street name and address for any dwelling should be determined
by the street on which the dwelling fronts. However, in those instances where
access is from a different street and the dwelling is not visible from the
fronting street, or if the dwelling is not readily accessible to emergency
personnel from the fronting street, the street name and address will be
assigned based on the access street.
         g.   For parcels that are accessed by multiple driveways, the owner
shall designate a primary access point that will be used for address
assignment. Such access points are subject to review and approval of the city
to ensure that they are accessible to emergency service providers. If the
property owner does not designate a primary access point, the city shall make
the official determination to allow the proper addressing of the property.
         h.   Circular and loop streets should begin numbering at the lower
numbered intersection, with odd and even numbers following the set standard.
         i.   For circle streets, the numbering should begin at its origin and
proceed in a counterclockwise direction around the circle using a consecutive
numerical order and odd/even numbers consistent with the beginning of the
street as if the street were straight.
         j.   Parcels served by a common driveway that access two (2) parcels
should be assigned an address at the point where the access intersects a public
or private street or named common driveway. Each property shall be assigned a
different address. If the city issues multiple addresses to a parcel pursuant
to this section, the city may also require that the common driveway be named in
the same manner as private streets.
         k.   Fractional addresses (56981/2 Happy Trail Street) and hyphenated
address numbers (632-58 Kennedy) shall not be used.
         l.   Parcels with multiple structures will be addressed on a case by
case basis.
      3.   Waterfront:
         a.   A shoreline distance based system may be used by the emergency
service agencies to assign numerical points to facilitate emergency responses.
These marine response identification numbers shall not be used as addresses
except for those parcels that do not have any access other than by water.
         b.   Marine response identification numbers should be based on a
shoreline distance measurement. Starting points shall be established at a
readily identified point on the water body and numbered consecutively. Odd and
even numbers may occur along the same shore.
   C.   Street Naming Standards:
      1.   It is hereby established that the following rules and regulations
for the naming of streets shall apply. All official street names shall be
assembled in the Bonner County road name list. Additions and amendments to the
list shall be made by the administrator. All new street names or changes to
names shall be established in accordance with the standards and procedures
hereinafter set forth. If possible, surnames should not be used.
      2.   The following standards shall be used in determining and approving
street names:
         a.   All proposed street names shall be submitted to the administrator
for review and approval.
         b.   Street names should be easy to communicate (e.g., across
electronic communication devices) and shall not be offensive to the standards
of good taste.
         c.   There shall be no duplication of names by sound or spelling
(example: Briar Street, Brier Street).
         d.   Variations of the same name with a different street designation
shall be prohibited within the first word of the two (2) word title or in the
street extension (example: Pine Street, Pine Drive, White Pine Street, White
Lilly Lane).
         e.   When a proposed street is in general alignment with an existing
street, and the proposed street is or planned to be a continuation of the
existing street, the existing name and designation should be maintained.
         f.   Where a proposed street connects, or aligns with, two (2)
different streets each having different names, the administrator shall decide
the name to be used, giving consideration to the length, classification, period
of usage and number of residents affected.
         g.   Both "L" shaped and "T" shaped streets should carry the same name
if either leg is one hundred feet (100') or less in length. "L" shaped and "T"
shaped streets over one hundred feet (100') in length each should carry a
different name on each leg of the "L" or the "T". This determination shall be
made on a case by case basis.
         h.   In general, street names should consist of no more than three (3)
words or contain over sixteen (16) letters in length including spaces, unless
otherwise approved by the administrator. The street direction (N, S, E, W) and
designation (e.g., street, lane, court, etc.) is not included. All names should
conform to this limitation except where existing names are to be continued due
to alignments.
         i.   There shall be no duplication of existing names. The city will
recognize Bonner County as the repository for the official list of street names
for the city.
         j.   No street shall have more than one name.
         k.   No street name shall contain the words north, south, east, or
west, or any combination thereof, within the street name except for use as a
prefix to names of streets crossing either U.S. 2 or SR 57.
   D.   New Streets Or Existing Unnamed Streets:
      1.   Any new street to be established within the city, public or private,
or any existing unnamed street, public or private, shall require a street name
approved by the administrator.
      2.   In the case of plats, approved street names shall be specified on
the final plat map.
   E.   Official Designation Of Existing Street Names: With the adoption of
this chapter, all streets named as a result of the city mapping and rural
addressing project for enhanced 911 shall be designated as the official street
names.
   F.   Renaming Streets:
      1.   Renaming Of Existing Duplicated Street Names: Where duplicate names
exist, streets should be renamed by the administrator to eliminate the
duplication. The administrator shall decide which streets shall be renamed
using the following criteria:
         a.   When the street was originally named.
         b.   The number of improved properties served by the street.
         c.   Other factors as deemed appropriate by the administrator.
         d.   When a street name within the incorporated area of the city is
duplicated by a street name within the county, the county shall work with the
city to decide which street shall be renamed.
      2.   Renaming Other Streets: In cases where property owners request to
change the name of a street which has an existing city approved name, the
property owners may petition the city. Property owner initiated requests under
this section shall require seventy five percent (75%) approval of property
owners abutting the street and the payment of an applicable fee and any other
costs incurred. Street names shall not be changed more frequently than once
every five (5) years.
   G.   Signage:
      1.   Physical Addresses: Physical address numbers shall be clearly
readable from the streetway, and shall contrast with background. If a structure
is more than seventy five feet (75') from the street, or is otherwise not
clearly visible from the street, its address shall be posted at the
intersection of its access street and public or private street. The address
sign should be no less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') above
the ground and mounted on support structure not exceeding the standards listed
in section 8 of the "Street Standards Manual" (title 2, BCRC) published by the
Bonner County public works department. The view of the address from the street
must be unobstructed and maintained. All primary letters, numbers and symbols
should be a minimum of three and one-half inches (31/2") in height, with a one-
half inch (1/2") stroke, and should contrast with the background color. The
city shall not be liable for any damage to the address sign and support
structure. The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by the
installation of the address sign and support structure.
      2.   Marine Response Identification Numbers:
         a.   Where a marine response identification number is used as an
address for a parcel, the number should be posted on a pier, dock or other
waterfront appurtenance, no less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet
(6') above the ground or high water line. The sign must be clearly readable to
emergency providers arriving by boat.
         b.   In cases where the marine response identification number is not
used as an address (where street access is available and a street address has
been issued), the marine response identification number should be posted in
accordance with the policies of the emergency service providers.
   H.   Street Sign Standards:
      1.   General: Street signs shall be placed in accordance with subsection
H2 of this section to be clearly visible at intersections. All primary letters,
numbers, and symbols shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height, with a
one-half inch (1/2") stroke, and shall be reflectorized and contrasting with
the background color of the sign in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). Specifically, public street signs shall be
green with white lettering. Private street signs shall be blue with white
letters. All public and private street signs shall be constructed and installed
to the standards of the city. Signs shall be installed within one hundred
twenty (120) days of notice of approval of the street name or before any
construction starts on any structure accessed by that street, whichever is
later.
      2.   Installation Standards: Proper positioning of signs is essential to
obtain maximum safety, efficiency and observance. Signs should be installed in
accord with the corresponding public and private streets standards manual
adopted by the city along with standards listed within the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). (Ord. 523, 6-1-2009)
7-3-5: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Enforcement:
      1.   Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Erect or install a street name sign not in accordance with this
chapter.
         b.   Remove, alter, change, or deface a street name sign or address
identification erected or installed as provided herein.
         c.   Place or post addresses not approved by this chapter.
      2.   Penalty: Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty and enforcement as
follows:
The owner, or other person, who may be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, who has been notified of the violation or failure
to comply, fails to comply and cure the violation within the time provided in
the notice, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. However, the city's
prosecuting attorney may elect to refrain from initiating criminal prosecution
on the violation or failure to comply if the violator brings the property into
compliance and pays to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
the complaint of such violation a civil assessment in the amount set forth in
section
1-4-5 of this code.
If there is not compliance and payment of the applicable penalties as set forth
above, the offense shall be punishable as provided in the general penalty
provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Administrative Procedures: The city council may, by resolution, adopt
administrative procedures, create fee schedules, etc., to facilitate
implementation of the purpose and intent of this chapter.
      1.   Amendments: The city council may amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this chapter in the manner prescribed by Idaho
Code. A proposed amendment, supplement or repeal may be originated by the city
council, administrator or by petition. All proposals not originating with the
administrator shall be referred to him/her for a report thereon before any
action is taken on the proposal by the city council.
      2.   Controversial Or Disputed Street Names: The administrator shall have
the discretion to refer any disputed street name, addressing issues or
controversial street name changes to the city council for approval or
resolution.
      3.   Appeals: Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this
chapter may be filed by any affected person. Such appeals shall be filed within
a reasonable time of the action being appealed, not to exceed thirty (30) days,
by filing with the administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of
the appeal. The administrator shall schedule a meeting with the council to hear
the appeal and shall provide written notice to the affected persons of the time
and place of the meeting. The affected persons and the administrator shall be
provided an opportunity to present the relevant issues to the board at that
meeting. The council's decision shall be final, and further recourse for the
affected persons shall be to the courts as provided by law.
      4.   Appeal Not Granted For Special Privilege Or Exception: An
administrative appeal shall not be granted if it would function as a grant of
special privilege or to provide an exception to the regulations contained
within this code.
(Ord. 523, 6-1-2009; amd. Ord. 549, 7-16-2012; Ord. 631, 9-5-2023)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
7-4-1: General
7-4-2: Permit Process
7-4-3: Violation And Penalty
7-4-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Hours: The use of all public parks and recreation areas within the city
limits is prohibited without a permit from sunset to sunrise.
   B.   Park Closure: The mayor, or a duly authorized representative, may close
a park area or recreation facility at any time there is an apparent danger to
the persons using the property itself, or for any cause which would provide for
the safety and protection of the public. Remaining in an area closed by the
mayor or authorized representative is prohibited.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the
operation of city owned or operated vehicles or personnel while engaged in
official city business.
   D.   Overnight Camping: Overnight camping is prohibited except when
necessary for overnight security at multiday events.
   E.   Open Fires: Open fires are prohibited without a permit. No permit shall
be issued without a fire permit from the fire department.
   F.   Amplified Sound: Amplified sound, whether for speech, music, or
otherwise, is prohibited without first obtaining a city permit.
   G.   Model Airplanes, Boats, Cars Or Model Rockets: The operation of motor
driven airplanes, boats, cars or model rockets is prohibited on park property
without first obtaining a city permit.
   H.   Dumping: Dumping rocks, soil, grass clippings, branches, leaves,
equipment, vehicles, furniture, or any other item or material is prohibited.
   I.   Litter, Rubbish And Glass Containers: Carrying onto any park property
any garbage, trash or refuse is prohibited. Trash generated in the park must be
deposited in provided trash receptacles or carried off the park property. Glass
containers are prohibited.
   J.   Flora And Turf: Removing or injuring any form of plant life on park
property, including the removal of wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand and
gravel is prohibited except by a duly authorized city employee or authorized
contractor in the performance of their duties.
   K.   Animals: With the exception of service animals, dogs and cats are
prohibited on park property unless kept on a leash at all times and under full
control of the owner. The removal of feces of animals that defecate on park
property is required of the owner or custodian of said animal and such owner or
custodian shall have the means to do so in their possession. All pets may be
prohibited from parks for the duration of a permitted event. Livestock are not
allowed on park property without a permit. No animal shall be killed, harmed,
or removed from any park without government authority.
   L.   Motor Vehicles And Parking: Motor vehicles shall not be operated or
parked except on designated roadway or within designated markings without a
city permit.
   M.   Roller Skates And Skateboards: Except for the skatepark, roller skates,
skateboards and other similar items are prohibited from the parks unless a
permitted event specifically permits the use of such items. Motor vehicles are
prohibited in all parks except as necessary to set up a permitted event.
   N.   Alcoholic Beverages: Alcoholic beverages are prohibited within parks
except as may be authorized during an event after obtaining a city permit.
   O.   Fireworks: The possession or firing of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes
or other fireworks on park property is prohibited. (See title 4, chapter 3 of
this code.) This subsection shall not apply to professional displays by
companies licensed by the state of Idaho in conjunction with a city permitted
event. (Ord. 547, 5-21-2012)
   P.   Firearms And Weapons: Discharging any firearm, air gun, slingshot, or
bow and arrow is prohibited on park property without a city permit. (Ord. 571,
3-2-2015)
   Q.   Interference: No person shall use, attempt to use, or interfere with
the use of any facility which is reserved for another person or group holding a
permit issued by the city.
   R.   Damage To Park Property: Persons causing damage or committing
vandalism, or parents of such persons under the age of eighteen (18), will be
held financially responsible for the full amount of damages. (Ord. 547, 5-21-
2012)
7-4-2: PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Use Of Parks: The city's park areas may be made available for the use
of persons and groups subject to the issuance of a permit and the payment of
fees. Use of any park for preadvertised assemblies may not be made without the
issuance of a permit. All applications for use of city parks shall be signed by
an adult twenty one (21) years of age or over who shall be responsible for
compliance with the terms of the permit.
   B.   Application For Use:
      1.   The mayor shall reserve the right to grant or deny all applications
for the use of parks within the city. This authority is hereby delegated to the
city clerk and/or chief of police.
      2.   Requests for use shall be made a minimum of fourteen (14) days and a
maximum of six (6) months prior to the date of requested use. Exception:
Applications that will include a separate alcoholic beverage catering permit
for use in a park must be made in person a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to
the event.
      3.   The application for a permit shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
         a.   Name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization(s), and name
of the person in charge of the proposed activity;
         b.   Address and telephone number of applicant(s);
         c.   Park being applied for and the area involved;
         d.   Starting time of the proposed activity;
         e.   Finish time of the proposed activity;
         f.   Number of persons expected;
         g.   Additional city personnel or items requested, such as barricades;
         h.   Nature of the proposed activity or activities, including
equipment and vehicles to be brought into the park, duration and nature of the
use of any amplified sound whether speech, music, or otherwise;
         i.   Fees charged and monies collected;
         j.   Individual(s) who will receive monies collected and purpose for
money;
         k.   Notice of requirement of certificate of co-insurance for public
liability, in the form of attachment to application, if required.
   C.   Liability: All persons to whom a use permit is granted must agree in
writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all
liability for injury to persons or property occurring as the result of the
activity sponsored by permittee, and said persons shall be liable to the city
for any and all damages to parks, equipment and buildings owned or controlled
by the city which result from the activity or permittee or is caused by any
participant in said activity. A person exercising any of the privileges
authorized by this policy does so at his own risk without liability on the part
of the city for any injury to persons or property resulting therefrom.
When an association or organization which carries public liability insurance
requests the use of city facilities, or when the city is involved with
scheduling and/or coordinating their activities, a certificate of co-insurance
naming the city as an additional insured must be filed with the city five (5)
days prior to the first day of use of facilities involved. The city may require
proof of liability insurance with limit of bodily injury and property damage of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and a certificate of co-
insurance for any group when it is determined that the planned activity is
judged to be other than a low risk activity.
   D.   Cleanup: The permittee is responsible to ensure all trash is picked up
and placed in the appropriate trash containers and that the park is left neat
and orderly. Any work performed by city crew to clean up after the permitted
use will be billed to the permittee.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit: Permit may be revoked if any terms or conditions
of the permit are violated by the permittee or any agent or employee of the
permittee.
   F.   Appeal Process: An applicant may appeal the decision of a city
representative regarding park use permits to the city council by contacting the
city clerk. (Ord. 547, 5-21-2012)
7-4-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall
be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 547, 5-21-2012)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Utility Services User Application
8-1-3: Utility Service Charges Payment Policy
8-1-4: Delinquent Utility Service Charges Collection Policy
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
BACKFLOW: Any flow, actual or potential, intentional or otherwise, of any
liquid, gas or substance from a customer service back into the city water
system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION: The elimination of any backflow through the use of a
backflow prevention assembly.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: Any device approved by the purveyor that will
eliminate backflow into the city water system.
BASE UNIT: A single-family residence, apartment or commercial unit.
BASE UNIT CHARGE: The monthly amount charged for sewer service for each base
unit, and shall be as prescribed by the city council and specified in the rate
schedule.
CITY: The municipal corporation known as the city of Priest River, or the city
council of the city of Priest River, or the staff of the city of Priest River.
The exact meaning shall depend upon the context used.
CITY LIMITS: The limits of the incorporated city of Priest River.
CITY SEWER SYSTEM: The sewer system, governed and administered by the city, the
purpose of which is the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage. The city sewer system includes all collection, transportation,
treatment and disposal facilities.
CITY WATER SYSTEM: The water system of the city of Priest River, governed and
administered by the city, intended or used for fire protection, human
consumption or other domestic or nondomestic purposes for the citizens of the
city and areas under the jurisdiction of the city. The city water system
includes all source, treatment, storage, transmission and distribution
facilities.
CONTAMINATION: The introduction into, or the presence of, in the city water
system any liquid, gas or substance that, when present in the city water system
above an acceptable level (as determined by the DEQ), may adversely affect the
health of the water consumer and/or the aesthetic qualities of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement connecting the city water system,
directly or indirectly, with anything capable of causing contamination of the
city water system as a result of a backflow.
CUSTOMER: An owner who has been granted utility services, or any portion
thereof, by completing an application for utility services.
CUSTOMER SERVICE: A physical connection furnishing water between the city water
system and a customer's water system.
DELINQUENT NOTICE: A notice sent by the city to a delinquent customer informing
them that they are delinquent on payment of utility service charges. Such
notice shall be contained in the regular billing of utility service charges
mailed to the customer. The delinquent notice shall contain information as to
the amount of utility service charges due and payable, and a notice that in
fifteen (15) days, a twenty four (24) hour notice shall be issued. Such
delinquent notice shall be mailed to the customer's last known address by
regular mail, and its receipt shall be presumed.
DEQ: The Idaho department of health and welfare, department of environmental
quality.
MULTI-UNIT: A single parcel with more than one residential or commercial
occupancy unit.
OWNER: The legal owner of record, or the legal representative of the legal
owner of record, of a particular real property.
PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEM: Any water system or sewer system, or part thereof,
constructed within city rights of way, or upon city property, or property under
the jurisdiction of the city, intended to be connected to a city water system
or city sewer system, the purpose of which is to procure, treat, transport,
store, deliver or measure water for the city water system, or to collect,
transport, treat, measure or dispose of wastewater, or wastewater treatment
byproducts, for the city sewer system.
RATE SCHEDULE: The current resolution, passed by the city council, specifying
the schedule of water and sewer connection fees, and other charges and fees,
charged by the city.
SEWER SYSTEM: The network of piping, manholes, cleanouts, pumping stations and
other facilities and appurtenances used to construct, in city rights of way and
easements, a system, the purpose of which is to provide for the collection and
transportation of sanitary sewage to a wastewater treatment facility. A sewer
system shall, at least at one point, be connected to the existing city sewer
system.
TWENTY FOUR HOUR NOTICE: A notice hand delivered to a delinquent customer
notifying the delinquent customer of the city's intention to discontinue water
service, as a means of enforcement of payment of utility service charges, in
twenty four (24) hours. Such notice shall be delivered no less than twenty four
(24) hours before the city effects discontinuation. Such notice shall be posted
at the delinquent customer's service address, and shall contain the date and
time of water service discontinuation, the current and past due utility service
charges, and the terms and cost of water service recontinuation.
UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES: Any and all charges billed by the city for utility
services and shall include all fees, fines, remediation charges, utility
services discontinuation and recontinuation charges and other penalties or
charges legally assessed by the city or by a county, state or federal court in
accordance with the provisions of this code.
UTILITY SERVICES: All water, sewer, refuse collection and related services, or
any portion thereof, provided by, or under the authority of, the city.
WATER SYSTEM: The network of piping, water service lines and meters, valves,
fire hydrants, fittings, pumps, storage facilities and appurtenances used to
construct, in city rights of way and easements, a system, the purpose of which
is to provide for the delivery of potable and fire protection water. A water
system shall, at least at one point, be connected to the existing city water
system. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-1-2: UTILITY SERVICES USER APPLICATION:
   A.   All applications for utility services shall be made by and in the name
of the owner, and shall be made by completing an application for utility
services provided by the city.
   B.   Owners of properties presently being supplied with utility services
under a name other than that of the owner shall complete and submit an
application for utility services in the name of the owner, in accordance with
subsection A of this section, within thirty (30) days of official notification
to do so by the city. Failure of an owner to comply with this section shall
result in discontinuation of utility services.
   C.   The owner of any property being supplied utility services by the city
shall be held legally responsible for payment for all current and past due
utility service charges, and for any and all costs incurred by the city for
collection of these utility service charges.
   D.   All requests for discontinuation of utility services shall be made by
the owner, and shall be made by completing a request for discontinuation of
utility services.
   E.   No applications for utility services shall be approved by the city for
any property that has an unpaid utility service charges balance. (Ord. 482, 6-
5-2006)
8-1-3: UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES PAYMENT POLICY:
   A.   It is the policy of the city that all utility service charges are due
and payable within fifteen (15) days of billing. Any utility service charges
not paid in full by the date due shall be considered delinquent, and shall be
subject to collection in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord.
532, 5-3-2010)
   B.   Any utility service charges, or portion thereof, that is disputed by
the customer must be done so in writing to the city clerk. If the city clerk
cannot resolve the dispute, it shall be presented to the city council for
resolution at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. The decision
of the city council shall be final. Any utility service charges, or portion
thereof, that is not in dispute by the customer shall be paid in full by the
date due, or shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to collection
in accordance with the provisions of this code. For the purposes of this code,
the monthly minimum water service charge, water meter demand charge, and sewer
base unit charge shall be considered not to be in dispute. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006;
amd. Ord. 532, 5-3-2010)
8-1-4: DELINQUENT UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES COLLECTION POLICY:
   A.   Lien Conditions:
      1.   Recovery By City:
         a.   The city shall have a lien upon any premises served with utility
services to the extent of such delinquent utility service charges incurred
after the effective date hereof, and such delinquent utility service charges
shall be subject to recovery in the manners set forth in this chapter.
         b.   The liens referred to in this chapter are preferred to any lien,
mortgage or other encumbrance which may have attached subsequent to the time
utility services were furnished; also, to any lien, mortgage or other
encumbrance of which the city had no notice, and which was unrecorded at the
time utility services were furnished.
      2.   Lien Foreclosure Authority: It shall be the duty of the city
attorney, at the direction of the city council, to foreclose upon such liens as
described in this chapter, and to bring appropriate actions as necessary for
the collection thereof.
   B.   Enforcement Of Payment Policy:
      1.   It is declared the policy of the city that enforcement of payment of
delinquent utility service charges shall be by discontinuation of water
service, or by foreclosure of a lien as specified in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
      2.   Any utility service charges not paid within the time frame as
established in subsection
8-1-3A of this chapter shall be declared delinquent, whereupon the city clerk
shall provide the delinquent customer with a delinquent notice. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006; amd. Ord. 532, 5-3-2010)
      3.   A delinquent customer shall have fifteen (15) days from the time of
issuance of a delinquent notice in which to file a request for a hearing before
the city council in order to show cause why their water service should not be
discontinued. Such requests for hearings shall be made in writing by the
customer and addressed to the city clerk. The city clerk shall schedule a
hearing at a time and date convenient for the city council, and shall notify
the customer of such. The city council shall receive all relevant evidence and
shall issue its decision based upon that evidence. The decision of the city
council shall be final. Until such time as the city council reaches their
decision, discontinuance of water service of the delinquent customer shall be
delayed. Delinquent customers failing to show adequate cause before the city
council shall have the next business day to pay all utility service charges
billed. Failure to pay all utility service charges billed by the end of the
next business day shall result in discontinuation of water service at eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following business day.
   C.   Twenty Four Hour Notice:
      1.   The city clerk shall cause delinquent customers to be issued a
twenty four (24) hour notice no sooner than fifteen (15) days after issuance of
a delinquent notice.
      2.   There shall be imposed upon a delinquent customer a penalty charge
if issued a twenty four (24) hour notice. Such penalty charge shall be as
specified by resolution and such charge shall be added to the customer's
utility service charges balance due.
   D.   Discontinuation Of Utility Services Authorized:
      1.   The city is authorized to discontinue water service of delinquent
customers served with a twenty four (24) hour notice twenty four (24) hours
after issuance of such notice. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
      2.   No delinquent customer shall, after having water service
discontinued in accordance with this chapter, thereafter be provided with water
service until such time as all delinquent and current utility service charges
have been paid in full. Delinquent customers whose water service has been
discontinued shall also pay a recontinuation fee. Such fee shall be as
specified by resolution, and shall be added to the customer's utility service
charges. (Ord. 532, 5-3-2010)
      3.   Delinquent customers whose water service has been discontinued shall
also pay any additional fees, if adverse conditions exist that affect the
accessibility of the curb valve or the meter valve. Such additional fees shall
be added to the customer's utility service charges. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 2
UTILITY SERVICES RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Meters Required
8-2-2: Utility Service Charges
8-2-3: Fire Hydrant And Tank Truck Filling Charges
8-2-4: Water Service Turnon/Turnoff
8-2-5: Review Of Rate Schedule
8-2-6: Utility Improvement Bond Assessments
8-2-1: WATER METERS REQUIRED:
Except for charges imposed for unmetered tank truck filling in this chapter, it
is the declared policy of the city that all service charges for water shall be
computed by a water meter, and that all water meters used for computation of
water service charges shall be supplied, owned and maintained by the city. The
penalty for failure of a customer to comply with any part of this section shall
be the immediate discontinuation of the customer's water service. (Ord. 482, 6-
5-2006)
8-2-2: UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Water Service:
      1.   There are imposed monthly water service charges upon each
residential and commercial customer receiving water service from the city. Such
water service charges shall include a monthly minimum charge, overage
consumption charge, and, for services with meters larger than one inch (1"), a
demand charge, and shall be as specified by resolution. These water service
charges shall apply to each residential and commercial water service customer
served by the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
      2.   Seventy five percent (75%) of an individual water service charge
shall apply to each unit in residential and commercial occupancies classified
as multi-unit. If a single meter serves the multi-unit occupancy, seventy five
percent (75%) of a standard minimum quantity of water will be allowed for each
unit before overage charges are imposed. (Ord. 520, 12-15-2008)
      3.   The city council may, at their discretion, grant water service rate
discounts for residential customers based on age, level of household income, or
both, or other criteria deemed appropriate. Such rate discounts shall apply to
the water base rate and shall not apply to overage consumption rates. Any such
water service rate discount shall be set by resolution. Customers whose service
connection is located outside the city limits shall not be eligible for any
such discount.
      4.   In the event that the water meter for any commercial customer, who
has been determined by the city to be a high consumption water user, cannot be
read due to inaccessibility or nonoperation of the meter, the consumption
portion of the water service charges shall be, whenever possible, an estimation
of a consumption derived from the average of the preceding twelve (12) months'
metered consumption. In instances of estimated billing, all adjustments to any
billing of estimated consumption amounts, due to an estimation greater or
smaller than the actual consumption amount as determined by a meter reading,
shall be made on the first billing following the actual water meter reading.
   B.   Sewer Service:
      1.   There is imposed a monthly sewer base unit charge upon each
residential and commercial base unit receiving sewer service from the city and
shall be as specified by resolution. This sewer base unit charge shall apply to
each residential and commercial sewer service customer.
      2.   The city council may, at their discretion, grant sewer service rate
discounts for residential customers based on age, level of household income, or
both, or other criteria deemed appropriate. Any such sewer service rate
discount shall be set by resolution. Customers whose service connection is
located outside the city limits shall not be eligible for any such discount.
      3.   Based upon an annual consumption audit, or based upon a chemical
analysis of a customer who has been determined by the city by comparison to
industry standards to produce a larger than average quantity of sewer flow, or
a sewage flow proven by chemical analysis to be of a strength or quality that
will put an unusual treatment burden on the wastewater treatment plant, shall
have their base unit charge determined by using a standard equivalent user
formula. Such base unit charges shall become effective thirty (30) days after
official notification of such charges to the customer by the city. (Ord. 482,
6-5-2006)
      4.   Seventy five percent (75%) of a base unit charge shall be charged
for each unit on residential and commercial properties classified as multi-
unit. For commercial properties subject to sewer overage charges, seventy five
percent (75%) of a standard minimum quantity of sewage will be allowed for each
unit before overage charges are imposed. (Ord. 520, 12-15-2008)
      5.   Multi-unit residential and commercial properties shall not have
their base unit charge determined under the large quantity sewer flow generator
provisions as described in subsection B3 of this section.
   C.   Users Outside City Limits Surcharge: There is imposed a surcharge to
the water service charges and sewer base unit charges of customers located
outside the city limits and shall be as specified by resolution. Such surcharge
may, at the discretion of the city council, be waived by the city council for
individual customers. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
   D.   Theft Of Utility Services: The definition and punishment for theft of
utility services shall be as defined and stated in chapter 24 of title 18 of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 531, 4-19-2010)
8-2-3: FIRE HYDRANT AND TANK TRUCK FILLING CHARGES:
   A.   No person or company shall take city water from any city fire hydrant
without first making application for permission to do so with the city. The
city public works department shall make the determination of fire hydrants
available for usage. Permission to take water from city fire hydrants is hereby
declared surplus usage and is revocable at any time deemed necessary by the
city council.
   B.   No person or company shall connect to a city fire hydrant in such a way
as to pose a threat of backflow into the city water system. All connections to
city fire hydrants shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention method
in compliance with chapter 6 of this title.
   C.   There is imposed a charge for rental and use of a city fire hydrant
meter. The rental charge and the consumption charge shall be as specified by
resolution. There is also imposed a refundable fire hydrant and meter damage
deposit. Such deposit shall be refunded in full upon the return of the fire
hydrant meter in good condition, inspection of the fire hydrant used, for
damage, and upon payment in full of all charges incurred including any damages
to the fire hydrant and meter. Such fire hydrant and meter damage deposit shall
be as specified by resolution. The fire hydrant meter consumption charge shall
be subject to the surcharge imposed in this chapter for usage of fire hydrants
located outside the city limits or for hydrant water used outside the city
limits.
   D.   There is imposed a charge for nonmetered tank truck filling from a city
fire hydrant and shall be as specified by resolution. Nonmetered tank truck
filling will be allowed only for tank trucks of a proven capacity. A tank load
count shall be kept on a tank load tally card supplied by the city. There is
also imposed a refundable fire hydrant damage deposit. Such deposit shall be
refunded in full upon inspection of the fire hydrant used and payment in full
for all water service charges, including fire hydrant damages, incurred. Such
fire hydrant damage deposit shall be as specified in the rate schedule. The
nonmetered tank truck filling charge shall be subject to the surcharge imposed
in this chapter for usage of fire hydrants located outside the city limits or
for hydrant water used outside the city limits.
   E.   The charges and conditions imposed in this section shall not apply to
authorized fire department personnel conducting fire department business.
Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-2-4: WATER SERVICE TURNON/TURNOFF:
There is imposed a charge for water service turnoff/turnon under the following
specific conditions:
   A.   Emergency Water Service Turnoff/Turnon: There shall be no charge for
one emergency water service turnoff/turnon per calendar year. There is imposed
a charge for all other emergency water service turnoff/turnon per calendar year
and shall be as specified by resolution.
   B.   Seasonal Or Short Term Nonemergency Water Service Turnoff/Turnon: There
is imposed a charge for all seasonal or short term nonemergency water service
turnoff/turnon and shall be as specified by resolution. All such requests for
seasonal or short term nonemergency water service turnoff and turnon shall be
made in writing by the owner. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-2-5: REVIEW OF RATE SCHEDULE:
It shall be the responsibility of the city council to annually review the
current rate schedule to determine the need for any rate adjustments for the
next fiscal year. Such reviews shall be performed during the second regular
city council meeting in July. Adjustments to the rate schedule shall be made by
resolution and shall become effective on October 1 of the year in which the
resolution was passed, or at any time deemed appropriate by the city council.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-2-6: UTILITY IMPROVEMENT BOND ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Payments for all legally enacted water and/or sewer utility improvement
bonds shall be assessed in accordance with the rate schedule and shall be
charged against all open water and/or sewer utility accounts without regard as
to whether the account is active or inactive. Any utility account that has been
closed at the request of the property owner and reopened in the name of the
same property owner will be assessed for all water and/or sewer utility bond
payments accrued from the date of closing.
   B.   In accordance with USDA loan agreements and conditions, the city shall
not waive utility improvement bond assessments.
   C.   Utility improvement bond assessments are deemed to be a utility service
charge payable in accordance with section
8-1-3 of this title. Delinquent utility improvement bond assessment payments
shall be handled in accordance with section
8-1-4 of this title. (Ord. 536, 7-6-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
CHAPTER 3
WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND CONDITIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Water And Sewer Service Connection Applications
8-3-2: Water And Sewer Connection Fees
8-3-3: Responsibility Provisions
8-3-4: Change Of Use
8-3-1: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION APPLICATIONS:
All applications for water and sewer service connections shall be made by the
legal owner of record, or the legal representative of the legal owner of record
(applicant), of the property to be served by the City with a water and sewer
service connection. All applications shall be made on an application for water
and sewer service connection form provided by the City. Such applications may
be presented to the City Council for approval, approval with conditions, or
denial. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-3-2: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
The City shall charge a fee for connection to the City water and sewer systems:
   A.   Basis Of Charges: Water connection fees are based on the water meter
size and are as specified by resolution in the rate schedule. Sewer connection
fees are based on an equivalent residence table adopted by the City Council.
Such table and sewer connection fee shall be specified by resolution in the
rate schedule.
   B.   Transfer Of Service Prohibited: The issuance of water and sewer
connections is the right of the City and the transfer of ownership of a water
and sewer connection to any property, other than to the property it was issued
to, is prohibited. Any such transfer shall become void upon transfer and any
fees paid shall not be refunded.
   C.   Service To Only One Lot: Water and sewer connection fees are based on
one residential or commercial unit per lot. For each additional residential or
commercial unit on a lot serviced by one water and/or sewer connection, a full
water and/or sewer connection fee shall be paid.
   D.   Multiple Connections: For one lot serviced by multiple water and sewer
connections, the fee for each connection shall be as described in the rate
schedule.
   E.   Utility Lines To Front On Property: Water and sewer connection fees are
based on City water and sewer lines fronting an applicant's property. In
instances where the City water and sewer does not front the applicant's
property, and as a condition for City Council approval of an applicant's
request for water and sewer service connection to the City water and sewer main
line, the City water and sewer main lines shall be extended to a point fronting
the applicant's property in a method as described herein.
   F.   Frontage Determination: The determination of whether a City water or
sewer main line fronts an applicant's property shall be made by the City by
extending a point from a property corner bordering a City right-of-way and
closest to a City water or sewer main line that is perpendicular to the
horizontal run of the water or sewer main line. If the end of the City water or
sewer main line lies a minimum of fifteen feet (15') past this extended point,
the City water or sewer main line is considered to front the applicant's
property.
   G.   Impact Mitigation Charges:
      1.   The City shall impose an impact mitigation charge upon any new water
and/or sewer service connection upon determination by the City that the water
and/or sewer connection will have a detrimental effect upon either the water
pressure or flow of the water customers of the contiguous water system or the
adequate sewer flow of the sewer customers of the contiguous sewer system. Such
impact mitigation fee shall be determined by the City and shall be based upon
the estimated cost of mitigating any such proven detrimental effects to the
contiguous water and/or sewer system that are attributable to the new
connection. In areas where future water and/or sewer connections are possible,
such impact mitigation fees shall be determined on a pro rata basis based upon
the estimated number of possible future water and/or sewer connections.
      2.   The City shall impose an impact mitigation charge upon any new water
and/or sewer service connection upon determination by the City that the water
and/or sewer connection will have a detrimental effect on the City's ability to
properly operate and maintain the City water and/or sewer system in its
entirety. Such impact mitigation fee shall be determined by the City and shall
be based upon the estimated cost of mitigating any such detrimental effect on
City's ability to properly operate and maintain the City water and/or sewer
system in its entirety.
   H.   Fee Payments: All water and sewer connection fees, and impact
mitigation charges shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a
building permit for the applicable lot. The collection of water and/or sewer
fees prior to the issuance of a building permit, hereinafter referred to as
prepaid connection fees, shall be discouraged by the City Council but may be
collected upon exception granted by the City Council. Under no circumstances
shall impact mitigation charges be collected prior to the issuance of a
building permit. If any water and/or sewer connection is deemed an abandoned
connection, as defined in this chapter, said connection shall be only
reinstated after compliance with section
8-3-1 of this chapter and payment of the required connection fee.
   I.   Fire Service Connections: All commercial occupancies required to
provide fire protection systems shall be required to install a separate fire
service connection to the City water system. Such fire service connection shall
be sized according to required fire flow and shall be installed in accordance
with chapter 7, "Water And Sewer System Construction Standards", of this title
and shall provide for backflow prevention in accordance with chapter 6,
"Backflow Prevention And Cross Connection Control", of this title. All fire
service connections, two inches (2") or larger in size, shall be equipped with
fire flow detector assemblies. The connection fee for a fire service connection
shall be specified by resolution in the rate schedule.
   J.   Abandoned Connection: All water and/or sewer connections that have been
abandoned or have not been used for thirty six (36) consecutive months or that
for any reason have become useless for further service shall be deemed an
abandoned connection. Any abandoned connection shall be disconnected at the
main by the property owner or the Public Works Department, and all pipe and
appurtenances removed shall be the property of the City. (Ord. 603, 4-15-2019)
8-3-3: RESPONSIBILITY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Water And Sewer Main Line Extensions:
      1.   All water and sewer main line extensions required to serve any new
subdivision (as defined in the existing City Subdivision Ordinance) with water
and sewer service shall be done in compliance with the current City Subdivision
Ordinance.
      2.   Water and sewer main line extensions for water or sewer service
connection applicants, whose property is located in a previously platted
subdivision within the City limits, shall be made at the expense of the City;
providing that the subdivision was under the jurisdiction of the City at the
time the plat was recorded; and providing that the subdivision was required to
install water and sewer main lines as a condition to platting the subdivision
under the then existing Subdivision Ordinance; and providing the City Council
approves the applicant's request for water and sewer service connection; and
providing that the applicant's property was not created in a manner that could
be classified as a subdivision as defined in the existing City Subdivision
Ordinance, in which instances responsibility for extension of City water and
sewer main line shall be done in compliance with the current City Subdivision
Ordinance.
      3.   For water and sewer service connection applicants whose property is
not located in a previously platted subdivision, and which requires an
extension of the City water and sewer main lines to service the property, the
responsibility for such extensions in a method as described herein shall be the
applicant's.
   B.   Connections And Maintenance:
      1.   The City may, upon payment of a water service installation fee,
provide all materials and labor to effect a water service connection to the
applicant's closest property or easement line, providing the applicant's
property meets the conditions described herein. This connection shall include
the City water main tap, piping, meter and meter box, and for all trenching,
backfilling and compaction required to effect the installation; except that it
shall not include any costs associated with asphalt pavement repair and
replacement, which shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be
charged in addition to the water service installation fee upon completion of
the pavement repair. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
      2.   It is the responsibility of the City to maintain and repair the
water service line from the City main water line to the property line dividing
the applicant's property, or easement, and the City right-of-way. It is also
the responsibility of the City to maintain and repair the City water meter,
regardless of the location of the water meter, and the associated meter setting
appurtenances. It shall not be the responsibility of the City to maintain any
water service line that lies upon or within private property. (Ord. 538, 1-3-
2011)
      3.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to furnish all materials
and labor to extend a sewer service lateral line from the City sewer main line
to the applicant's property or easement line, except that the City may furnish
the sewer tapping saddle. Such service line shall also include the installation
of a sewer backflow device if it is determined that the lowest plumbing fixture
drain in the dwelling is lower than the manhole rim elevation of the nearest
downstream or upstream manhole serving the dwelling. The cost of such
installation shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
      4.   It shall also be the responsibility of the owner to maintain the
sewer service lateral line from the City sewer main line to the owner's
property line, or easement line, dividing the owner's property, or easement,
and the City right-of-way, and responsibility for maintenance shall include the
tap into the City sewer main line. When existing sewer lateral lines are
retrofitted with a sewer backflow device, the City shall supply the device and
associated parts and shall reimburse the property owner an amount specified by
the Council in the rate resolution for the installation of such device. (Ord.
509, 3-17-2008)
      5.   All water and sewer service connections shall be made in compliance
with sections
8-7-3 and
8-7-4 of this title.
   C.   Water And Sewer Connection Size: It shall be the responsibility of the
City to determine the required size of the water and sewer service connections
and shall be based on flow requirements as submitted by the applicant. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
8-3-4: CHANGE OF USE:
Total water and sewer service connection fees are determined utilizing: a) the
equivalent residential unit (ERU) table and b) the current water and sewer
connection fee table, both of which are contained in the current rate
resolution. If a change of use is requested that would materially increase the
number of ERUs determined under a previous use, the City shall recalculate the
ERUs and determine whether additional water and/or sewer connection fees are
applicable. The property owner will be given credit for any ERU determination
used in the original connection fee determination. Any additional connection
fees shall be based upon the water and/or sewer connection fee schedule in
effect at the time of the ERU redetermination. In no instance shall the City
rebate any connection fees paid by any owner of the property. (Ord. 524, 6-1-
2009)
CHAPTER 4
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Water Use Authority
8-4-2: Right Of Entry
8-4-3: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-4-1: WATER USE AUTHORITY:
   A.   In the interest of public health and safety, the city council is
authorized to regulate the water usage drawn from the city water system and may
pass such ordinances, resolutions and regulations as it may deem necessary to
protect the city water supply and control water usage.
   B.   Notices of any such ordinances, resolutions and regulations pertaining
to the protection and control of city water shall be given by publication in
the official newspaper of the city, and such ordinances, resolutions and
regulations shall become effective on the date of such publication and notice.
   C.   At any time deemed necessary by the city council, water usage not
necessary for potable or fire protection use may be declared surplus usage and
its discontinuance so ordered by the city council. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-4-2: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
All persons or companies receiving water from the city water system shall be
required to admit, upon reasonable notice if such notice is so requested,
properly identified city employees onto their property for purposes of water
meter reading and discontinuance of city water service. Refusal to grant entry
shall result in the immediate discontinuance of city water service. (Ord. 482,
6-5-2006)
8-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
Violations of the provisions of this section shall be considered misdemeanors:
   A.   Unauthorized Supplying Of Water: It is unlawful for any person or
company legally receiving water from the city water system at any residence or
place of business to supply water from said source to any other residence or
place of business without first obtaining the written approval of the city.
   B.   Unauthorized Taking Of City Water: It is unlawful for any person or
company to take water from the city water system without first making
application to the city.
   C.   Meter Tampering: It is unlawful for any person or company to cause to
be disconnected, circumvented, readjusted, or otherwise tampered with, any city
water meter or water meter setting equipment. For the purposes of this
subsection, any valve controlling the flow of water into the meter shall be
considered as part of the meter setting equipment. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Enforcement Policy
8-5-2: Connection To Sewer System Required
8-5-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
8-5-4: Maintenance Responsibility
8-5-5: Commercial And Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program
8-5-6: Sand And Grease Interceptors
8-5-7: Public Utility Access
8-5-8: Prohibited Discharges
8-5-9: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-5-1: ENFORCEMENT POLICY:
It is declared the policy of the city that enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter shall be by discontinuation of city water service, or by penalties
as described, or both. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-2: CONNECTION TO SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED:
Owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes located within the jurisdiction of the
city and abutting any street, alleyway or city right of way in which there is
located a public sanitary sewer of the city sewer system, are required at their
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the city sewer within ninety (90) days after official
notice by the city to do so, provided that such public sewer is within three
hundred feet (300') of the closest property line. Where sewer connections are
made as provided herein, septic tanks, cesspools and drywells and all other
private sewage disposal systems shall be physically bypassed and permanently
disconnected from sewer lines and their use permanently abandoned. Such
facilities shall be filled and compacted. A violation of this section shall be
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
Violations of the provisions of this section shall be considered misdemeanors:
   A.   Properties within the jurisdiction of the city that do not have a city
sewer located within three hundred feet (300') of their closest property line
may, with the approval of the city and the local health district, construct
such private sewage disposal systems as approved by the city and the local
health district.
   B.   Properties located within three hundred feet (300') of a city sewer and
served by a private sewage disposal system are required to connect to the city
sewer within six (6) months, except that the city council may grant a time
extension to this requirement. Such time extension shall expire when it is
determined by the city or the local health district that the private sewage
disposal system will no longer function without repairs that would require the
issuance of a permit from the local health district.
   C.   Except as provided for in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any private sewage disposal system intended for, or used for, the
disposal of sewage. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-4: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
A sewer lateral, which shall be an extension from the owner's building sewer
drain to the city sewer, including the sewer main line tap, shall be owned and
maintained by the owner of the premises upon which the building is located, and
the city shall not be responsible in any manner for its maintenance or repair.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-5: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM:
   A.   It is declared the policy of the city that commercial and industrial
sewage flow into the city sewer be controlled and monitored in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. As such, development and enforcement of a
commercial/industrial wastewater pretreatment program is a necessary means to
control sewage waste discharged into the city sewer by commercial and
industrial sewer users.
   B.   The city council shall, if deemed necessary, appoint a pretreatment
program administrator to develop and administer a commercial/industrial
wastewater pretreatment program, the purpose of which shall be the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter concerning commercial and industrial wastes.
   C.   The administrator shall have the powers and duties to: develop and
administer the program within the provisions of this chapter; make
determinations of sewage flows from commercial and industrial dischargers; make
determinations of the type of pretreatment required; require the installation
of any pretreatment equipment determined to be needed; require the periodic
testing and maintenance of pretreatment equipment; recommend to the city
council the discontinuance of water service to any customer who fails to comply
with the provisions of this chapter; and keep all appropriate records regarding
the administration of the program. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-6: SAND AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS:
   A.   Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the administrator, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   B.   Grease, oil and sand separators shall be constructed of impervious
materials and shall be designed to be capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. Separators shall be of substantial construction
and designed for the type of traffic they will be subject to; shall be
watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gastight.
   C.   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand separators shall be
maintained by the owner, at their expense, in continuously efficient operation
at all times.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. In addition,
violators shall pay for costs of remediation of damages caused by a violation
of this section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-7: PUBLIC UTILITY ACCESS:
   A.   When, in the opinion of the administrator, because of the quantity or
the chemical quality of the discharge, a customer's discharge into the city
sewer has a potential to disrupt the bacteriological functioning of the
wastewater treatment plant, or poses a potential danger to the wastewater
treatment plant, or to the plant personnel, or to the city sewer, the
administrator may require, as a provision of the program, the installation of a
monitoring manhole in the customer's sewer lateral line, to be located on the
customer's premises, downstream of the last customer inlet into their sewer
lateral line, and before the connection into the city sewer, the purpose of
which is to allow the city to monitor and sample the customer's discharge into
the city sewer.
   B.   When required in accordance with this section, a monitoring manhole
shall be installed as directed by the administrator. The customer shall be
responsible for the costs of installation of the monitoring manhole, and shall
maintain the monitoring manhole at all times so as to provide a safe entry and
exit.
   C.   When required in accordance with this section, a monitoring manhole
shall be installed in such a way as to provide access to authorized city
personnel at all times in order to effect measurements and sampling of the
customer's discharge into the city sewer.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. In addition,
violators shall pay for costs incurred by the city for installation of a
monitoring manhole as required in accordance with this section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-
2006)
8-5-8: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   Except as provided for in this chapter, no person or company shall
discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or
wastes to the city sewer:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F);
      2.   Any fat, oil, grease, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      4.   Any ashes, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment facility;
      5.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0,
or having any corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater treatment facility;
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility;
      7.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the wastewater treatment facility;
      8.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      9.   Any milk product wastes;
      10.   Any liquid or solid that may cause, because of its chemical
composition, strength, toxicity, or volume, the wastewater treatment facility
to violate the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
discharge permit conditions or limitations, or that may affect the city's
ultimate disposal of sewage waste;
      11.   Any solid or liquid that would have an adverse effect on the city
sewer, or any portion thereof.
   B.   All commercial and industrial users of the city sewer shall be subject
to pretreatment inspection and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of
the commercial/industrial wastewater pretreatment monitoring program.
   C.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. In addition,
violators shall pay all costs incurred by the city for investigations, testing,
fines or penalties paid by the city to other governmental agencies or private
parties due to a violation of this section, and for the costs of remedial
actions taken by and for the city for damages caused by a violation of this
section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-5-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Discharge Of Stormwater And Other Unpolluted Waters To City Sewers: No
person or company shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, floor drainage,
cooling water or polluted or unpolluted industrial process waters to the city
sewer. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor. In addition,
violators shall pay for costs of remediation of damages caused by a violation
of this section.
   B.   Sewage Or Waste Deposits: It is unlawful for any person or company to
place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited, in any unsanitary manner
upon any public or private property within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, violators shall pay all costs incurred by the city for
prosecution of a violation of this subsection, and for costs of remediation of
damages caused by a violation of this subsection.
   C.   Discharging Sewage Or Polluted Waters In Natural Outlets: It is
unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A violation of this subsection
shall be a misdemeanor. In addition, violators shall pay all costs incurred by
the city for investigations, testing, fines or penalties paid by the city to
other governmental agencies or private parties due to a violation of this
subsection, and for the costs of remedial actions taken by and for the city for
damages caused by a violation of this subsection.
   D.   Tampering Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, company or
corporation, without authority from the public works supervisor, to open any
sewer manhole or interfere with or tamper with, in any manner, any sewer
manhole or city sewer. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
In addition, violators shall pay for costs of remediation of damages caused by
a violation of this subsection. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 6
BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Administration And Program
8-6-3: Rules And Regulations
8-6-4: Right Of Entry
8-6-5: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-6-6: Remedies
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to the Idaho administrative procedures act (IDAPA) 16.01.08550.06, it
is the responsibility of the city to protect the city water system from
contamination due to backflow. The purpose of this chapter is to guard the
public health and safety of the water consumer by enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-6-2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROGRAM:
   A.   The mayor shall, with the approval of the city council, appoint a cross
connection control administrator to develop and administer a backflow
prevention and cross connection control program for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   In the interest of the public health and safety, and as a means for the
city and administrator to develop and administer the backflow prevention and
cross connection control program, the "Cross Connection Control Manual -
Accepted Procedure And Practice", latest edition, as published by the cross
connection control committee, Pacific Northwest section, American Waterworks
Association, and as the same may be revised by the publishing authority, and
the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this chapter as fully as
though set forth at length in this chapter.
   C.   The administrator shall have the powers and duties to: develop and
administer the program within the guidelines of the IDAPA and the Idaho
department of environmental quality (DEQ); make determinations of the existence
of cross connections and the level of backflow protection required; require the
discontinuance of cross connections; require the installation of backflow
prevention assemblies; direct the discontinuance of water service to any
customer who fails to comply with this chapter; require the periodic testing
and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies; keep all appropriate records
regarding the administration of the program; and, recommend to the city council
any changes required to the program or this chapter. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-6-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   City Authority: The city shall make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as it shall deem advisable for the implementation and enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be in
accordance with the guidelines of the DEQ.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Backflow And Cross Connection Prohibited: The installation or
maintaining of any backflow or cross connection, actual or potential, is
prohibited. Any such backflow or cross connection now existing is declared
unlawful and shall be eliminated immediately. A violation of this subsection
shall be a misdemeanor. A violator shall also be subject to immediate
discontinuance of water service.
      2.   Backflow Prevention And Cross Connection Control Required: When, in
the determination of the administrator, there exists a need for backflow
prevention and/or cross connection control, the city water supplied to any
customer shall be contingent upon the customer providing backflow prevention
and/or cross connection control in a manner approved by the administrator and
the DEQ.
      3.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Approval:
         a.   Any backflow prevention assembly required by the administrator to
be installed shall be a type approved for the specific degree of hazard it will
be used for, by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR) and shall be installed
in accordance with the manual.
         b.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested a minimum of
once a year by a tester approved by the administrator. A copy of all test
results and any repairs required shall be delivered to the administrator. All
required testing and repairs shall be done at the expense of the customer.
         c.   The customer shall have full responsibility to maintain any
required backflow prevention assembly in proper operating order. (Ord. 482, 6-
5-2006)
      4.   Fire Protection System Backflow Preventers: All commercial fire
protection systems, two inches (2") in size and larger, served by the city
shall be equipped with an approved detector double check valve backflow
prevention assembly (hereinafter "detector check assembly"). Such detector
check assembly shall be equipped with a bypass water meter that shall
accurately detect flows through the detector check assembly and such bypass
meter shall be equipped with a separate double check valve assembly. Detector
check assemblies shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the
manual. (Ord. 525, 7-20-2009)
8-6-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
All persons or companies receiving water from the city water system shall be
required to admit, upon reasonable notice if such notice be so requested, city
employees onto their property for purposes of inspecting for cross connections
and ascertaining the proper operation of backflow prevention assemblies.
Refusal to grant entry shall result in the immediate discontinuation of water
service. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-6-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Tampering: It is unlawful for any person or company to cause to be
disconnected, circumvented, readjusted or otherwise tampered with any backflow
prevention device, except for a person approved by the administrator for
testing and repairing such devices. A violation of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor. In addition, a violator shall pay all costs incurred by the city
for remediation of damages caused by a violation of this section.
   B.   Failure To Comply: For failure to comply with the terms of this
chapter, or any part thereof, the city shall have the right, in order to
protect the health and safety of the public, to take all actions necessary,
including prosecution of violations of this chapter and discontinuation of
water service to any customer. Such discontinuation shall continue until such
time as the administrator finds the customer in compliance with this chapter.
Any and all costs incurred by the city in obtaining customer compliance shall
be the responsibility of the customer and shall be reimbursed by the customer
to the city before compliance is certified and water service is restored. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
8-6-6: REMEDIES:
It is declared the policy of the city that enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter shall be by discontinuation of city water service, or by penalties
as described, or both. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 7
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Public Works Inspector
8-7-2: Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction
8-7-3: Water System Construction Standards
8-7-4: Sewer System Construction Standards
8-7-5: Public Utility Installation Bonding, Licensing And Insurance
8-7-1: PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor shall, with the approval of the city council,
appoint a public works employee as the city public works inspector.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The city public works inspector shall, under the
direction of the mayor and city council, ensure compliance of all public works
projects with all applicable codes, laws, standards and ordinances and shall
keep accurate records and maps of all public works construction, and shall
periodically review all applicable standards and ordinances to ensure
compliance with federal and state statutes. Under the direction of the mayor
and city council, the public works inspector shall have the power to take any
legal actions necessary, up to and including stopping works in progress, to
ensure compliance with all applicable codes, laws, standards and ordinances.
(Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-7-2: IDAHO STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Purpose: It is declared the policy of the city that public utility
systems be constructed and installed in a uniform manner, consistent with
accepted construction practices, for the protection of the water and sewer
system users. Toward that end, adoption of the latest edition of the Idaho
standards for public works construction, as amended by the city council, is a
necessary means of assuring consistency and uniformity of the construction and
installation of public utility systems and services within the jurisdiction of
the city.
   B.   Standards Adopted By Reference: There is adopted, for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction and installation of
public utility systems and services, those certain standards identified as the
"Idaho Standards For Public Work Construction (ISPWC)", latest edition, as
published by the Idaho standards for public works construction committee and as
amended by the city council as the same may be revised by the publishing
authority, or as amended by the city council, and the same is adopted and
incorporated as part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length
herein. One copy of the latest edition of said standards, as amended by the
city council, shall be kept on file with the city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-7-3: WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Specifications For Water System Construction:
      1.   All water systems, or part thereof, constructed and installed within
the city, shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the ISPWC as
adopted by the city council in section
8-7-2 of this chapter.
      2.   All water system construction plans shall be reviewed and approved
by the Idaho department of environmental quality prior to installation.
      3.   All materials used in the construction of a water system shall be
inspected and approved by the public works inspector prior to installation and
shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   All parts of a constructed and installed water system shall be
inspected and approved by the public works inspector and/or the engineer's
inspector prior to backfilling.
      5.   Strict compliance with all federal and state safety rules,
regulations and standards regarding trenching, traffic control and work zone
safety shall be enforced by the public works inspector. Failure to comply with
the provisions of this subsection shall result in work stoppage.
   B.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Unauthorized Connection To City Water System: It is unlawful to
connect to, or cause to be connected to, the city water system any other water
system, or part thereof, without the approval of the city.
      2.   Tampering With City Water System Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to tamper with, or cause to be tampered with, the city water system, or
any part thereof.
   C.   Violation: A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. In
addition, violators shall pay all costs incurred by the city for all remedial
actions taken by the city to repair damages caused by a violation of this
section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-7-4: SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Specifications For Sewer System Construction:
      1.   All sewer systems, or part thereof, constructed and installed within
the city, shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the ISPWC as
adopted by the city council in section
8-7-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Prior to installation, all sewer system construction plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Idaho department of environmental quality.
      3.   All materials used in the construction of a sewer system shall be
inspected and approved by the public works inspector prior to installation and
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   All parts of a constructed and installed sewer system shall be
inspected and approved by the public works inspector and/or the engineer's
inspector prior to backfilling.
      5.   Strict compliance with all federal and state safety rules,
regulations and standards regarding trenching, traffic control and work zone
safety shall be enforced by the public works inspector. Failure to comply with
the provisions of this subsection shall result in work stoppage.
   B.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Unauthorized Connections: It is unlawful to connect to, or cause to
be connected to, the city sewer system, or any other sewer system, or part
thereof, without the approval of the city.
      2.   Tampering: It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, or cause to
be tampered with, the city sewer system, or any part thereof.
   C.   Violations: A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. In
addition, violators shall pay all costs incurred by the city for all remedial
actions taken by the city to repair damages caused by a violation of this
section. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
8-7-5: PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATION BONDING, LICENSING AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond Requirements: No person, company or corporation shall be permitted
to proceed with any public utility system construction, or development of any
subdivision public utility system, before having provided to the city all
payment, performance and other bonds as set forth in the ISPWC or as directed
by the city council.
   B.   License Requirements: No person, company, or corporation shall be
permitted to proceed with any public utility system construction, or
development of any subdivision public utility system, before having provided to
the city proof of a valid Idaho public works contractor's license, as issued by
the Idaho public works contractors license board. Such license shall cover the
type and class of public utility construction being constructed, and shall be
kept valid for the entirety of the construction.
   C.   Insurance Requirements: No person, company, or corporation shall be
permitted to proceed with any public utility system construction, or
development of any subdivision public utility system, before having provided to
the city proof of valid liability and worker's compensation policies. The
minimum value of liability insurance shall be one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) except that the city reserves the right to require a higher
value. Such liability and worker's compensation policies shall be kept in
effect during the duration of the project. The policy carriers shall notify the
city whenever there is a material change in the status of either the liability
or worker's compensation policy. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Short Title
9-1-2: Building Official
9-1-3: Building Codes Adopted
9-1-4: Adaptation Of International Codes
9-1-5: Permit And Associated Service Fees
9-1-6: Manufactured Home Placement Permits
9-1-7: Energizing Authorization
9-1-8: Sewage Disposal Approval
9-1-9: Fences
9-1-10: Penalties And Remedies
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the CONSTRUCTION CODE OF THE CITY OF
PRIEST RIVER, and is adopted pursuant to Idaho Code title 39, chapter 41. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-2: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The mayor shall, with approval of the city council, appoint an individual,
partnership, corporation or other business association or entity as the
building official. The appointed building official is hereby empowered to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and the building, mechanical, fire and
life safety and other codes adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
and such other ordinances and resolutions as directed by the mayor. All
building code inspectors shall be certified as provided by Idaho Code. (Ord.
482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-3: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the following building codes and standards, pursuant to
Idaho Code 50-901 and 39-4116, as adapted in section
9-1-4 of this chapter, and shall enforce them with regard to all construction
and development in the incorporated areas of the city. The following codes
shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they are
adopted or approved by the Idaho building code board effective on the date any
such codes are made effective by said Idaho building code board:
   A.   Building Code: The international building code, 2000 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, as the same may be supplemented,
including all rules promulgated by the Idaho building code board, to provide
equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities act
accessibility guidelines and the federal fair housing act accessibility
guidelines.
   B.   Residential Code: The international residential code, 2000 edition,
parts I - IV and part IX, as the same may be supplemented, as published by the
International Code Council.
   C.   Energy Conservation: The international energy conservation code, 2000
edition, as the same may be supplemented, as published by the International
Code Council.
   D.   Fire Code: The international fire code, 2000 edition, as the same may
be supplemented, as published by the International Code Council.
   E.   Mechanical Code: The international mechanical code, 2000 edition, as
the same may be supplemented, as published by the International Code Council.
   F.   HVAC Standards: The HVAC standards book, 1997 edition, part III,
standard for installation of gas equipment in excess of 400,000 BTU/hr, as
published by Inland Northwest Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
Association.
   G.   Manufactured Home Installations: The Idaho manufactured home
installation standards, 2003 edition, or any superseding update, as adopted by
the state of Idaho.
   H.   Building Conservation: The uniform code for building conservation, 1994
edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials.
   I.   Life Safety: The life safety code, 1997 edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association.
   J.   Dangerous Buildings: The uniform code for abatement of dangerous
buildings, 1994 edition, as published by the International Conference of
Building Officials. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-4: ADAPTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CODES:
   A.   Building Code: The following sections of the international building
code are hereby revised:
      Section 101.1, insert "city of Priest River".
      Section 1612.3, insert "city of Priest River", flood design criteria.
      Section 1612.3, insert (date of issuance) flood design criteria. (The
date of issuance is when the flood design approval is issued and will be filled
in at that time.)
      Section 3409.2, insert "effective date of this ordinance".
   B.   Residential Code: The following sections of the international
residential code are hereby revised:
Section R101.1, insert "city of Priest River".
Table R301.2, insert:
Ground snow load  
Ground snow load           
Residential               50 pounds
Commercial                60 pounds
Wind speed                90 mph
Seismic design category   C
Weathering                Severe
Frost line depth          24 inches
Termite                   None to slight
Decay                     None
Winter design temperature 10 degrees Fahrenheit
Flood hazards             See chapter 1403.6 and 1612 appendix G of the IBC
 
   Table R301.2(1) footnotes, insert:
         i.   Regardless of construction design standards, as outlined in this
section, one- and two-family dwellings shall not be constructed for less than
fifty (50) pounds per square foot roof live load (snow load).
   (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-5: PERMIT AND ASSOCIATED SERVICE FEES:
The city shall adopt by resolution a fee schedule for building permits and
associated services (the schedule). The schedule shall contain, but not be
limited to, fees for permits and associated services required by this chapter.
Fees for other services and application, including those of other ordinances
administered by the building official, may be added as deemed necessary by the
city. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-6: MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Placement of manufactured homes within the incorporated areas of the
city shall require a manufactured home placement permit. To obtain a
manufactured home placement permit for manufactured home placement, the
applicant shall supply all site information required from an applicant seeking
to build a single-family dwelling on a site. All manufactured homes shall meet
the minimum standards as established by the "Idaho Manufactured Home
Installation Standard", latest edition. The minimum live roof load (snow load)
for manufactured housing shall be fifty (50) pounds per square foot. This live
load requirement may be achieved by either:
      1.   Constructing the manufactured housing to meet the required live
load, or
      2.   Constructing a protective roof cover to meet the live load
requirements. Such protective roof cover shall be constructed in compliance
with the standards adopted by the city herein and as the same may be
subsequently amended or modified.
   B.   Protective roof covers for manufactured homes shall be constructed in
accordance with the following standards:
      1.   For manufactured homes where the protective cover is not part of a
porch or carport projection from the home, any supporting posts, if used, shall
be set flush against the building. The same shall be made to appear as
architectural projections of the building, and shall be clad in a similar type
of siding as used on the building.
      2.   For manufactured homes where the protective cover is part of a porch
or carport projection from the home, the supporting posts shall be clad in a
similar type of siding as used on the building.
      3.   The protective cover shall be constructed using scissor type trusses
and the edge of the cover shall not be set above the edge of the building
roofline.
      4.   The ends and sides of the cover shall be sealed against the
building. Any carport or porch projections of the cover shall have the
underside of the trusses sealed with a siding similar to the type used on the
building. (Ord. 490, 11-20-2006)
9-1-7: ENERGIZING AUTHORIZATION:
No person shall energize a new or upgraded existing electric service or set an
electric meter for any structure or install construction power to assist in the
construction of a structure until approval has been granted by the building
official. The serving electric utility shall not initiate service until it
receives an energizing permit that has been approved and issued by the building
official. The utility company shall then be permitted to provide connection or
energizing to the use specified and shall validate the energizing permit by
recording the hookup date and official signature and then return the card to
the building official. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-8: SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPROVAL:
No building or setting permit shall be issued for the construction or placement
of any structure designed for human habitation or requiring sewage disposal
within the city unless approval has first been obtained from the Panhandle
health district or connection has been authorized by a sewer district. A copy
of the approval must be submitted to the city with the building permit
application. (Ord. 482, 6-5-2006)
9-1-9: FENCES:
   A.   Height Restrictions: No fence shall exceed four feet (4') in height in
front of a dwelling in a residential zone, beginning at the farthest front
corners of each side of the dwelling, or dwelling and attached garage or
carport, unless a design is submitted for approval that meets safety and design
criteria. Fences beginning at the farthest front corner of each side of the
dwelling, or dwelling and attached garage or carport, and extending rearward
may be six feet (6') in height.
   B.   Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in good condition and free
of all weeds, debris and trash. (Ord. 569, 10-20-2014)
9-1-10: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
The primary purpose of this chapter shall be to maintain compliance with the
standardized codes adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public. For that purpose, the building official may seek to use any of the
following remedies as may be appropriate to ensure enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter: (Ord. 468, 2004)
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or of
the standardized codes adopted pursuant to this chapter, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in the general
penalty in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 468, 2004; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   A separate violation is deemed to have occurred with respect to each
building or structure not in compliance with the codes adopted herein, and for
each day such violation continues.
   C.   The city may seek civil remedy from a court of competent jurisdiction
to restrain conduct in violation of this chapter or compel performance of
duties established by this chapter. Civil remedies may be sought in addition to
criminal penalties. (Ord. 468, 2004)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Contractor Registration Number
9-2-1: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION NUMBER:
No building permit will be issued without the contractor's registration number
being presented by the contractor, except when the permit applicant provides
evidence to the satisfaction of the building official that the applicant is
exempt from the registration requirements pursuant to chapter 52, title 54, of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 481, 3-6-2006)
CHAPTER 3
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Title And Purpose
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-3: Application
9-3-4: Collection Of Impact Fee
9-3-5: Capital Improvement Projects
9-3-6: Calculation Of Impact Fee
9-3-7: General Methodology For Calculation
9-3-8: Inflationary Adjustment Index For Impact Fee
9-3-9: Administration Of Impact Fee
9-3-10: Credits And Reimbursement
9-3-11: Refunds
9-3-12: Appeals
9-3-13: Extraordinary Impacts
9-3-14: Addendum A
9-3-15: Bonding
9-3-16: Effect Of Impact Fee On City Development Regulations
9-3-17: Other Powers And Rights Not Affected
9-3-18: Severability
9-3-19: Public Health, Safety And Welfare
9-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the CITY OF PRIEST RIVER
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE. The purpose of these regulations is to
prescribe the procedure whereby developers of land shall pay an impact fee as
set forth in this chapter for the purpose of providing the public facilities
and system improvements needed to serve future residents and users of such
development. It is further the purpose of this chapter to:
   A.   Ensure that adequate facilities are available to serve new growth and
development;
   B.   Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform
standards by which the city may require that those who benefit from new growth
and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development;
   C.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are
required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve new growth and development and to prevent duplicate
and ad hoc development requirements;
   D.   Collect and expend development impact fees pursuant to the enabling
powers granted by the provision of the Idaho development impact fee act, title
67, chapter 82, Idaho Code;
   E.   Provide the legal and procedural basis for the implementation of
development impact fees within the area of city impact; and
   F.   Ensure that any capital improvement funded wholly or in part with
impact fee revenue shall first be included in an approved capital improvements
plan that lists the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fee
revenues as well as the estimated costs and timing for each improvement. (Ord.
510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for new construction and additions.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or
more, by new construction or other action, which increase the service capacity
of a public facility, or service improvement.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted and amended pursuant to the provision
of the development impact fee act, Idaho Code 67-8208 that identifies capital
improvements for which development impact fees may be used as a funding source.
The capital improvements plan is included as a part of the development impact
fee report.
CITY: The city of Priest River, a municipal corporation duly organized pursuant
to the laws of the state of Idaho.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, the
use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires
issuance of a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home permit, which
creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written duly authorized document from the city that
authorizes the commencement of a development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed as a condition of
development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements needed to serve development. This term is also referred to as an
impact fee in this chapter. The term does not include the following:
   A.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review or inspection
cost associated with permits required for development;
   B.   Connection or hookup charges;
   C.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation
charges for services provided directly to the development; or
   D.   Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city
has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the development
if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the
construction or installation of the capital improvements, unless a written
agreement is made pursuant to section 67-8209(3), Idaho Code, for credit or
reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or
other governmental action approving or authorizing a particular development
project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels
the payment, dedication or contribution of goods, services, land, or money as a
condition of approval.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary
impact.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the city to:
   A.   Result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will
significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated
from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development
agreement as allowed by section 67-8214(2), Idaho Code;
   B.   Result in the need for system improvements which are not identified in
the capital improvements plan;
   C.   Have an impact which results in a lower than acceptable level of
service.
FEE PAYER: That person who pays or is required to pay a development impact fee.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or
structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct
of the business or use, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It
does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics when not used for human
occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building, carport, or the main
building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to
meet any city parking requirement nor nonresidential facilities; arcades,
porticoes, and similar open areas which are located at or near street level,
which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used
as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.
IMPACT FEE: See definition of Development Impact Fee.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land
uses, densities, intensities, and population in the service area over at least
a twenty (20) year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and
service demand for public facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA manufactured
home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which:
   A.   In the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty
(40) body feet or more in length, or
   B.   When erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
feet; and
   C.   Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities; and
   D.   Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein;
   E.   Except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards
established under 42 USC 5401 et seq.
MOBILE HOME: A structure similar to a manufactured home, but built to a mobile
home code prior to June 15, 1976, the date of enactment of the federal
manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code).
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a
manufactured/mobile home, which is constructed according to standards contained
in the uniform building code, as adopted or any amendments thereto, which is of
closed construction and is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or
assembled at a place other than the building site.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future
payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction, or money.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to system improvements, project improvements
are site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide
service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use
and the convenience of the occupants or users of the project.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined
pursuant to section 67-8207, Idaho Code, which reasonably relates to the
service demands and needs of the project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Those types of improvements described in Idaho Code 67-8203,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Water supply production, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities;
   B.   Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
   C.   Roads, streets and bridges, including rights of way, traffic signals,
landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways;
   D.   Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital
improvements; and
   E.   Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular public facility category (i.e., parks, police) of capital
improvements.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, mean capital
improvements to public facilities which are designed to provide service to a
service area including, and without limitation, the type of improvements
described in section 50-1703, Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of
system improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs
attributable thereto, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs
described in section 50-1702(h), Idaho Code, to provide additional public
facilities needed to service new growth and development. For clarification,
system improvement costs do not include:
   A.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than
capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan;
   B.   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements;
   C.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
   D.   Administrative and operating costs of the city unless such costs are
attributable to development of the capital improvements plan, as provided in
section 67-8208, Idaho Code; or
   E.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or
other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the
city to finance capital improvements identified in the capital improvements
plan.
UNIT(S) OF DEVELOPMENT: A quantifiable increment of development activity
measured in terms of dwelling units, or other appropriate measurements
contained in the impact fee schedule incorporated in the "report". (Ord. 510,
3-17-2008)
9-3-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all those who
benefit from new growth and development except as provided below.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
      2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not increase the
number of service units;
      3.   Replacing a residential unit, including a modular building or
manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot,
provided that the number of service units does not increase;
      4.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
      5.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure that does not
increase the number of service units;
      6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
      7.   Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility
bills and tax records, to the installation of a modular building, manufactured/
mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a
development impact fee has been paid previously, and as long as there is no
increase in service units.
   C.   An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a
building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee
payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the
city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, within ninety (90) days.
Appeals of the city clerk's, or his or her duly designated agent, determination
shall be made under the provisions of section
9-3-12, "Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-4: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   The development impact fee shall be paid and collected at the time of
issuance of a building permit or a manufactured/mobile home installation
permit.
   B.   No building permit or other equivalent city approval shall be issued
for "development" as herein defined unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to
this chapter.
   C.   A manufactured/mobile home unit may not locate on a manufactured/mobile
home site unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this chapter or has been
paid on a previous manufactured/mobile home unit on the same site.
   D.   In the event payment is dishonored, the city shall have all lawful
remedies including, but not necessarily limited to, the withholding of utility
services, the imposition of reasonable interest and penalties, the imposition
of liens pursuant to chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code, the withholding of other
city approvals required for the development of other properties owned by the
fee payer, and the issuance of "stop work" orders, and the revocation or
suspension of the building permit.
   E.   The city of Priest River, by and through the city council, may by a
majority vote suspend the collection of development impact fees for a period of
twelve (12) months. The council may suspend all development impact fees or any
portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the parks facilities fee;
police facilities fee; or circulation facilities fee. At the end of the
suspension, the collection of development impact fees shall automatically
resume. The council may continue to suspend the collection of development
impact fees for twelve (12) month time periods by a majority vote. The council
shall review any motion for suspension of development impact fees at the second
meeting in July of each calendar year with any approved suspension to go into
effect October 1 of each calendar year. (Ord. 552, 7-15-2013)
9-3-5: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The capital improvement projects to be financed by the impact fee are those as
listed in the "report", incorporated herein by reference along with all
footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other attachments referenced. (Ord. 510,
3-17-2008)
9-3-6: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Procedure: The city shall calculate the amount of the impact fee due
for each building permit and manufactured/mobile home installation permit by
the procedure set forth in the "report".
   B.   Accordance With Generally Accepted Accounting Principles: The
calculation of a development impact fee shall be in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. A development impact fee shall not be deemed
invalid because payment of the fee may result in an incidental benefit to
owners or developers within the service area other than the person paying the
fee.
   C.   Calculation On Basis Of Performance Standard: A development impact fee
shall be calculated on the basis of the performance standard for public
facilities adopted in this chapter and in the "report" that are applicable to
existing development as well as new growth and development. The construction,
improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or existing public facilities for
which a development impact fee is imposed must be attributable to the capacity
demands generated by the new development.
   D.   Calculation For Development With Mixed Uses: If the development for
which a building permit is sought contains a mix of uses, the impact fee will
be calculated for each type of use.
   E.   Certification: Prior to making an application for a building permit or
manufactured/mobile home installation permit, a prospective applicant may
request in writing a written certification of the development impact fee
schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall
establish the development fee for a period of one year from the date of
certification. The certification shall include an explanation of facilities
considered under section 67-8207, Idaho Code. The certification shall specify
the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used.
   F.   Individual Assessment: Individual assessment of impact fees is
permitted in situations where the fee payer can demonstrate by clear and
convincing evidence that the established impact fee is inappropriate.
      1.   Individual assessments of development impact fees may be made by
application to the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, prior to
receiving building permits, manufactured/mobile home installation permits, or
other necessary approvals from the city. The city clerk, or his or her duly
designated agent, shall evaluate such individual assessments under the
guidelines provided for in subsection F4 of this section. If the guidelines are
met, the individual assessment shall be approved by the city clerk, or his or
her duly designated agent. Any decision regarding a request for an individual
assessment shall be provided in writing to the applicant and a copy of said
decision, along with supporting documentation, shall be provided to the city
council within thirty (30) days of the decision.
      2.   Late applications for individual assessments may be submitted within
thirty (30) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer
makes a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or
discoverable prior to receipt of a building permit and that undue hardship
would result if said application is not considered.
      3.   The city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall render a
written decision regarding the individual assessment and forward it to the city
council within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is
submitted. The decision of the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent,
shall establish the impact fee for the project in question for a period of one
year from the date said decision becomes final.
      4.   The city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall evaluate
an application for individual assessment and may approve the same if fee payer
has shown by clear and convincing evidence that the established impact fee is
inappropriate and that the following facts and conditions exist:
         a.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to
the development that does not apply generally to other properties in the
vicinity of the development.
         b.   An individual assessment is necessary for the reasonable and
acceptable development of the property.
         c.   The approval of the individual assessment will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in
which the development is located.
         d.   The approval of the individual assessment will not adversely
affect the capital improvement plan for the city.
      5.   Appeals to the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent,
determination of individual assessment shall be made to the city council by the
filing of an appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of
mailing, faxing, or personal delivery of written notice of the decision of the
city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent. Final determination regarding
the appeal of individual assessments shall be made by the city council. (Ord.
510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-7: GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION:
   A.   Calculation Methodology: The amount of the impact fee shall be
calculated using the methodology contained in the "report".
   B.   Fee Not To Exceed Proportionate Share: A development impact fee shall
not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements determined
in accordance with section 67-8207, Idaho Code. Development impact fees shall
be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such
costs.
   C.   Fee Schedule: A developer shall have the right to elect to pay a
project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of
development impact fees according to the fee schedule as full and complete
payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement
costs, except as provided in section 67-8214(3), Idaho Code. The schedule of
development impact fees for various land users per unit of development shall be
as set forth in the "report".
   D.   Proportionate Share Determination:
      1.   All development impact fees shall be based on a reasonable and fair
formula or method under which the development impact fee imposed does not
exceed a proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the
city in the provision of system improvements to serve the new development. The
proportionate share is the cost attributable to the new development after the
city considers the following:
         a.   Any appropriate credit, offset, or contribution of money,
dedication of land, or construction of system improvements;
         b.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new development in the form of user fees, debt service payments, or taxes which
are dedicated for system improvements for which development impact fees would
otherwise be imposed; and
         c.   All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
      2.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements to be paid by the developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the city:
         a.   The cost of existing system improvements within the service area
or areas;
         b.   The means by which existing system improvements have been
financed;
         c.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to the
cost of system improvements through taxation, assessments, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system
improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
         d.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute
to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
         e.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
         f.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development;
         g.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
         h.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation. The city shall develop a
plan for alternative sources of revenue, which shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, plans generated during the city's annual budget
process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, implementation of user fees
and various forms of utilities. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-8: INFLATIONARY ADJUSTMENT INDEX FOR IMPACT FEE:
This chapter provides for an automatic annual adjustment to the impact fee
based on the constructions materials index for Seattle. The adjustment may
increase or decrease the impact fee depending on the value of the index for
that year. The annual effective date of this fee adjustment shall coincide with
the beginning date of the city's annual budget. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-9: ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Transfer Of Funds To City Treasurer: Upon receipt of impact fees, the
city treasurer, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be responsible for
placement of such funds into separate accounts as hereinafter specified. All
such funds shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts, within the capital
projects fund, in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest
earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used
solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account.
   B.   Establishment And Maintenance Of Accounts: The city treasurer, or his
or her duly designated agent, shall establish separate accounts and maintain
records for each such account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated.
   C.   Maintenance Of Records: The city treasurer, or his or her duly
designated agent, shall maintain and keep accurate financial records for each
such account that shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues; that
shall account for all monies received; that shall ensure that the disbursement
of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the
provision of projects specified in the capital improvements program; and that
shall provide an annual accounting for each impact fee account showing the
source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
   D.   Expenditure Of Fees: Development impact fees shall only be spent for
the public facility category (i.e., parks, police, fire and circulation) of
system improvements for which the fees are collected and either within or for
the benefit of the service area in which the project is located.
   E.   Review And Modification: Unless the city council deems some other time
period is appropriate, the city shall at least once every five (5) years
commencing from the date of the original adoption of the capital improvement
plan, review the development potential of the area and update the capital
improvements plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code
section 67-8206. The city may make any updates as are deemed necessary as a
result of: 1) development occurring in the prior year; 2) capital improvements
actually constructed; 3) changing facility needs; 4) inflation; 5) revised cost
estimates for capital improvements; 6) changes in the availability of other
funding projects; and 7) such other factors as may be relevant.
   F.   Capital Budget: The city shall annually adopt a capital budget.
   G.   Report: As part of its annual audit process, the city shall prepare an
annual report describing the amount of all development impact fees collected,
appropriated, or spent during the preceding year by category of public facility
and service area.
   H.   Other Requirements: All other requirements of Idaho Code 67-8210,
regarding earmarking and expenditure of collected development impact fees,
shall apply. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-10: CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project,
credit or reimbursement shall be given for the present value of any
construction of system improvements or contribution or dedication of land or
money required by the city from a developer for system improvements of the
public facility category (i.e., parks, police, circulation) for which the
development impact fee is being collected. Credit or reimbursement shall not be
given for project improvements unless those improvements are identified in the
"report" as a system improvement. In that event, the credit given will only be
given for those project improvements that are specifically listed in the
"report" and not for any portion of the improvements that would otherwise be
required by zoning, subdivision, or other city regulations.
   B.   If a developer is required to construct, fund or contribute system
improvements in excess of the development project's proportionate share of
system improvement costs, the developer shall receive a credit on future impact
fees or be reimbursed at the developer's choice for such excess construction,
funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by future development
which impacts the system improvements constructed, funded or contributed by the
developer(s) or fee payer. If a credit for the payment of future impact fees is
requested, the credit shall be given only for the public facility category that
received system improvements in excess of the development's proportionate
share.
   C.   If credit or reimbursement is due to the developer pursuant to this
section, the city shall enter into a written agreement, with the fee payer,
negotiated in good faith, prior to the construction, funding, or contribution.
The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and
form of reimbursement.
   D.   Any person requesting such credit or reimbursement shall submit their
request in writing on a form provided by the city and present documentation of
costs or payments for facilities to the city clerk or his or her duly
designated agent prior to issuance of a building permit or manufactured/mobile
home installation permit. The determination shall be made no more than forty
five (45) days after complete documentation is submitted to the city clerk or
his or her duly designated agent. Any appeal from such a determination by the
city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be pursuant to section
9-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-11: REFUNDS:
   A.   The current owner or contract purchaser of property on which an impact
fee has been paid may request a refund of such fee if:
      1.   Service is available but never provided;
      2.   The project for which a building permit has been used has been
lawfully altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due;
or
      3.   The city, after collecting the fee when service is not available,
has failed to appropriate and expend the collected development impact fees
pursuant to section 67-8210(4), Idaho Code.
      4.   A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured/
mobile home is denied or abandoned.
   B.   The request for refund must be filed in writing and submitted to the
city clerk or his or her duly designated agent on a form provided by the city
for such purpose. The owner shall provide such documentation as the city clerk,
or his or her duly designated agent, may require proving such satisfaction,
reconveyance, or releases from contract sellers, mortgagees, lienholders, and/
or others having an interest in the real property for which an impact fee has
been paid.
   C.   A request for refund must be filed within the time allowed by law.
   D.   Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of a request for refund,
the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent must provide the owner, in
writing, with a decision on the refund request including the reasons for the
decision. If a right to refund exists, the city is required to send a refund to
the owner of record within ninety (90) days after it is determined that a
refund is due. A refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (1/2)
the legal rate provided for in section 28-22-104, Idaho Code.
   E.   Owner may appeal the determination of the city clerk, or his or her
duly designated agent, to the city council pursuant to the provisions in
section
9-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-12: APPEALS:
   A.   A developer or fee payer may appeal the written determination of the
applicability and amount of the development impact fee, or refund, or any
discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf of the city to the city
council.
   B.   The developer or fee payer must file a notice of appeal to the city
council with the city clerk within thirty (30) days following the written
determination, discretionary action, or inaction. When filing an appeal, the
fee payer shall submit a letter providing a full explanation of the request,
the reason for appeal, as well as all supporting documentation.
   C.   The filing of an appeal shall not stay required payment of the impact
fee, however, a fee payer can pay a development impact fee under protest in
order to obtain development approval or building permit.
   D.   Upon voluntary agreement by the fee payer and the city, any
disagreement related to the impact fee for the proposed development may be
mediated by a qualified independent party.
      1.   Mediation may take place at any time during the appeals process and
participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other
remedies provided for in this chapter.
      2.   The fee payer and the city shall share mediation costs equally.
(Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-13: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be
paid by the developer, the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent shall
consider whether any extraordinary costs will be incurred in serving the
development based upon an "extraordinary impact" as defined in section
9-3-2 of this chapter. This determination shall be made prior to issuance of
any permit for development and shall be paid prior to any such issuance except
as may be provided pursuant to a private agreement between the parties as
authorized by Idaho Code section 67-8214.
If the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent determines that the
development will result in an extraordinary impact, it shall advise the fee
payer in writing what the extraordinary impact is, the reason for the
extraordinary impact, and the estimated costs to be incurred as a result of the
extraordinary impact.
Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any development that
results in extraordinary impact.
The fee payer may appeal the determination of an extraordinary impact or the
amount of extraordinary costs incurred in writing by filing a notice of appeal
to the city council with the city clerk pursuant to the terms set forth in
section
9-3-12, "Appeals", of this chapter. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall
submit a letter providing the reason for the appeal along with supporting
documentation. The city council shall consider the appeal and make a final
determination within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written appeal. (Ord.
510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-14: ADDENDUM A:
Addendum A entitled "development impact fee program/capital improvement plan"
dated February 2007, along with all footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other
attachments referenced therein, all of which are by this reference incorporated
herein as if set forth fully. A description of acceptable levels of service for
system improvements is described in the "report". (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-15: BONDING:
Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other
obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other
city revenues as may be allocated by the city council. (Ord. 510, 3-17-2008)
9-3-16: EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON CITY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements, or
any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital
improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development. (Ord. 510, 3-
17-2008)
9-3-17: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from requiring a
developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a
development project.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit
private agreements between property owners and developers, the Idaho
transportation department, the city, and other governmental entities in regard
to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for
credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer
including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for
project improvements which are used or shared by more than one development
project. If it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct impact on
a public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho transportation
department, then the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of
impact fees collected from the developer for the improvement of the public
facility by the Idaho transportation department.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve development
that results in an extraordinary impact. Extraordinary impacts shall be
determined and processed pursuant to section
9-3-13 of this chapter.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve a
development request that may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service
below minimum acceptable levels established in this chapter. To this end, the
city may impose a development impact fee for system improvement costs incurred
subsequent to adoption hereof to the extent that new growth and development
will be served by the system improvements.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional
right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating
the orderly development of real property.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall work to limit the use by the city of the
power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or
procedures authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or
general obligation bond issues.
   G.   Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the city to
annex property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its
territorial boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose
reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system
improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord. 510,
3-17-2008)
9-3-18: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable and if any
provision of this chapter or the application of such provision to any person or
circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not
affect the validity of remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 510, 3-17-
2008)
9-3-19: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience and it shall
be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes. (Ord. 510, 3-17-
2008)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Penalties And Remedies
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be referred to as the PLANNING AND ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF
PRIEST RIVER, and is adopted pursuant to Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. (Ord.
597, 8-6-2018)
10-1-2: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
The primary purpose of this title shall be to maintain compliance with the
standardized codes adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public. For that purpose, the Administrator and/or the building official may
seek to use any of the following remedies as may be appropriate to ensure
enforcement of the provisions of this title:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title, or of the
standardized codes adopted pursuant to this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in
section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   A separate violation is deemed to have occurred with respect to each
building or structure not in compliance with the codes adopted herein, and for
each day such violation continues.
   C.   The City may seek civil remedy from a court of competent jurisdiction
to restrain conduct in violation of this title or compel performance of duties
established by this title. Civil remedies may be sought in addition to criminal
penalties. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: General Definitions
10-2-2: Specific Definitions
10-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms are herewith defined. When not
inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the singular include the plural; words in the plural include
the singular; the word "persons" may be taken for persons, association, firm,
co- partnership or corporation; the word "structure" includes building; the
word "occupied" includes premises designed or intended to be occupied; the word
"used" includes designed or intended to be used; the word "shall" is always
mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and the word "should" is a preferred
requirement. The word "lot" includes plot, parcel, and tract; the word
"airport" includes such common terms as aviation field, airfield, intermediate
landing field, landing area, landing field, airstrip, and landing strip. (Ord.
597, 8-6-2018)
10-2-2: SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS:
                        A common area set aside for the temporary parking and
ACCESSORY PARKING AREA: storage of vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats,
                        motorcycles, and other similar items to everyday life.
ACCESSORY PARKING AREA:                       A common area set aside for the temporary parking and storage of vehicles,
                                              recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles, and other similar items to everyday life.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE:                   One which is secondary to the main use or structure on the lot, serving a purpose
                                              normally secondary to the principal use or structure.
ACCESSWAY:                                    An unobstructed way of specified width containing a drive or roadway which provides
                                              vehicular access and connects to a public street.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS:                     Those persons owning property within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior
                                              boundary of the parcel.
ADMINISTRATOR:                                An official having knowledge in the principals and practices of zoning, who is
                                              appointed by the City Council to administer this title.
                                              Any area of land or water which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and
AIRPORT 1 :                                   takeoff of aircraft, or intended for use, for airport buildings or other airport
                                              facilities or rights-of-way.
APARTMENT HOUSE:                              A building or portion thereof used or intended to be used as a home with three (3) or
                                              more families living independently of each other.
                                              That portion of a structure, not intended for occupancy, and that extends beyond the
                                              face of a wall that protrudes closest to the property line, not including signs,
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION:                     canopies, or marquees. This is the point where setbacks are measured from (refer to
                                              subsection
                                              10-7-6E of this title).
AS BUILT DRAWINGS:                            Design plans which have been revised to reflect all changes to the plans which
                                              occurred during construction.
                                              Dismantling or wrecking of two (2) or more used motor vehicles, recreational
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING:                          vehicles, or travel trailers or the storage, sales, or dumping of dismantled,
                                              partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
AUTOMOTIVE, MANUFACTURED HOME, TRAVEL         The sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, manufactured homes, travel
TRAILER, AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES:            trailers, or farm implements, but not including repair work except incidental
                                              warranty repair of same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR:                            The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof,
                                              including collision service, painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles.
                                              Any new or existing structure, object of natural growth, use of land, or
                                              modifications thereto, which endangers the lives and property of users of an airport,
AVIATION HAZARD 2 :                           or of occupants of land in its vicinity, and that reduces the size of the area
                                              available for landing, taking off and maneuvering of aircraft, or extends up into the
                                              airspace between airports to cause disastrous and needless loss of life and property.
AVIATION HAZARD AREA 3 :                      Any area of land or water upon which an aviation hazard might be established if not
                                              prevented as provided in the referenced chapter of Idaho Code.
BASEMENT:                                     Any floor level below the first story in a building.
                                              Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP):              combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, sedimentation, displacement or
                                              erosion of soils.
BLOCK:                                        A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within a subdivision, with well-defined
                                              boundaries, usually streets.
                                              A surety bond, cash deposit, or escrow account, assignment of savings, or other means
BOND:                                         acceptable to or required by the permit authority to guarantee that work is completed
                                              in compliance with all local government requirements.
                                              A fence, wall, landscaping, filtration, or sound deadening technique which provides
BUFFER OR BUFFERING:                          separation between normally incompatible uses. The objective of a buffer is to
                                              minimize the potential effects of noise, dust, smoke, odors, and fumes from the more
                                              restrictive use, and to provide visual screening between parcels.
                                              Any structure, permanent, mobile, removable, or movable, built or used for the
BUILDING:                                     support, shelter, or enclosure of any persons, animals, goods, equipment, or chattels
                                              and property of any kind.
BUILDING CODE:                                The current State adopted construction regulations in effect for the City of Priest
                                              River.
                                              A building or group of buildings, within a single architectural plan and/or parcel of
BUILDING COMPLEX:                             property, housing two (2) or more residential, commercial, industrial, or
                                              recreational units or combination thereof, and providing common facilities or
                                              utilities, such as shopping centers, professional office buildings, etc.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL:                        All the window and wall area of a building in one place or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE:                            The linear width of a building facing the right-of-way or the linear length of the
                                              right-of-way facing the building, whichever is smaller.
                                              The vertical distance at the center of a building’s principal front, measured from
BUILDING HEIGHT:                              the level of the first floor above grade to the highest point of the roof. For
                                              buildings set back from the street line, the height may be measured from the average
                                              elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building.
BUILDING INSPECTOR:                           The official building inspector for the City of Priest River, State of Idaho.
                                              A line established by this title to govern the placement of a building with respect
BUILDING LINE:                                to highways, streets, and alleys. The front property line shall be the front line as
                                              shown upon official plats of the property in all subdivisions.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL:                          A building in which the use conducted is the main or principal use of the lot on
                                              which the building is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK:                             A distance measured from the furthest architectural projection to the property line.
BULK PLANT:                                   An establishment where flammable liquids are received by tank vessel, pipelines, and
                                              tank car or tank vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk for distribution.
                                              A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face over a
CANOPY OR MARQUEE:                            public right-of-way and constructed of some durable material such as wood, metal,
                                              canvas, glass, or plastic.
CEMETERY:                                     A land dedicated for burial purposes serving solely for below ground level interment,
                                              not including mortuary, crematory, mausoleum and/or columbarium.
CHANNEL:                                      The bed where a natural stream of water runs.
CITY:                                         The City of Priest River, State of Idaho.
CLEARING:                                     The destruction and removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods.
                                              A building or portion of a building containing offices and facilities for providing
CLINIC:                                       medical, dental, or psychiatric services for outpatients, or any similar- type use as
                                              determined in section
                                              10-3-6 of this title.
                                              Any for profit activity which is generally related to the entertainment field, such
COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES:          as motion picture theaters, carnivals, night clubs, cocktail lounges, and similar
                                              entertainment activities, or any similar-type use as determined in section
                                              10-3-6 of this title.
COMMUNITY CENTER:                             A building designed for the recreational, social, and public meeting needs of the
                                              people of the community on a no- or nominal-fee basis.
                                              A plan which includes such things as the general location and extent of present and
                                              proposed physical facilities including, but not limited to, housing, industrial and
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:                           commercial uses, transportation, parks and other community facilities. The
                                              Comprehensive Plan establishes the goals and objectives of the City for present and
                                              future land use within the limits of its jurisdiction.
                                              An activity not specified as a use permitted outright by this title and may be
CONDITIONAL USE:                              permitted with project specific conditions. A conditional use is a principal or an
                                              accessory use, permitted when authorized by the City Council and subject to certain
                                              conditions.
                                              An apartment house, office building, or other multiple-unit complex, the units of
CONDOMINIUM:                                  which are individually owned, each owner receiving a recordable deed to the
                                              individual unit purchased.
CONSTRUCTION:                                 Architectural plans, engineering studies, purchase of materials, site preparation,
                                              utility installation, and building erection.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICE:                          A mobile building used in conjunction with a permitted construction project that may
                                              or may not be outfitted for human habitation.
                                              A mechanism for transporting water from one point to another, including pipes,
CONVEYANCE:                                   ditches, and channels. Also means the transportation of sewage by means of enclosed
                                              piping system.
                                              The drainage facilities, both natural and manmade, which collect, contain, and
                                              provide for the flow of surface and stormwater from the highest points on the land
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM:                            down to receiver water. The natural elements of the conveyance system include swales
                                              and the small drainage courses, streams, rivers, lakes, and wetlands. The human-made
                                              elements of the conveyance system include gutters, ditches, pipes, channels, and
                                              grassy retention/detention facilities.
                                              Single-family, stick built, dwellings allowed in a planned unit development (PUD),
COTTAGE:                                      which are typically less than the required square footage required in residential
                                              development outside of a PUD.
COUNCIL:                                      The elected Priest River City Council.
                                              A private club organized to provide for the recreational needs of its membership,
COUNTRY CLUB:                                 including golf, tennis, swimming, and other athletic pursuits. It may include
                                              facilities for dining and private parties. It shall be supported by annual membership
                                              fees and fixed endowments and shall not be open to nonmembers except as guests.
                                              The person at the County who records (or puts into public record) all the legal
COUNTY RECORDER:                              papers including, but not limited to, plats, deeds, contracts, surveys, marriage
                                              licenses, etc., for Bonner County.
COVENANT:                                     A written agreement, promise, or pledge.
CULVERT:                                      A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road, or driveway.
                                              The setting aside of land or interests in land for use by the public by ordinance,
DEDICATION:                                   resolution, or entry into the official minutes, or to a home owners’ association as
                                              by the recording of a plat. Publicly dedicated land becomes public land upon the
                                              acceptance by the City.
DENSITY:                                      The number of residential or commercial units per acre of land.
   Gross Density:                          The number of units per acre of total land to be developed including public right-of-
                                              way.
   Net Density:                            The number of units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land
                                              devoted to other uses, excluding public right-of-way.
                                              The requirements for each land use district to encourage, protect, and preserve the
DENSITY PROVISIONS:                           health, safety, and general welfare of the area, through standards which include
                                              yards, height, bulk, lot area, lot coverage, and occupancy limitations.
DESIGN STORM:                                 A rainfall event of 25-year/24-hour based on Sandpoint, Idaho locale, 2.19 inches of
                                              rainfall.
DETENTION AREA:                               The temporary storage of storm runoff in a grass infiltration (GIA), which is used to
                                              control the peak discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.
DEVELOPER:                                    Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DISTRICT OR ZONE:                             A section or district of the City within which the standards governing the use of
                                              buildings and premises are uniform.
DUPLEX:                                       A multi-family residential structure consisting of two (2) dwelling units.
                                              A building consisting of two (2) or more residential units including apartment
DWELLING, MULTI- FAMILY:                      houses, townhouses, and condominiums with varying arrangements of entrances and
                                              separating walls.
DWELLING, SINGLE- FAMILY:                     A building consisting of a single residential unit only, separated from other
                                              residential units by open space or connected at a lot line by a common garage wall.
                                              The space within a building comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms,
DWELLING UNIT:                                storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet
                                              facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees.
EASEMENT:                                     A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to use land for
                                              specific purposes.
ENGINEER:                                     Any person who has scientific training and who designs and builds complicated
                                              products, machines, systems, or structures and is licensed by the State.
                                              The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geological
EROSION:                                      agents, including such processes as gravitational creep, detachment and movement of
                                              soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
EROSION/SEDIMENT ATION:                       Any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion; control siltation and
                                              sedimentation; and ensure that sediment-laden water does not leave the site.
EXISTING TREE:                                A tree at least three inches (3") in diameter which is on a property at the time of
                                              any application in accordance with the Design Review Overlay District.
FLOOD:                                        A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water overtopping its banks
                                              and inundating areas adjacent to the channel.
FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY:                  A flood magnitude, which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded
                                              in any year.
                                              The relatively flat area or low land adjacent to a body of water which is naturally
FLOODPLAIN:                                   subject to flooding and included in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 100-year
                                              floodplain or has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year. The
                                              floodplain includes the channel, floodway, and floodway fringe.
                                              The channel or a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
FLOODWAY:                                     channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of any
                                              water course.
                                              That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway. Such areas will include
FLOODWAY FRINGE:                              those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by the flood of 100-year
                                              frequency.
FLOOR-AREA-RATIO:                             The ratio of usable floor area of a structure to the total area of the lot occupied
                                              by the structure.
GABLE:                                        The part of the wall that encloses the end of a pitched roof.
GOLF COURSE (COMMERCIAL):                     Any private or public enterprise designed for the play of golf, and the accessory
                                              building(s) and club house(s) necessary to its operation.
                                              Any private or public enterprise designed for the play of golf, having at least nine
GOLF COURSE (RESIDENTIAL):                    (9) holes - sixty percent (60%) of which are par four or greater, and the accessory
                                              building(s) and club house(s) necessary to its operation.
                                              The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or
GRADE:                                        sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the
                                              property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and
                                              a line five feet (5') from the building.
                                              The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the
                                              exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two
                                              (2) buildings. Gross floor area does not include basements when at least one-half (1/
GROSS FLOOR AREA:                             2) of the floor-to-ceiling height is below grade, accessory parking (i.e., parking
                                              that is available on- or off-site that is not part of the use’s minimum parking
                                              standard), attic space having a floor-to-ceiling height of less than seven feet (7'),
                                              exterior balconies, uncovered steps, or inner courts.
GROUND WATER:                                 Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or a surface water
                                              body.
HEALTH AUTHORITY:                             The legally designated health regulator or its authorized representative of the City
                                              of Priest River.
HEALTH DISTRICT:                              Panhandle Health District (Region I).
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION:                         Any subdivision or portion thereof, having an average slope of eight percent (8%) or
                                              more.
                                              A profession, trade, skill, or service possessed and utilized, in whole or in part,
HOME OCCUPATION:                              by a family member for monetary gain within or upon the premises of a permanent
                                              dwelling unit in a Residential District.
HOTEL:                                        A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation
                                              and which is open to transient guests. Distinguishable from a motel primarily by:
                                             A.   Lack of exterior access to individual rooms, and
                                             B.   Parking for privately owned vehicles, if provided, is interior rather than
                                              exterior.
HYDRIC SOIL:                                  Soil that is permanently or seasonally saturated by water, resulting in anaerobic
                                              conditions, as found in wetlands.
HYDROPHYTES:                                  A plant that grows only in or on water.
                                              A hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil
                                              and/or a hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE:                           quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural
                                              conditions. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops,
                                              walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, or gravel roads.
IMPROVEMENT:                                  Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions associated with
                                              subdivision and building sites.
INFILTRATION:                                 The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil. The infiltration
                                              capacity is expressed in inches/hour.
INTERFLOW:                                    The lateral movement of water in the unsaturated zone, that first returns to the
                                              surface or enters a stream prior to becoming ground water.
                                              A stream or portion of a stream that flows only in direct response to precipitation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM:                          It receives little or no water from springs and no long-continued supply from melting
                                              snow or other sources. It is dry for a large part of the year, ordinarily more than
                                              three (3) months.
                                              A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
                                              stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including automobile, RV,
JUNK YARD:                                    mobile or manufactured home, wheeled or unwheeled wrecking yards, used-lumber yards,
                                              and yards used for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
                                              equipment.
KENNEL:
   Commercial Kennel:                      An establishment primarily offering boarding, training and/or breeding services and
                                              the associated sale of dogs, with the exclusion of veterinary hospitals.
                                              Any one household that keeps, maintains, harbors or possesses more than three (3)
   Noncommercial Kennel:                   dogs over six (6) months of age. Incidental sale of such animals shall not disqualify
                                              households of noncommercial kennel status.
                                              Any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY:                     non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities
                                              include, but are not limited to, demolition, construction, clearing, logging,
                                              grading, filling and excavation.
LARGE ANIMAL:                                 Any animal, including horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats and all wild and exotic
                                              animals which are normally classified by a veterinarian as a large animal.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT:                      A subdivision or planned unit development, the size of which consists of thirty (30)
                                              or more lots or dwelling units.
                                              Product assembly or mixing where previously processed components or manufactured
                                              parts produced off site are fitted together into a complete machine or blended
                                              together to form a non-combustible and non-explosive product. These uses are
LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND LIGHT ASSEMBLY:       typically characterized by low to medium intensity and should not emit smoke, gas,
                                              odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, or excessive lighting that might be obnoxious or
                                              offensive to nearby residents or businesses. Can include food production, consumer
                                              electronics, home furnishings, toys, clothing, and printing.
LOCATION MAP:                                 A small scale map showing location of a tract of land in relation to a large area,
                                              essentially the whole community or County.
                                              A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use,
LOT:                                          coverage and area, and to provide yards and other open spaces as required. Lots shall
                                              have frontage on an approved public street and may consist of:
                                             A.   A single lot of record;
                                             B.   A portion of a lot of record; and/or
                                              C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
LOT AREA RATIO:                               The ratio of a building’s gross floor area to the area of the lot on which the
                                              building is located.
LOT COVERAGE:                                 That portion of a lot that is occupied by the principal building and its accessory
                                              buildings, usually expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
LOT DEPTH:                                    The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
                                              The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For
LOT FRONTAGE:                                 determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot
                                              adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided as
                                              indicated under “yards” in this section.
                                              The movement of property lines between adjoining platted parcels or combining
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT:                          adjoining parcels. No additional parcels are created, and no resultant parcels are
                                              reduced below the zoning district minimum parcel size.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF:                         The total area of a lot when computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of
                                              any public or private street or any easement for any path or other land dedication.
LOT TYPES:                                    The terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots, and
                                              through lots is as follows:
                                             A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
                                             B.   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street;
                                              C.   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
                                             street. Through lots which abut two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage
                                              lots; and
                                              D.   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general
                                              pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
                                              The distance between side lot lines measured at the front yard building line; in case
LOT WIDTH:                                    of irregular shaped lots, the lot shall be measured as a point midway between the
                                              front and rear lot lines. In all cases, front property line shall be no less than
                                              fifty feet (50') in width
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT:                        A parcel of land for the placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive
                                              use of its occupants.
                                              A tract of land under single ownership, developed for providing the placement of two
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:                       (2) or more individual rental spaces for the placement of manufactured homes within
                                              its boundaries.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND:                      That part of an individual lot that has been reserved for the placement of the
                                              manufactured home, appurtenant structures or additions.
MANUFACTURED HOMES:                           As defined by Idaho Code.
MIXED USE BUILDING:                           A building that contains at least one floor devoted to allowed nonresidential uses
                                              and at least one floor devoted to allowed residential uses.
MIXED USE LOT:                                A lot that contains at least one structure devoted to allowed nonresidential uses and
                                              at least one devoted to allowed residential uses.
MOBILE HOME:                                  As defined by Idaho Code.
                                              Any factory-built housing designed primarily for residential occupancy by human
                                              beings which is designed to be assembled upon a permanent foundation with permanent
MODULAR HOME:                                 utility connections and is not designed for transport on public streets or highways
                                              on its own chassis and wheels. Modular homes are designed for transport only to a
                                              building site and are not designed to be removed from that site. Modular homes are
                                              further differentiated from manufactured homes in the following manner(s):
                                             A.   They consist of two (2) or more sections or modules.
                                             B.   They are designed to require internal and external finishing greater than simple
                                              joining of sections, tie down, skirting, and utility connection.
                                             C.   They do not have, never have had, and were not designed to have a chassis and
                                              wheels of their own for transport to site.
                                              Any permanent survey marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or iron or
MONUMENT:                                     steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as specified in
                                              section 50-1303, Idaho Code.
                                              A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living
                                              units where most of the units open individually and directly to the outside, and
MOTEL:                                        where a garage is attached, or a parking space is conveniently located to each unit,
                                              all for the temporary use by automobile tourists or transients. The definition shall
                                              also include “auto courts”, “tourist courts” and “motor lodges”.
                                              A self-propelled highway vehicle designed to be operated upon roads or highways and
MOTOR HOME:                                   fitted with equipment and furnishings for human habitation. Not intended for long
                                              term or permanent living quarters.
                                              Multi-family is a classification of housing where multiple separate housing units for
MULTI-FAMILY:                                 residential inhabitants are contained within one building or several buildings within
                                              a complex. Units can be next to each other or stacked on top of each other. A common
                                              form is an apartment building.
NET AREA:                                     The total usable area exclusive of space dedicated to such things as streets,
                                              easements and use out of character with the principal uses.
                                              A lot of record which lawfully existed at the effective date of the provisions of
NONCONFORMING LOT:                            this title, but which, because of the application of this title to it, no longer
                                              meets lot area or width requirements prescribed in this title for the district in
                                              which it is situated.
                                              A use or activity involving a building or land occupied or in existence at the
NONCONFORMING USE:                            effective date of this title or at any time of any amendments which does not conform
                                              to the standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
NUTRIENTS:                                    Essential elements needed by plants or animals for growth.
                                              An off-street parking place shall consist of an area adequate for parking an
OFF-STREET PARKING:                           automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related
                                              access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room; but, shall be located
                                              totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
                                              The drawing established by the City Council showing the streets, highways, and parks
OFFICIAL MAP:                                 laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments adopted by the City
                                              Council and any additions resulting from the approval of subdivision plats or
                                              annexations.
                                              Devices designed to separate gross amounts of oil and suspended solids from the
                                              wastewater effluents of oil refineries, petrochemical plants, chemical plants,
OIL/WATER SEPARATORS:                         natural gas processing plants, and other industry oily water sources. Highly
                                              recommended to be installed in any new business or industry working with gas and/or
                                              oil products.
OPEN SPACE:                                   Areas for outdoor recreation activity, exclusive of streets and buildings.
                                              The ordinary high-water mark on all lakes and streams is that mark which will be
ORDINARY HIGH- WATER MARK:                    found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action
                                              of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to
                                              mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland.
                                              A lot or tract as recorded on any plat or record on file in the Office of the County
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND:                      Recorder, or any un- platted contiguous parcel of land held in one ownership and of
                                              record at the effective date of this title.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES:                       Include but are not limited to lighting for billboards, streetlights, shopping center
                                              parking area lights, advertising signs and area-type lighting.
                                              Any lighting accent attached to a building or sign, using either neon or fluorescent
OUTLINE ILLUMINATION:                         light tubes. Ballasts for fluorescent lighting shall not exceed eighty (80) ma., and
                                              transformers for neon tubing shall not exceed thirty (30) ma.
OVERLAND FLOW:                                The movement of water over land, downslope toward a surface water body.
OWNERSHIP:                                    The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having any
                                              interest in the land to be subdivided.
PARAPET:                                      A low protective wall along the edge of a roof, bridge or balcony.
                                              An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by a subdivider or his surety to
                                              the City Clerk which guarantees that the subdivider will perform all actions required
PERFORMANCE BOND:                             by the City Council regarding an approved plat and provides that if subdivider
                                              defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider
                                              or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself
                                              complete the requirements of the approved plat.
                                              A written permission issued by the City allowing the construction, alteration, and
PERMIT:                                       extension of any structure or the grading of any lot under the provisions of this
                                              title and regulations issued hereunder.
PERVIOUS, NO FINES, OR POROUS CONCRETE OR     A special type of concrete or asphalt with a high porosity that allows water from
ASPHALT:                                      precipitation and other sources to pass directly through, thereby reducing the runoff
                                              from a site and allowing ground water recharge.
                                              A subdivision designed as residential, commercial, or industrial uses or a
                                              combination thereof, planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION:         single ownership or control, which is developed for the selling of individual lots or
                                              estates, whether fronting on private or dedicated streets, which may include two (2)
                                              or more principal buildings.
                                              The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite or other tract
PLAT:                                         of land or a re- platting of such including certifications, descriptions and
                                              approvals:
   Final Plat:                             The final and formal presentation by drawings of an approved subdivision development,
                                              the original and one copy of which is filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
   Preliminary Plat:                       The first formal presentation by drawings of a proposed subdivision.
PREMISES:                                     An area of land with its appurtenance and building which, because of its unity of
                                              use, is one unit of real estate.
                                              Uses allowed as a matter of right within certain land use districts without public
PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:            hearing, zoning permit, conditional use or variance; provided that such use is in
                                              accordance with requirements of that district and general conditions stated elsewhere
                                              in this title.
PROHIBITED USES:                              Any use which is not specifically enumerated or interpreted as allowable in that
                                              district.
                                              Any violation of the provisions of this Code. Any violation of this title shall be
PUBLIC NUISANCE:                              subject to prevention or abatement in an action at equity to the same extent as are
                                              other public nuisances.
                                              The erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance of buildings, power
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY:                      plants or substations, water treatment plants or pumping stations, sewage disposal or
                                              pumping plants and other similar public service structures by public utility or
                                              association, by a Municipal or other governmental agency.
                                              A licensed engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, architect, soil scientist or
QUALIFIED, LICENSED PROFESSIONALS:            other individual who has demonstrated a professional ability to design, among other
                                              professional services, stormwater systems and certify their effectiveness with a
                                              registered stamp.
RECONSTRUCTION:                               Any modification of the cross-section or sub-grade of an existing roadway. Paving or
                                              re-paving shall not be considered reconstruction.
RECREATION AREA:                              A parcel of land having recreational equipment and open space to be used for leisure
                                              activities for the residents.
                                              An enclosed piece of equipment, with or without motor power, primarily designed as
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE:                         temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use including but not
                                              limited to: motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, and camping trailer.
                                              Any park, camp, court, site, lot, parcel or tract of land under unified ownership,
                                              designated, maintained or intended for supplying a location of accommodations for any
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK, CAMP, OR COURT:    recreational vehicle to park overnight or for a limited extended stay. Parks are
                                              designed for two (2) or more recreational vehicles and include all buildings and open
                                              space used or intended for use as part of the facilities.
                                              An area in a recreational vehicle park designed for the parking of one recreational
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITES OR UNITS:          vehicle (RV). Each site or unit shall incorporate a paved pad for parking the RV, a
                                              paved area for parking of motor vehicles, and an area surrounding the RV for the use
                                              of the occupants.
                                              An area devoted to the dumping of refuse, including incineration, reduction or
REFUSE DUMP:                                  dumping of ashes, garbage, combustible or noncombustible refuse, offal or dead
                                              animals. This definition shall include landfills.
RESERVE STRIP:                                A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property, which is reserved or
                                              held in public ownership for future street extension or widening.
                                              Those establishments whose stock in trade and/or service are not directly related to
                                              the day to day activities normally associated with keeping a residential dwelling and
RETAIL STORE/RETAIL SERVICE:                  whose activities normally lead to congestion heavier than that associated with
                                              neighborhood services. Examples would include supermarkets, discount stores, spa and
                                              pool outlets, feed stores and building supply stores.
RETENTION PERIOD:                             The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of evaporation,
                                              infiltration, or emergency bypass.
                                              An establishment operated for providing domiciliary care for a group of persons who
                                              by reason of age are unable or choose not to provide such care for themselves and who
RETIREMENT HOME:                              are not in need of medical or nursing treatment except in the case of temporary
                                              illness and in which no more than fifty percent (50%) of the dwelling units have
                                              kitchen facilities. Nursing, convalescent or rest homes and hospitals or sanitariums
                                              shall not be construed to be included in this definition.
                                              Every way, lane, road, street and every way or place, not including private driveways
                                              serving only the owner of the property where situated, which is in private ownership
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE:                        inside the limits of incorporated City, and is used, or subject to being used, for
                                              travel by the owner or owners, or those persons having express or implied permission
                                              from the owner or owners, but not by other persons.
                                              Every way, lane, road, street, boulevard and every way or place in the City open or
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC:                         subject to being open, as a matter of right to public vehicular travel inside the
                                              limits of the incorporated City.
ROOF TYPES:
   Gable Roof:                             A roof with two (2) sloping sides and a gable at each end.
   Gambrel Roof:                           A roof with two (2) sides, each of which has a shallower slope above a steeper one
                                              (barn roof).
   Hip Roof:                               A roof with the ends inclined as well as the sides.
   Mansard Roof:                           A roof that has four (4) sloping sides, each of which becomes steeper halfway down.
                                              Water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that is found in drainage
RUNOFF:                                       facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, and wetlands, as well as
                                              shallow ground water.
SANITARY DUMP STATION:                        A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from recreational vehicle sewage
                                              holding tanks.
SATURATED ZONE:                               Encompasses the area below ground in which all interconnected openings with the
                                              geologic medium are completely filled with water.
                                              For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for certain uses,
SEAT:                                         the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated each twenty
                                              four (24) linear inches of benches, pews or space for loose chairs.
SEDIMENT:                                     Fragmented material that originates from weathering and erosion of rocks or
                                              unconsolidated deposits, and is transported by, suspended in, or deposited by water.
SEDIMENTATION:                                The deposition of sediment on ground surfaces and in water courses.
SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER:                       A building and facilities intended for the use of persons sixty five (65) years and
                                              over and to meet their particular social, recreational and meeting place needs.
SERVICE BUILDING:                             A structure housing toilet, lavatory and other servicing facilities as may be
                                              required by this Code.
                                              A retail establishment for the sale on the premises of motor vehicle fuel and other
SERVICE STATION:                              petroleum products and automobile accessories, and for the washing, lubrication and
                                              repair of automobiles.
                                              A line or point established by this title, generally parallel with and measured from
SETBACK OR SETBACK LINE:                      the lot line, to establish the location acceptable for building or placing any
                                              permitted structure.
SHORELINE AREAS:                              Those lands extending landward for two hundred feet (200') in all directions as
                                              measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark.
                                              Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or device, illuminated
                                              or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place designed to advertise,
SIGN:                                         identify or convey information, or otherwise directs attention to (including any
                                              landscape where letters or numbers are used), used for directing the public’s
                                              attention to a product or location, except for window displays and flags of any state
                                              or nation. For removal, sign shall also include all sign structures.
SIGN TYPES AND STRUCTURES:
   Abandoned Sign On Premises:             A sign, which no longer advertised a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or
                                              activity conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is displayed.
                                              A roof sign or projecting sign with no visible legs or braces designed to look as
   Architectural Blade:                    though it could have been part of the building structure, rather than something
                                              suspended from or standing on the building.
                                              The area of all faces of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape
                                              including any frame, forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the
   Area Of A Sign:                         necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists
                                              of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Where poster panels or
                                              bulletins are installed back to back, both faces are considered area.
   Background Area:                        The area comprising the message portion of the sign, behind the copy of the sign, not
                                              including the support structure.
   Banner:                                 A long, narrow flag hung over a street or entrance.
   Banner Sign:                            A temporary sign composed of lightweight material secured or mounted to allow
                                              movement caused by the wind.
                                              An outdoor advertising sign, being any structure or portion thereof, upon which
   Billboard:                              lettered or pictured material is displayed for advertising purposes, which is not
                                              situated on the premises occupied by the enterprise, organization or activity being
                                              advertised. Billboards do not include painted walls.
   Canopy Or Marquee Sign:                 Any sign attached to or constructed in or on a canopy or marquee.
   Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic):       An electronically controlled time, temperature and date sign, message center or
                                              reader board, where different copy changes are shown on the same location.
   Changeable Copy Sign (Manual):          A sign on which copy, or sign panels may be changed manually in the field, such as
                                              boards with changeable letters or numbers or changing pictorial panels.
   Construction Sign:                      A temporary sign identifying a building or construction site and architects,
                                              engineers, financial institutions, contractors and suppliers involved.
   Copy:                                   The wording on the sign surface.
                                              Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes
   Flashing Sign:                          the illusion of intermittent light by means of animation, or an externally mounted
                                              intermittent light source.
   Free-Standing Sign:                     A sign erected on a free-standing frame, mast or pole and not attached to any
                                              building.
                                              The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or upper surface of the
   Height Of Sign:                         street curb to the highest point of the sign. Elevated roadways shall not be used to
                                              measure height.
   Internally Lighted Sign:                A sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by an internal light source from
                                              which source light passes through the display surface to the exterior of the sign.
   Neon Sign:                              Any sign that has exposed neon tubing.
                                              Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to
   Nonconforming Sign:                     the time it came into the purview of this title, and which fails to conform to all
                                              applicable regulations and restrictions of this title.
   Off-Premises Or Off-Site Sign:          Any sign that relates to or advertises products, services or uses at, or directs
                                              persons to, a different premises upon which the sign is installed.
                                              A sign calling attention to any business, product or activity conducted or produced
   On-Premises Sign:                       on the property where the sign is located or identifying the premises upon which the
                                              sign is located.
                                              Any structure or portion thereof which is exterior to a building and is to advertise
   Outdoor Advertising:                    goods or services or activities, including billboards. The advertising area shall not
                                              exceed sixty two (62) square feet and shall consist of only one product display per
                                              facing.
                                              A piece of cloth, plastic, paper or other such material varying in size, shape or
   Pennant:                                design, erected as an advertising device to draw attention to the site upon which it
                                              is located.
   Permanent Sign:                         Any sign other than a temporary sign.
   Portable Sign:                          A sign not permanently attached to the ground or building.
   Projecting Sign:                        A sign other than a wall sign, which is attached to and projects from the structure
                                              or building face.
   Roof Sign:                              Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on top of or above the
                                              parapet of a building.
                                              A sign, which is not permanently affixed. All devices such as banners, pennants,
   Temporary Sign:                         flags (not intended to include flags of a nation), searchlights, twirling or sandwich
                                              type signs, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or gas filled figures.
                                              A sign painted on, attached to or erected against a wall of a building with face
   Wall Sign:                              parallel to the building wall and extending not more than one foot (1') from the
                                              wall, and the bottom of the sign must be eight feet (8') from the ground.
                                              The act of preparing a parcel of property for development and shall include
SITE PREPARATION:                             installation of utilities, tree removal, excavation work; including digging, filling,
                                              removing or moving of earth.
                                              The hiding from view of the understructure components of a manufactured home by the
SKIRTING:                                     means of wood, aluminum, steel or other metal sheeting, installed between the ground
                                              level and the bottom of the manufactured home. The skirting shall be stained or
                                              painted and neatly and attractively installed.
SPECIAL USE:                                  See definition of conditional use.
SPORTS OR ATHLETIC CLUB:                      A facility designed for the athletic recreation of its members. It does not include
                                              entertainment or party facilities.
STATE:                                        The sovereign territory of Idaho, USA.
                                              The time between major storms of predetermined intensity and volumes of runoff for
STORM FREQUENCY:                              which storm sewers and other structures are designed and constructed without fear of
                                              back flooding. A 2-year, 25-year, or 100-year storm, represents the percentage of
                                              chance of the particular storm event at any given time:
                                             A.   2-year event has a fifty percent (50%) chance any given year;
                                             B.   25-year event has a four percent (4%) chance of meeting or exceeding in any
                                              given year;
                                              C.   100-year event has a one percent (1%) chance of meeting or exceeding in any
                                             given year and has the same probability in each and every year, so any of these are
                                              possible in consecutive years.
                                              That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or
STORMWATER:                                   evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels, or pipes into a defined
                                              surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration facility.
                                              That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
                                              upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that
                                              portion of the building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and
STORY:                                        the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or
                                              unused under-floor space is more than six feet (6') above grade as defined herein for
                                              more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet
                                              (12') above grade at any point, it shall be considered a story.
                                              The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, except that a floor level
                                              in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a first story,
STORY - FIRST:                                provided such floor level is not more than four feet (4') below grade for more than
                                              fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or more than eight feet (8') below grade
                                              at any point.
STREET:                                       A right-of-way which provides access to adjacent properties, the declaration of which
                                              has been officially accepted.
STREET TYPES:
                                              A public right-of-way not over thirty feet (30') wide which affords, generally, a
   Alley:                                  secondary means of access to abutting lots, not intended for general use. Alleys are
                                              maintained by the properties abutting the alley. Alleys shall be subject to the
                                              authority of the City.
   Arterial Road:                          A major or main route, highway, or main road.
   Collector Street Or Road Or Distributor A low-to-moderate-capacity street which serves to move traffic from local streets to
Road:                                         arterial roads. Unlike arterials, collector streets are designed to provide access to
                                              residential properties.
   Cul-De-Sac:                             A street connected to another street at one end only and provided with a turnaround
                                              space at its terminus.
   Frontage Street:                        A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street to provide access to
                                              abutting properties.
   Highway:                                A main road, especially one connecting major towns or cities, and designated by an
                                              appropriate State or Federal agency.
   Loop:                                   A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
   Minor Street:                           A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
   Partial Street:                         A dedicated right-of-way providing only a portion of the required street width,
                                              usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
   Private Street:                         A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance, which provides vehicular
                                              and pedestrian access.
                                              Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to
STRUCTURE:                                    something having a location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as
                                              fences less than six feet (6') in height.
                                              A subdivider shall be deemed to be an individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
                                              association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
SUBDIVIDER:                                   initiates proceedings for the subdivision or tract of land in accordance with the
                                              provisions of this title. The subdivider need not be the owner of the property;
                                              however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient proprietary rights in
                                              the property to represent the owner.
                                              The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel of land into two
SUBDIVISION:                                  (2) or more lots or parcels for sale, lease, financing, gift or building
                                              construction, whether immediate or future.
                                              Describes the level of similarity necessary to prove the degree of similarity,
                                              between those uses permitted outright or listed as a conditional use, are such that
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USE:                    the proposed use might be expected to be found in this title as determined in
                                              accordance with section 10-3-6 of this title. In addition, a substantially similar
                                              use fits logically into the City model and Comprehensive Plan.
SUBSTRATE:                                    A substance or layer that underlies something, or on which something occurs, in
                                              particular.
SURETY:                                       A person who takes responsibility for someone else’s performance of an undertaking,
                                              or payment of debt.
                                              All waters which stand upon or flow along the surface of the ground. All lakes,
SURFACE WATERS:                               continuously flowing streams, and other bodies of water that are at least one-fourth
                                              (1/4) acre in surface area shall be considered to have a shoreline.
SURVEYOR:                                     A person who is licensed in the State as a public land surveyor, whose occupation is
                                              determining the size, shape, or boundaries of a piece of land.
SWALE:                                        A shallow drainage conveyance or infiltration area with relatively gentle side
                                              slopes, generally with flow depths less than one-half foot (1/2').
TENNIS CLUB:                                  A country club, organized solely for the play of tennis.
TRAVEL TRAILER:                               See definition of “recreational vehicle”.
                                              A Best Management Practice (BMP) that is intended to remove pollutants from
TREATMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE:           stormwater. A few examples of treatment BMPs are detention ponds, oil/water
                                              separators, biofiltration swales and constructed wetlands.
                                              Soil, slope or depth to bedrock conditions that will not accommodate on-site
                                              treatment through infiltration to the standards specified in this title. Unique site
UNIQUE SITE CHARACTERISTICS:                  characteristics include those circumstances which prevent or deprive the property
                                              owner of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the district under this title
                                              and are not a result of the actions of the property owner and may be used as a basis
                                              for a variance request.
UNSATURATED ZONE:                             The portion of the subsurface above the ground water table. The soil and rock in this
                                              zone contain air as well as water in its pores.
USE:                                          An activity or purpose for which land or premises or a building is designed, arranged
                                              or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
UTILITIES:                                    Installations for conveying water, sewage, gas, electricity, television, stormwater,
                                              and similar facilities providing service to and used by the public.
VACATED PLAT:                                 A recorded plat which has been removed from the County records under provisions of
                                              Idaho Code.
                                              A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot coverage, width,
                                              depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings
                                              or other code provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the size of
VARIANCE:                                     lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or a special privilege but may be
                                              granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of
                                              characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public
                                              interest.
VICINITY:                                     The area surrounding a use in which such use produces a discernable influence by
                                              aesthetic appearance, traffic, noise, glare, smoke or similar influences.
VICINITY MAP:                                 A small-scale map showing the location of a tract of land in relation to a larger
                                              area.
                                              Lands which are transitional between the earth and aquatic systems where the water
WETLANDS:                                     table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water, and
                                              are made up of the following attributes:
                                             A.   The land periodically supports predominately hydrophytes;
                                             B.   The substrate is predominantly un-drained hydric soil;
                                              C.   The substrate is non-soil and is saturated with water at some time during the
                                              growing season each year.
                                             Wetland areas shall be protected from construction and site preparation with a
                                              minimum of a twenty five foot (25') setback.
WIDTH:                                        The measurement taken at right angles to the length, which is the longer or longest
                                              dimension.
                                              Premises used for the storage or sale of new automobile parts, or for the storage,
WRECKING YARD:                                dismantling or abandonment of junk, obsolete automobiles, trailers, truck machinery
                                              and their parts.
                                              A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any
                                              structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general ground
YARD:                                         level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments and furniture may be
                                              permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting
                                              obstruction of visibility.
                                              A portion of land extending between side lot lines across the front of the lot and
   Front Yard:                             from the front lot line to the furthest architectural projection of the principal
                                              building.
                                              A portion of land extending from the furthest architectural projection of the
   Interior Side Yard:                     principal building to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building
                                              between the lines establishing the front and rear yards.
                                              A portion of land extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot and from
   Rear Yard:                              the rear lot line to the rear of the furthest architectural projection of the
                                              principal building.
                                              A portion of land extending from the furthest architectural projection of the
   Street Side Yard:                       principal building to the secondary street that adjoins the lot between the lines
                                              establishing the front and rear yards.
                                              A parcel of land abutting a district boundary where the district boundary is not a
ZONE TRANSITION LOT:                          street upon which more restrictive standards are affixed. The width of such parcel
                                              shall be the width of the lot, if platted, but not to exceed one hundred feet (100')
                                              in any distance.
                                              The regulation of the use of private lands or the manner of construction related
                                              thereto in the interest of achieving a comprehensive plan of development. Such
ZONING:                                       regulation shall also govern those public and quasi-public land use and buildings
                                              which provide for the proprietary type service for the community’s benefit as
                                              contrasted with governmental activities. Governmental activities are encouraged to
                                              cooperate under these regulations to secure harmonious development.
                                              A tract of land occupied or to be occupied by a principal building and its accessory
                                              facilities, together with such open spaces and yards as are required under the
                                              provisions of this title, having not less than the minimum area required by this
ZONING LOT:                                   title for a zoning purpose in the district in which the land is situated, and having
                                              its principal frontage on a public street of a standard width. A “zoning lot” which
                                              refers to land designated as a separate and distinct parcel on a legally recorded
                                              subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed filed in the records of the County.
ZONING PERMIT:                                A permit, issued by the City of Priest River, which authorizes land to be used for
                                              specific purposes.
                                              A discouraged variation in zoning where a piece of land is zoned differently than the
ZONING, SPOT:                                 zoned property surrounding it. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-2019; Ord.
                                              634, 6-17-2024)
 
 
Notes
1 1. IC 21-501.
2 2. IC 21-501.
3 3. IC 21-501.
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: District Classifications
10-3-2: Text And Official Map
10-3-3: District Boundaries
10-3-4: Divided Zoning
10-3-5: Zoning Upon Annexation
10-3-6: Classification Of New Uses Within Zone Districts
10-3-1: DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS:
To effectuate the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City, lands within the
incorporated boundaries of the City are hereby classified into the following
categories, which are further described in subsequent sections and so indicated
on the Zoning Map.
R-1  Residential
R-2  Residential - High Density
R-5  Rural Development
MU-R Mixed-Use Residential
MU-C Mixed-Use Commercial
C    Commercial
LI   Light Industrial
MUN  Municipal Use
AP-O Airport Overlay
FPM  Forest Products Manufacturing
DRO  Design Review Overlay District (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-
     2024)
 
10-3-2: TEXT AND OFFICIAL MAP:
This title shall consist of the text thereof and that certain map or maps
identified by the approving signature of the City Council and marked and
designated as "Zoning Map", which is placed on file with the City Clerk. The
map has been examined and duly considered in detail by the City Council and
adopted as part of this title. This title and each and all its terms and mapped
details is to be read and interpreted in the light of the contents of the maps
and their relationship to the Comprehensive Plan. If any conflict between the
maps and the text of this title is deemed to arise, the text of this title
shall prevail, and any conflict shall be interpreted by the Administrator;
subject to appropriate appeals process. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-3-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the various districts shown on the Zoning Map are, unless
otherwise indicated, streets, alleys, lot lines, or other lines of demarcation
as shown on the map. Where a street layout, property line or other boundary on
the ground varies from that shown on the Zoning Map, and where property or
other boundary lines do not exist or are not shown on the Zoning Map, the
designations shown on the map shall be applied and interpreted by the
Administrator by map scale or other method so as to carry out the intent and
purpose of the Zoning Map for that district. All interpretations are subject to
the appeals process. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-3-4: DIVIDED ZONING:
When divided zoning on a single lot occurs, either zone is acceptable for the
entirety of that lot with the declared use encumbering the entirety of the lot
and making it subject to the applicable zoning standards. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-3-5: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the Council shall request and
receive a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Department on the
proposed Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code changes for the unincorporated
area. The City Council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures provided
in section
10-15-5 of this title. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an
Ordinance of Annexation, the Council shall amend the Comprehensive Plan and
Zoning Code. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-3-6: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW USES WITHIN ZONE DISTRICTS:
It is recognized that new, unanticipated types of land uses will be proposed in
Priest River. To provide for such changes and contingencies, when a use is
proposed that is not listed as a prohibited, permitted, or conditional use in a
zone district, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall decide that:
   A.   The use falls within the same standard classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual or the North American Industry
Classification System (www.naics.com/search.htm), as amended, modified or
superseded, as a listed permitted or conditional use in a current zone district
and that it may be processed in the same fashion as the listed use; or
   B.   The use does not fall within the same standard classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual or the North American Industry
Classification System, as amended, modified or superseded, as a listed
permitted or conditional use in a current zone district, and thus is a
prohibited use in that district; or
   C.   The use is unique in nature and an amendment to this title is necessary
to allow for its placement within the appropriate zone district. (Ord. 597, 8-
6-2018)
CHAPTER 4
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: R-1 Residential
10-4-2: R-2 Residential - High Density
10-4-3: R-5 Rural Development
10-4-4: MU-R Mixed-Use Residential
10-4-5: MU-C Mixed-Use Commercial
10-4-6: C Commercial
10-4-7: LI Light Industrial
10-4-8: MUN Municipal Use
10-4-9: AP-O Airport Overlay
10-4-10: FPM Forest Products Manufacturing
10-4-11: DRO Design Review Overlay District
10-4-12: DROH Design Review Overlay Historic District (Rep. by Ord. 616, 4-19-
2021)
10-4-1: R-1 RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-1 District is to provide for a large lot
residential environment at housing densities consistent with the physical
characteristics of the area. Manufactured home placement standards shall not
exceed placement standards required of other single-family dwellings in this
district.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Agriculture, but not including the keeping of large animals on any lot of
less than one acre and limited to no more than one large animal per acre.
      Home occupations; that generate less than ten (10) trips per day, require
no large delivery trucks unless located on an established truck route and have
a current City business registration (refer to subsection
10-7-5J of this title).
      Parks controlled and maintained by the City of Priest River, Bonner
County, the State of Idaho, or a responsible association approved by the City
Council.
      Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes if they meet the
manufactured home placement standards adopted by the City per section
10-7-7 of this title.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Cemetery.
      Church.
      Daycare and pre-school facilities.
      Planned unit developments.
      Power substations screened from the public view.
      School.
      Uses substantially similar to an established use as determined per
section
10-3-6 of this title.
      A commercial use that is located adjacent to a pre-existing residential
use must provide noise buffering and privacy screening between the two (2) uses
by means of a fence, wall, or landscaping.
   D.   Density Provisions:
      1.   No more than one permanent dwelling unit allowed per lot.
      2.   Lots must be no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or at
the Administrators discretion within three hundred (300) square feet.
      3.   Lots must be a minimum of eighty feet (80') in width at the front
setback line.
      4.   Lot depth must not be less than one hundred feet (100').
      5.   The front yard setback must be a minimum of twenty five feet (25'),
measured from the front property line to the furthest architectural projection.
      6.   Side yard setback must be no less than ten feet (10') from the
furthest architectural projection.
      7.   Side yard setback flanking the street of a corner lot must be no
less than twenty feet (20'). On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet
(10') above the center line grades of the intersection streets in the area
bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points
along said street right-of-way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection.
      8.   Rear yard setbacks must be no less than twenty feet (20') from the
furthest architectural projection.
      9.   Accessory use setbacks must be no less than five feet (5') from rear
and side property lines.
      10.   Building height must not be more than two (2) stories and shall not
exceed thirty six feet (36'). (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-4-2: R-2 RESIDENTIAL - HIGH DENSITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide for residential
environments at a higher density than those provided for in the R-1 District.
Manufactured home placement standards shall not exceed placement standards
required of other single- family dwellings in this district.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Agriculture, but not including the keeping of large animals on any lot of
less than one acre and limited to no more than one large animal per acre.
      Home occupations; that generate less than ten (10) trips per day, require
no large delivery trucks unless located on an established truck route and have
a current City business registration (refer to subsection
10-7-5J of this title).
      Parks controlled and maintained by the City of Priest River, Bonner
County, the State of Idaho, or a responsible association approved by the City
Council.
      Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes if they meet the
manufactured home placement standards adopted by the City per section
10-7-7 of this title.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Cemetery.
      Church.
      Community center or nonprofit senior center.
      Daycare and pre-school facilities.
      Golf course, country club, or tennis club.
      Manufactured home park conforming to section
10-12-1 of this title and lying within a planned unit development.
      Multi-family dwellings provided they shall meet the setback requirements
of single-family dwellings.
      Planned unit developments.
      Power substations screened from the public view.
      School.
      Uses substantially similar to an established use as determined per
section
10-3-6 of this title.
      A commercial use that is located adjacent to a pre-existing residential
use must provide noise buffering and privacy screening between the two (2) uses
by means of a fence, wall, or landscaping.
   D.   Density Provisions:
      1.   No more than one permanent dwelling unit allowed per lot.
      2.   Lots must be no less than six thousand (6,000) square feet or at the
Administrators discretion within three hundred (300) square feet.
      3.   Lots must be a minimum of fifty feet (50') in width at the front
setback line.
      4.   Lot depth must not be less than fifty feet (50').
      5.   The front yard setback must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15'),
measured from the front property line to the furthest architectural projection.
      6.   Side yard setback must be no less than five feet (5') from the
furthest architectural projection.
      7.   Side yard setback flanking the street of a corner lot must be no
less than fifteen feet (15'). On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet
(10') above the center line grades of the intersection streets in the area
bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points
along said street right-of-way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection.
      8.   Rear yard setbacks must be no less than fifteen feet (15') from the
furthest architectural projection.
      9.   Accessory use setbacks must be no less than five feet (5') from rear
and side property lines.
      10.   Building height must not be more than two (2) stories and shall not
exceed thirty six feet (36'). (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-2019;
Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-4-3: R-5 RURAL DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-5 District is to provide for larger
tracts of land and to accommodate the rural lifestyle generally associated with
larger lots located on the outskirts of the City. It provides for a very low-
density development and typically, does not require the infrastructure
improvements of higher-density developments. R-5 requires design review per
section
10-4-11 of this chapter.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Agriculture, including the keeping of large animals.
      Home occupations; that generate less than ten (10) trips per day, require
no large delivery trucks unless located on an established truck route and have
a current City business registration (refer to subsection
10-7-5J of this title).
      Parks controlled and maintained by the City of Priest River, Bonner
County, the State of Idaho, or a responsible association approved by the City
Council.
      Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes if they meet the
manufactured home placement standards adopted by the City per section
10-7-7 of this title.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Animal clinics, hospitals, boarding kennels, runs, training schools, and
riding areas.
      Cemetery.
      Church.
      Free-standing (tower) wireless communication facility.
      Golf course and athletic and recreational facilities.
      Guest apartments and guest houses.
      Heliports.
      Manufactured home park conforming to section
10-12-1 of this title.
      Multi-family dwellings consistent with densities described in subsection
E of this section.
      Planned unit developments.
      Power substations screened from the public view.
      Recreational vehicle park conforming to section
10-9-2 of this title.
      School, daycare, and pre-school facilities.
      The keeping of flocks of fowl.
      Uses substantially similar to an established use as determined per
section
10-3-6 of this title.
      A commercial use that is located adjacent to a pre-existing residential
use must provide noise buffering and privacy screening between the two (2) uses
by means of a fence, wall, or landscaping.
   D.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area:
         a.   Five (5) acres when served by individual well and septic systems.
         b.   Two and one-half (21/2) acres when served by either or both
community water or sewer systems with remaining service by individual system.
         c.   One acre when served by both City water and sewer systems and
must be created by an approved planned unit development (PUD).
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
         a.   One hundred feet (100') for lots less than two and one-half (21/
2) acres;
         b.   Two hundred feet (200') for lots two and one-half (21/2) acres
and larger.
      3.   Minimum Lot Depth:
         a.   One hundred feet (100') for lots less than two and one-half (21/
2) acres;
         b.   Two hundred feet (200') for lots two and one-half (21/2) acres
and larger.
      4.   Minimum Setbacks:
         a.   Front yard setbacks must not be less than twenty five feet (25')
measured by the furthest architectural projection to the edge of the right-of-
way (public or private) or front property line if front yard contains no right-
of-way.
         b.   Side yard setbacks must not be less than ten feet (10') from the
furthest architectural projection.
         c.   Side yard setbacks flanking a street of a corner lot must not be
less than twenty feet (20') from the furthest architectural projection. On a
corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a
height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the center
line grades of the intersection streets in the area bounded by the right-of-way
lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street right-of-
way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection.
         d.   Rear yard setbacks must not be less than twenty feet (20') from
the furthest architectural projection.
         e.   Rear yard accessory uses must not be less than five feet (5')
from the furthest architectural projection.
      5.   Access: Lots shall have direct access to a public right-of-way or
access by deeded easement.
   E.   Density Provisions:
      1.   A maximum of one permanent dwelling unit per lot unless otherwise
allowed by an approved conditional use permit.
      2.   Densities may be averaged using a planned unit development and lot
clustering.
   F.   Community System Defined: As used within this designation, the term
"community systems" shall be defined as: privately maintained water supply and
distribution systems; sewage collection, treatment and disposal systems (not
including individual septic tanks and drain field systems or community septic
tanks and drain field systems unless subject to an approved sewer management
agreement).
   G.   Consent To Receive City Utility Services: All development utilizing any
type of community system as defined within this Code shall be required, prior
to the City approving a conditional use permit, subdivision, or planned unit
development or issuing a building permit, to provide recorded written consent
as to the acceptance of City utility service when the services are available to
the development and the City determines it will provide the services to the
development. Provided, however, no development shall be required to connect to
the City utility systems within five (5) years of the development installing a
like (i.e., water or sewer) community utility within an approved development.
At the end of the five (5) year period, or at any time thereafter, the
development must connect to available services. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-4-4: MU-R MIXED-USE RESIDENTIAL:
The intent of the MU-R Zoning District is to provide a residential zoning
classification that permits a mix of commercial and residential uses within the
same parcel. The district is intended to accommodate the physical pattern of
development currently found along existing commercial corridors.
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of the MU-R Mixed-Use Residential District are
to:
      1.   Accommodate mixed-uses with neighborhood-serving retail, service,
and other uses on the same parcel as the owner's residence;
      2.   Encourage development that allows low impact, light commercial uses
to co-exist with residential uses; and
      3.   Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging
physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Animal services:
         Sales and grooming.
         Veterinary (without boarding services).
      Barber or beauty salon.
      Co-located wireless communication facilities.
      Daycare and pre-school facilities.
      Eating establishments:
         Coffee shop or deli.
         Small scale bakery.
      Financial services.
      Household living:
         Artist live/work space.
         Detached house.
         Dwelling units.
      Medical service.
      Office.
      Parks and recreation.
      Public safety service.
      Repair service, consumer (including bicycles).
      Utilities and services, minor. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Artist live/work space, with an art gallery or store.
      Artist work or sale space.
      Car wash.
      Colleges and universities.
      Cultural exhibits and libraries.
      Drive-through facilities.
      Eating and drinking establishments:
         Restaurant.
         Tavern.
      Entertainment and spectator sports:
         Small (1 - 149 seats).
      Food and beverage retail sales.
      Freestanding (tower) wireless communication facilities.
      Gas/fueling station.
      Group living:
         Assisted living.
         Group home.
         Nursing home.
         Temporary overnight shelter.
         Transitional residence.
         Transitional shelter.
      Household living:
         Duplex.
         Manufactured home parks conforming to section
10-12-1 of this title.
         Multi-unit (3+ units) residential.
         Recreation vehicle park conforming to section
10-9-2 of this title.
         Single room occupancy.
         Townhouse.
      Laundromat.
      Lodging:
         Large (17+ guest rooms).
         Small (1 - 16 guest rooms).
      Manufacturing, production, and industrial services:
         Artisan (hand tools only; e.g., jewelry and ceramics).
      Parking, commercial (non-accessory).
      Personal services, including health clubs and gyms.
      Postal service.
      Religious assembly.
      Retail sales, general.
      School.
      Storage warehouse/mini storage (caretaker residence allowed).
      Utilities and services, major.
      Vehicle sales, service, and repair.
   D.   Uses Not Allowed:
      Adult use.
      Animal services:
         Shelter/boarding kennel.
      Entertainment and spectator sports:
         Large (1,000+ seats).
         Medium (150 - 999 seats).
      Hospital.
      Lodge or private club.
   E.      Commercial Establishment Size Limits:
      1.   Commercial: the gross floor area of Commercial establishments in the
MU-R District shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
      2.   If residential only- the dwelling unit shall enclose a space of not
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   F.   Indoor/Outdoor Operations: All permitted uses in the MU-R District must
be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly
authorized. This requirement does not apply to off-street parking or loading
areas, automated teller machines, or outdoor seating areas.
   G.   Lot Area Per Unit (Density): The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet for mixed-use lots and one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet for non- dwelling units.
   H.   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be two point zero (2.0)
for mixed-use lots.
   I.   Setbacks:
      1.   The entire building facade must not be located within fifteen feet
(15') of the property lines that abut front and street side property lines.
      2.   The minimum rear setback is zero percent (0%) to thirty percent
(30%) of the lot depth.
      3.   No interior side setbacks are required in the MU-R District, except
when MU-R zoned property abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum side
setback required in the MU-R District shall be the same as required for a
residential use on the abutting R-zoned lot.
   4.   For residential only uses, R-2 setbacks shall apply unless abutting
another R- Zone, then that zoning shall apply.
   J.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall be two (2) stories
and shall not exceed thirty six feet (36').
   K.   Off-Street Parking:
      1.   No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses in MU-
R Districts unless uses exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross
floor area, in which case off-street parking must be provided for the floor
area more than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      2.   Off-street parking spaces must be located to the side or rear of the
principal building or otherwise screened to not be visible from public right-
of-way or Residential Zoning Districts.
   L.   Doors And Entrances:
      1.   Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing the public point
of access. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this
requirement.
      2.   Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or
courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
   M.   Vehicle And Driveway Entrances: Vehicle access to commercial uses shall
be from a public right-of-way. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-2019;
Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-4-5: MU-C MIXED-USE COMMERCIAL:
The following model zoning district provisions represent a commercial zoning
classification that permits, rather than mandates, a vertical mix of commercial
and residential uses within the same building. The district is intended to
accommodate a physical pattern of development often found along village main
streets and in neighborhood commercial areas in older cities.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the MU-C Mixed-Use Commercial District is to:
      1.   Accommodate mixed-use buildings with neighborhood-serving retail,
service, and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above or
attached to the rear of nonresidential space;
      2.   Encourage development that exhibits the physical design
characteristics of pedestrian-oriented, storefront-style shopping streets; and
      3.   Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging
physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction.
(Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright
      Animal services:
         Sales and grooming.
         Veterinary.
      Artist work or sales space.
      Auto parts supplier.
      Bank, savings and loan, or credit union.
      Barber or beauty salon.
      Colleges and universities.
      Co-located wireless communication facilities.
      Convenience store.
      Cultural exhibits and libraries.
      Dance, music studio.
      Daycare and pre-school facilities.
      Drug store.
      Eating establishments:
         Bakery or baked goods store.
         Coffee shop.
         Deli.
         Restaurant.
      Entertainment and spectator sports:
         Small (1 - 149 seats).
      Financial services.
      Food and beverage retail sales.
      Funeral homes and/or mortuary.
      Household living:
         Artist live/work space located above the ground floor.
         Detached house.
         Dwelling units located above or below the ground floor.
      Lodging:
         Small (1 - 16 guest rooms) - motel operator residence may be located
on the ground floor.
      Medical service.
      Offices, including medical, dental, and optical.
      Parks and recreation.
      Pawnbroker shops.
      Personal service, including health clubs, gyms, and spas.
      Photographic studio.
      Postal service.
      Printing.
      Public health service.
      Religious assembly.
      Repair service, consumer (including bicycles).
      Retail sales, general.
      Storage warehouse/mini storage (separate dwelling unit for caretaker
allowed).
      Utilities and services, minor.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Car wash.
      Drive-through facilities.
      Eating and drinking establishments:
         Tavern.
      Freestanding (tower) wireless communication facilities.
      Gas stations with or without convenience stores.
      Group living:
         Assisted living.
         Group home.
         Nursing home.
         Temporary overnight shelter.
         Transitional residence.
         Transitional shelter.
      Household living:
         Artist live/work space, ground floor.
         Duplex.
         Dwelling units, ground floor.
         Multi-unit (3+ units) residential.
         Single room occupancy.
         Townhouse.
      Laundromat.
      Lodge or private club.
      Lodging:
         Large (17+ guest rooms).
      Manufacturing, production, and industrial services:
         Artisan (hand tools only; e.g., jewelry and ceramics).
      Parking, commercial (non-accessory).
      School.
      Utilities and services, major.
   D.   Uses Not Allowed:
      Adult use.
      Animal services:
         Shelter/boarding kennel.
      Entertainment and spectator sports:
         Large (1,000+ seats).
         Medium (150 - 999 seats).
      Hospital.
      Vehicle sales, service.
   E.   Commercial Establishment Size Limits: The gross floor area of
commercial establishments in the MU-C District shall not exceed fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet without an approved Conditional Use permit.
   F.   Indoor/Outdoor Operations: All permitted uses in the MU-C District must
be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly
authorized. This requirement does not apply to off-street parking or loading
areas, automated teller machines, or outdoor seating areas.
   G.   Floor-To-Floor Heights And Floor Area Of Ground-Floor Space:
      1.   All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-
use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of eleven feet (11').
      2.   All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-
use building must contain the following minimum floor area:
         a.   At least eight hundred (800) square feet or twenty five percent
(25%) of the lot area (whichever is greater) on lots with street frontage of
less than fifty feet (50'); or
         b.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the lot area on lots with fifty
feet (50)’ or more of street frontage.
   H.   Lot Area Per Unit (Density): The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet for mixed-use buildings and one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for non-dwelling units.
   I.   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR shall be two point zero (2.0)
for mixed-use buildings and one point two five (1.25) for all other buildings.
   J.   Setbacks:
      1.   The entire building facade must abut front and street side property
lines or be located within ten feet (10') of those property lines.
      2.   The minimum rear setback is zero percent (0%) to thirty percent
(30%) of the lot depth.
      3.   No interior side setbacks are required in the MU-C District, except
when MU-C zoned property abuts R-Zoned property, in which case the minimum side
setback required in the MU-C District shall be the same as required for a
residential use on the abutting R-zoned lot.
      4.   For residential only uses, R-2 setbacks apply unless abutting
another R-zone, then that zoning shall apply.
   K.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall be three (3) stories
or forty feet (40') for mixed-use buildings and shall not exceed thirty six
feet (36') for all other buildings.
   L.   Off-Street Parking:
      1.   No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses in MU-
C Districts unless uses exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross
floor area, in which case off-street parking must be provided for the floor
area more than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      2.   Off-street parking spaces must be located to the rear of the
principal building or otherwise screened to not be visible from public right-
of-way or Residential Zoning Districts.
   M.   Doors And Entrances:
      1.   Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing a public
sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this
requirement.
      2.   Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or
courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
   N.   Vehicle And Driveway Entrances: Vehicle access to commercial uses shall
be from a public right-of-way. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-2019;
Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-4-6: C COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the C District is to provide for the location
of service and high intensity retail businesses to minimize land use and
traffic conflicts.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      All uses permitted outright in the MU-C District except detached house.
      Auto sales, service, rental, and repair.
      Bowling alley.
      Cabinet shop.
      Car wash.
      Cleaning/laundry agent.
      Drive-in restaurant.
      Frozen food locker.
      Hotel or motel.
      Laundromat.
      Manufactured home or farm implement sales yard.
      Retail stores and services.
      Tire sales and service.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-
2019)
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Amusement centers, indoor and outdoor.
      Buildings and uses of public works, public services or utility nature,
including enclosed and/or screened equipment storage, repair yards, warehouses,
or related activities.
      Commercial outdoor storage/storage units.
      Fueling stations.
      Furniture refinishing and rebuilding.
      Hospital.
      Light manufacturing and light assembly.
      Residential uses (R-2 District requirements).
      Schools.
      Or substantially similar to an established use as determined per section
10-3-6 of this title.
   D.   Density Provisions: Density in the Commercial District shall be
governed by the Building and Fire Codes currently adopted and in use by the
City. A commercial use that is located adjacent to a pre-existing residential
use must provide buffering between the two (2) uses by means of a fence, wall,
or landscaping.
   E.   Commercial Setbacks: Setbacks from property lines are established
through design review and a function of construction type. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018;
amd. Ord. 605, 8-5-2019; Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-4-7: LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the LI District is to provide for the location
of inoffensive light industrial and related uses, and to make provisions for
certain kinds of commercial uses needed to service these industries. All uses
in the LI District will be subject to the requirements of the Design Review
Overlay. (Ord. 605, 8-5-2019)
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Assembly plants.
      Indoor shooting ranges 1 .
      Storage facilities.
      Welding and fabrication shops.
      Wholesale distributors.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Residential use associated with the light industrial use such as owner,
caretaker, employee, etc.
         1. Owner shall provide written acknowledgment of possible conflicts
between residential uses and light industrial uses such as, but not limited to,
noise, light, glare, and odors.
         2. Residential use must comply with all Building and Fire Codes.
      Those substantially similar to an established use as determined per
section
10-3-6 of this title.
      Wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 605, 8-
5-2019)
   D.   Density Provisions: Density provisions in the LI District shall be
governed by the Building and Fire Codes currently adopted and in use by the
City and appropriate design as determined by the design review process. The
City’s building inspector will inspect all plans for compliance with the
adopted Building Codes. A light industrial use that is located adjacent to a
pre-existing residential or commercial use must provide buffering between the
two (2) uses by means of a fence, wall, or landscaping. Separate residential
structures are subject to R-2 residential density (setback) provisions.
Residential uses contained within light industrial buildings shall not be
subject to R-2 density (setback) provisions. (Ord. 605, 8-5-2019)
 
Notes
1 Refer to Idaho Code 55-2604.4(a).
10-4-8: MUN MUNICIPAL USE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the MUN District is to provide for the
development of an area where Municipal entities are in a designated area
suitable for uses generally recognized as Municipal in nature. All uses in the
MUN District will be subject to the requirements of the Design Review Overlay.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
      Airports.
      Equipment and material storage.
      Municipal maintenance shops.
      Parks.
      Schools.
      Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      Manufacturing.
      Repair and maintenance shops.
      Retail stores and services.
      Or substantially similar to an established use as determined per section
10-3-6 of this title.
   D.   Density Provisions: Density in the MUN District shall be governed by
the Building and Fire Codes currently adopted and in use by the City and
appropriate design as determined by the design review process. The City’s
building inspector will inspect all plans for compliance with the adopted
Building Codes. A Municipal use that is located adjacent to a pre-existing
residential or commercial use must, when the potential for glare, noise, dust,
or other disruptive activity exists, provide buffering between the two (2) uses
by means of a fence, wall, or landscaping. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634,
6-17-2024)
10-4-9: AP-O AIRPORT OVERLAY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the AP-O District is to protect the viability
of the Priest River Airport by encouraging compatible land uses, densities, and
reducing aviation hazards that may endanger the lives and property of the
public and aviation user.
   B.   Airport Height Restriction Zones (Height Zones): In order to carry out
the provisions of this title, there are hereby created and established certain
zones which are shown on the Airport's Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) part
77 Airspace Drawings. One original, official, and identical copy of the FAR
part 77 Airspace Drawings reflecting the boundaries of the airport Height Zones
of Priest River, Idaho is hereby adopted, and the Council is hereby authorized
to sign and attest the map as the official Priest River Airport FAR part 77
Airspace Drawings of Priest River, Idaho.
One copy shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be designated
as exhibit 1. The City Clerk shall maintain this copy by posting thereon all
subsequent changes and amendments.
Each portion of an area located in more than one of the following zones shall
be evaluated independently according to the zone in which it is located.
      1.   Non-Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone (Utility Aircraft):
The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a horizontal distance
five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      2.   Visual Runway Approach Zone (Larger Than Utility Runway): The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a
width of one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') at a horizontal distance five
thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      3.   Visual Runway Approach Zone (Utility Aircraft): The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two
hundred fifty feet (250') wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a
width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance
five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      4.   Transitional Zone: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
      5.   Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs
of five thousand feet (5,000') or ten thousand feet (10,000') radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of the primary runway and connecting
the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone
does not include the approach and transitional zones. The horizontal zone was
constructed with ten thousand feet (10,000') radii.
      6.   Conical Zone: The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there
from a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
   C.   Airport Height Zone Limitations: Pursuant to this section and except as
otherwise provided in this title, no structure shall be erected, altered, or
maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any Height Zone created by
this section to a height more than the applicable height limit herein
established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the Height Zones in question as follows:
      1.   Non-Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone (Utility Aircraft):
Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
      2.   Visual Runway Approach Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for
each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet
(5,000') along the extended runway centerline. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
      3.   Transitional Zone: Slopes seven feet (7') outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of one hundred fifty
feet (150') above the airport elevation. In addition, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to
where they intersect the conical surface. Where the non-precision instrument
runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending a
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured at ninety degree
(90°) angles to the extended runway centerline. (Ord. 605, 8-5-2019)
      4.   Horizontal Zone: Established at one hundred fifty feet (150') above
the airport elevation.
      5.   Conical Zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred
fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation.
   D.   Excepted Height Limitations: In the area lying within the limits of the
Horizontal and Conical Zones, nothing in this Code shall be construed as
prohibiting the construction, maintenance, or growth of anything to a height
that is less than one hundred fifty feet (150') above the surface of the land,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such
structure or growth would extend above the height limits prescribed herein.
   E.   Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones (Land Use Zones): The
controlled area of the airport is divided into Airport Compatible Land Use
Overlay Zones (Land Use Zones). The purpose of such zones shall be to regulate
the development of noise sensitive land uses; promote compatibility between the
airport and the surrounding land uses; protect the airport from incompatible
development; and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of property
users. The Airport Land Use Zones established herein shall be known as:
      1.   Runway Protection Zone (RPZ)
      2.   Lateral Safety Zone (LSZ)
      3.   Critical Zone (ICZ)
      4.   Traffic Pattern Area (TPA)
      5.   Airport Influence Area (AIA)
   F.   Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zone Boundaries: The Airport Land
Use Zone boundary lines shown on the official Airport Land Use Zone Map shall
be located and delineated along contour lines established for the airport.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the Airport Land Use Zones as
shown on the official map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries shall be scaled from the nearest runway end shown on the
map.
      2.   Boundaries shall be scaled from the nearest physical feature shown
on the map.
      3.   Distances not specifically indicated on the original Airport Land
Use Zone Map shall be determined by a scaled measurement on the map.
Where physical features on the ground differ from the information shown on the
official Airport Land Use Zone Map or when there arises a question as to how or
where a parcel of property is zoned, and such questions cannot be resolved by
the application of this subsection F, the property shall be classified as the
most restrictive Airport Land Use Zone.
Where a parcel of land lies within more than one Airport Land Use Zone, the
zone within which each portion of the property is located shall apply
individually to each portion of the development.
   G.   Airport Land Use Zone Map: The boundaries of the Airport Land Use Zones
set out herein shall be delineated upon the airport's Airport Land Use Zone
Map, with said maps being adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as
fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
One original, official, and identical copy of the Airport Land Use Zone Map
that reflects the boundaries of the Airport Land Use Zones is hereby adopted,
and the Council is hereby authorized to sign and attest the map as the official
Airport Land Use Zone Map of Priest River, Idaho, and such map shall be filed
and maintained as follows:
      1.   One copy shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be
within exhibit 1. The City Clerk shall maintain this copy by posting thereon
all subsequent changes and amendments.
   H.   Use Of Land And Buildings: Within the Airport Land Use Zones as defined
herein, no land shall hereafter be used, and no structure or other object shall
hereafter be erected, altered, converted, or modified other than for those
compatible land uses permitted by the underlying comprehensive zoning
districts, as specified in this title. Additional land uses are prohibited in
the Airport Land Use Zones, regardless of underlying zoning, as set forth in
the Airport Compatible Land Use Table designated as exhibit 2 on file with the
City.
Where any use of prohibited land and buildings set forth in this section
conflicts with any use of land and buildings set forth in this title and/or
Zoning Map, this chapter shall apply.
   I.   Additional Land Use Regulations: On property within the Airport Land
Use Zone Map jurisdiction, but outside the jurisdictional limits of Priest
River, Idaho, this section shall be used to formulate land use recommendations
or responses to land use comment requests from other jurisdictions.
In the event of conflict between this section and any aviation hazard
restriction, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
   J.   Disclosure Statement: Fair Disclosure Statement shall be provided to
any applicant for a permit within an airport zone, or any prospective buyers of
any structure or property within such zones. Further, the Fair Disclosure
Statement shall serve to notify prospective buyers of property near airports
that subject property is subject to the provisions of this section and lies
within the Airport Influence Area and under the airport's FAR part 77 airspace.
As such, it may be necessary to clear and keep clear the airspace of any
portions of buildings, structures, or improvements of any and all kinds, and of
trees, vegetation, or other objects. This includes reserving the right of the
City to require: removal or demolishment of those portions of such buildings,
structures, improvements, trees, or any other objects which extend into the
airspace; cut to the ground level and remove any trees which extend into the
airspace; the right to mark and light, or cause or require to be marked or
lighted, as obstructions to air navigation, any and all buildings, structures,
or other improvements, and trees or other objects now upon, or that in the
future may be upon, said parcel, and which extend into the airspace. The Fair
Disclosure Statement shall also notify applicant for permit or prospective
buyers that they may be exposed to potentially impactive levels of aircraft
overflight, including but not limited to noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel or
fuel particles, and other effects that may be caused by normal aircraft
operations in or around an airport.
Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall sign the Fair Disclosure
Statement and the Fair Disclosure Statement will be recorded in the deed
records of the County. Upon the applicant's refusal, the City shall acknowledge
that the applicant was made aware of the above- described impacts. Such
statement shall be recorded in the deed records of the County.
Nothing stated herein is meant to provide pilots, crews, owners of aircraft, or
any other person from protection from liability for negligence committed on
their part.
   K.   Uses: All uses are permitted in the respective district with which the
AP-O District is combined, subject to the provisions of those districts.
   L.   Airport Overlay Application Required: All districts with which the AP-
O District is combined shall be required to apply for AP-O review
consideration. Every person seeking design review consideration shall submit an
application upon a form prescribed by the City. All applications shall be
accompanied by appropriate architectural and site development plans to scale
which shall show building locations, landscaping, permanent existing trees,
ground treatment, fences, off-street parking and circulation, locations and
size of adjacent streets, north arrow and property lines, drawings of major
exterior elevations showing building materials and proposed color scheme,
existing grade and proposed new grades.
   M.   Airport Overlay Considerations:
      1.   Pedestrian safety.
      2.   Height restrictions.
      3.   Disclosure.
      4.   Requirement for building limitations.
      5.   Compliance with applicable Idaho Transportation Department
standards.
   N.   Action By City Council: Within a timely fashion after receipt of an
application for AP-O review, the City Council shall investigate and hear every
application and shall either approve or deny such application, the City Council
may impose additional conditions or limitations as deemed necessary. Upon
granting or denying the application the City Council shall specify:
      1.   The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reason for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
The City Council shall direct the Administrator to issue a Zoning Certificate
listing the conditions as specified by the City Council. The applicant or any
person who appeared in person or in writing before the City Council may appeal
the decision of the City Council to the First District Court.
   O.   Notification To Applicant: Within thirty (30) days after a decision has
been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-4-10: FPM FOREST PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the FPM District is to provide for the location
of areas for the storage, processing and manufacturing of timber and wood
products, together with incidental and related uses. All uses in the FPM
District will be subject to the requirements of the Design Review Overlay.
   B.   Principal Uses Permitted Outright:
Dry kilning.
Log scaling and processing preparatory to manufacture.
Log storage, including preservation.
Logging and sawmill equipment storage and repair.
Operation of commercial office functioning incidental to forest products
manufacturing.
Saw milling and planing.
Saw milling by-products waste disposal (in accordance with the law).
Vehicle loading and unloading.
Uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright. All accessory uses require a building permit unless declared exempt
under City building permit guidelines.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
Buildings and uses of public works, public service, or utility nature,
including enclosed and/or screened equipment storage, repair yards, warehouse,
or related activities.
Residential use incidental to a permitted use outright for the purpose of
security, care facility/employees or owner/operator living unit.
Retail stores and services.
Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal use permitted
outright.
Or substantially similar to an established use as determined per section
10-3-6 of this title.
   D.   Performance Standards And Density Provisions:
      1.   A landscaping buffer strip shall be maintained with landscaping and
fencing adjacent to Residential zoned areas. The buffer shall be sixty feet
(60') in width and fenced with a six foot (6') chain link fence that shall be
provided within the sixty foot (60') buffer zone.
      2.   No vehicular access shall be permitted in the buffer zone except for
emergency and utility access.
      3.   The buffer and required landscaping and fencing improvements shall
be permanently maintained by the applicant, heirs, and assigns. The
Administrator shall be notified when the required landscaping is completed. The
required inter-planting shall be completed within one year of acceptance into
the zone.
      4.   The applicant shall work with the Department of Environmental
Quality and Panhandle Health District to mitigate any negative impacts on
surrounding surface and subsurface waters, and to abide by State standards.
      5.   Other than the above-mentioned performance standards, density in the
FPM District shall be governed by the Building and Fire Codes currently adopted
and in use by the City and appropriate design as determined by the design
review process.
      6.   A forest product manufacturing use that is adjacent to a pre-
existing residential or commercial use must provide buffering between the two
(2) uses as prescribed in the performance standards. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-4-11: DRO DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the DRO District is to guide the general
appearance of building and improvements to achieve the objectives of a
Comprehensive Plan or a more detailed development plan as adopted by the City
Council. The DRO District is superimposed over all Commercial, Mixed-Use
Commercial, Rural Development, Municipal Use, Industrial, Forest Products
Manufacturing, and Historic Districts.
   B.   Uses: All uses are permitted in the respective district with which the
DRO District is combined, subject to provisions of those districts.
   C.   Design Review Application Required: All districts with which the DRO
District is combined shall be required to apply for design review
consideration. Every person seeking design review consideration shall apply
upon a form prescribed by the City. All applications shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Appropriate architectural and site development plans to scale,
showing:
         a.   Building locations.
         b.   Pre-existing trees and ground treatment.
         c.   Fences and landscaping.
         d.   Off-street parking and circulation.
         e.   Locations and size of adjacent streets.
         f.   North arrow and property lines.
         g.   Drawings of major exterior elevations showing building materials
and proposed color scheme.
         h.   Existing grade and proposed new grades.
All of the drawings and plans shall be reviewed by the Administrator. Refer to
section
10-7-1 of this title.
   D.   Design Review Considerations:
      1.   Pedestrian safety.
      2.   Entrance and exit safety.
      3.   Requirements for building setbacks.
      4.   Compliance with applicable Idaho Transportation Department
standards.
   E.   Action By The Planning And Zoning Department: Within thirty (30) days
after receipt of an application for design review, the Planning and Zoning
Department shall investigate and review every application and shall either
approve or deny the application. In approving an application, the Planning and
Zoning Department may impose additional conditions or limitations as deemed
necessary. Upon granting or denying the application the Planning and Zoning
Department shall specify:
      1.   The code and standard used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit. The Administrator shall issue a Zoning Certificate or report listing
the conditions as specified by the Planning and Zoning Department. The
applicant or any person, who appeared in person or in writing before the
Planning and Zoning Department, may appeal the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Department to the City Council, provided the appeal is submitted to the
City Council within fifteen (15) days from the Planning and Zoning Department's
action.
   F.   Notification To Applicant: Within thirty (30) days after a decision has
been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-4-12: DROH DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY HISTORIC DISTRICT:
(Rep. by Ord. 616, 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-5-1: General Provisions
10-5-2: Performance Standards
10-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Accessory Building:
      1.   Will not be located in any required front yard area;
      2.   Will not be located closer than five feet (5') from any side or rear
property line, except corner lots shall not have any accessory building located
within fifteen feet (15') from the side property line fronting the side street;
and
      3.   Recreational vehicles whose designated purpose is sleeping
accommodations for camping shall not be used as accessory structures.
      4.   Temporary carport structures shall be allowed in front and side
yards. Said structures shall not discharge snow onto adjacent property. No part
of the structure shall extend into a public right of way. An application and
accurate site plan are required depicting the proposed structure, distance to
the property lines, and utilities. Approval of the application and site plan by
the Planning and Zoning Administrator are required prior to construction.
   B.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
      1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
      2.   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district;
      3.   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district; and
      4.   The conversion follows all other relevant codes and ordinances.
   C.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only, may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress,
but the temporary facilities shall be removed upon substantial completion of
the construction work.
   D.   Required Trash Areas: All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four feet (4') in
height or within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate vehicular access
to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as
determined by the Administrator shall be provided; standard Municipal approved
dumpsters are excluded from this provision.
   E.   Development Close To An Airport: The location, building height and
lighting of residential and commercial development shall be restricted within
airport approach areas as required by the State Department of Transportation,
Division On Aeronautics and Public Transportation and Federal Aviation
Administration.
   F.   Maintenance Of Rights-Of-Way: Rights-of-way adjacent to property not
maintained by the City shall be the responsibility of the property owners whose
property abuts the rights-of-way. In the case of alleyways, maintenance will be
required by the adjoining land owners so that all alleys are free and clear of
debris, vehicles, weeds and all other obstructions.
   G.   Recreational Vehicle Storage: Refer to: Title 4 Chapter 6 Sections 1-4.
   H.   Addressing: Addressing of all structures shall be limited to one
address per structure for single use structures and clearly definable
addressing for multi-use structures as assigned by the County. The address
numbers shall be permanently attached to the front of the residence or on the
part of the structure facing the street and be clearly readable from the
street, in contrast to the structure color.
   I.   Fencing: See section
10-7-6 of this title.
   J.   Temporary Carport Structure: A pre-fabricated structure typically sold
as a complete structure kit or an equivalent site-built structure receiving
City approval prior to construction. Said structure is designed to be bolted to
a concrete slab or secured to the ground using soil anchors or concrete piers,
but not spread footings. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 617, 4-19-2021; Ord.
634, 6-17-2024)
10-5-2: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises,
except that any use permitted by this title may be undertaken and maintained if
acceptable measures and safeguards are taken to reduce dangerous and
objectionable conditions to acceptable limits as established by the following
performance requirements:
   A.   Fire Hazards: With the concurrence of the local Fire Department, any
activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall
be protected by adequate firefighting and fire-prevention equipment and by the
safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such
hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance, which is
compatible with the potential danger involved as specified in the International
Fire Code and the National Safety Foundation publications.
   B.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of the
disturbance.
   C.   Noise: Objectionable noise as determined by the Administrator which is
due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Air-
raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt
from this requirement.
   D.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without
instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   E.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and
regulations established by the health authority.
   F.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible
from any property outside a Manufacturing District or from any street.
   G.   Erosion: No erosion, by man, wind or water, shall be permitted which
carries objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   H.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
   I.   Enforcement Provisions: The Administrator, prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating
themanner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing
and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable
limits and tolerances.
   J.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards
Institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists’ Association, Inc., Washington
D.C., the United States Bureau of Mines and the health authority. (Ord. 597, 8-
6-2018)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Signage
10-6-1: SIGNAGE:
   A.   Purpose And Authority: The purpose of this section is to establish
standards for the fabrication, erection and use of signs, symbols, markings and
advertising devices within the City. These standards are desired to protect and
promote the public welfare, health and safety of persons within the community
and to aid in the development and promotion of business and industry by
providing sign regulations which encourage aesthetic creativity, effectiveness
and flexibility in the design and use of such devices without creating a
detriment to the general public and is adopted in accordance with that
authority granted in Idaho Code 67-6518 (1980) and the general police powers of
the City.
   B.   Short Title Citation: This chapter shall be known as the SIGN CODE OF
THE CITY OF PRIEST RIVER.
   C.   Permit Required; Appeal: It is unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, or change the use of any sign as defined in this title
without first obtaining a sign permit and/or building permit from the Planning
and Zoning Department. Permitted or grandfathered signs shall be allowed to
have routine maintenance; including changing of copy for on-site uses performed
without obtaining a permit if only non-structural changes or repairs are made.
All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans, designs,
specifications or drawings stating specifically all dimensions, animations if
any, lighting, colors and plan of installation stating clearances and setbacks.
The Administrator shall have the authority to refuse a sign permit for any sign
which does not comply with the requirements of this section. Appeal from the
provisions or enforcement of this section shall be made as follows:
      1.   Appeal From Administrator Decision:
         a.   Notice Of Appeal: An affected person aggrieved by the decision of
the Administrator may file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within fifteen (15) days after the Administrator’s decision and shall clearly
state the grounds for appeal as an affected person, as defined in Idaho Code
67-6521. An appeal from an action of the Administrator shall automatically stay
the issuance of the permit until such appeal has been decided by the City
Council.
         b.   Fees For Appeal: The fees for an appeal from the Administrator’s
decision regarding sign permits shall be set from time to time by resolution
duly passed and adopted by the City Council.
         c.   Hearing On Appeal: The City Council shall hold a hearing on an
appeal pursuant to the procedures as provided in section 10-15-5 of this title
at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, or at a special meeting
called for that purpose.
      2.   Appeal From City Council Decision: The decision by the City Council
shall constitute the final decision. An affected person aggrieved by the
decision may, within thirty (30) days, seek judicial review pursuant to Idaho
Code.
   D.   Impairment Of Traffic And Rights-Of-Way: In addition to other
requirements of this title and this chapter, all signs, including signs inside
windows, shall comply with the following conditions:
      1.   No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct the free
and clear vision of pedestrians and vehicular traffic or interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any traffic sign, signal or device.
   E.   General Sign District: All the area within the corporate limits of the
City where signs are permitted, with the following restrictions:
      1.   R-1, R-2, And R-5 District: Residential nameplates not exceeding two
(2) square feet, bearing only the name and address of the occupant, mounted
flush on the structure at or below eye level; non-illuminated signs for home
occupation not to exceed four (4) square feet, bearing the name of the
business, and the name and address of the occupant.
   F.   Construction/Finish: Signs may be constructed of painted, stained or
carved wood; brick or stone; glass or metal; plastics or polymers. Signs shall
not be pointed on their edges creating a safety hazard and shall be treated to
prevent reflective glare.
      Exposed metal support structures for signs, including but not limited to,
posts, poles and sign sides or edges, must be faced or covered with wood, brick
or stone, or painted. The color and material must be approved by the
Administrator. Appeals from this decision are made to the City Council.
      1.   All electric signs shall be Underwriter Laboratory (UL) approved.
All other signs shall comply with the most current International Building Code
adopted. Drawings of all signs showing size, location, color, or other
information as deemed necessary by the Administrator must be submitted prior to
receiving a sign permit. All plans for freestanding signs eight feet (8') or
taller in overall height, and all roof-mounted signs shall be submitted with
signature and stamp of an Idaho licensed engineer. The engineer’s review of a
sign structure shall include, but not be limited to, the effects of wind,
seismic forces, allowable stresses, combined loads, overturning movement from
lateral forces, the stresses of wire, rope and their fastenings.
      2.   The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed upon
private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Sign Sizes: Wall mounted signs shall be proportional in size to the
building they are mounted on.
      Freestanding signs shall be limited in size to a square footage equal to
one- third (1/3) of the footage of building frontage on the public right-of-
way.
      Any sign that exceeds eight feet (8') in height or thirty two (32) square
feet, even if temporary in nature, must secure a permit.
      1.   Size Variations: An applicant that wishes to vary from these
standards by an increase in allowable size has the right to petition the City
Council for a variance from these standards.
   H.   Number Of Signs: The number of freestanding signs for each business
shall be one for each street frontage.
   I.   Prohibited Signs And Exceptions:
      1.   No moving appurtenances attached to a sign intended to attract
attention.
      2.   No sign shall be located to conflict with the appearance of devices
controlling traffic.
      3.   No rotating beacon lights.
      4.   No rotating or flashing signs or signs which have moving parts
except for signs denoting the correct time and temperature. The sign display
itself shall not move or rotate.
      5.   Off-premises signs shall only be allowed as “business locator signs”
with the express permission of the Administrator. The purpose of these signs is
to direct traffic to businesses not located on either highway corridor. Signs
may be placed on principal arterial roads subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Only businesses located in the City of Priest River shall be
allowed to be named or displayed. The message displayed shall be restricted to
those businesses’ name, address, and directional arrow.
         b.   At each intersection of an arterial road, one freestanding sign
may be erected allowing for the joint display of business names and addresses
that are accessed from that intersection.
         c.   The sign may be placed on the edge of the City right-of- way or
such location as is specified by the City Council. The design and construction,
including materials, colors and lighting installed, must first be approved by
the Administrator and the City Council. The first sign shall become the
standard for all the signs on the framework. The City of Priest River may
require maintenance or repairs to any sign at any time. Maintenance or repairs
shall be completed within ten (10) days of notification or the sign will be
removed at the expense of the business so listed.
         d.   Off-premises signs along the highway corridors may be subject to
Idaho Transportation Department permitting. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
      6.   Reader board or changeable copy signs may be allowed with
Administrator approval. The area of the sign(s) shall be combined with any
other on-premises sign and the total size shall not exceed the maximum allowed
for that business. (Ord. 605, 8-5-2019)
   J.   Design And Construction Standards:
      1.   Height: No sign shall be designed, constructed or erected which
extends to a height of more than five feet (5') above the roof line, exclusive
of false fronts, or a maximum height of twenty four feet (24'), whichever is
lower.
      2.   Setback: All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of ten
feet (10') from the property line to the nearest point of the support
structure. No projecting sign, canopy or marquee shall extend from a building
closer than eighteen inches (18") from the back of the curb or be lower than
eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
   K.   Landscaping: The area around the base of all signs shall be landscaped,
providing that the Administrator may waive this requirement where the
landscaping would interfere with pedestrian or vehicle traffic or where not
practical.
   L.   Exempted Signs: The following signs shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter providing that they meet the requirements set forth
in this section:
      1.   All signs erected in a public right-of-way by a public agency
controlling or directing traffic.
      2.   Political signs pertaining to a specific election must be removed
within five (5) days after the election by the candidate or property owner who
placed the sign.
      3.   Real estate signs, not occupying any portion of the public right-of-
way.
      4.   Construction signs announcing the construction of a building or
project thirty two (32) square feet. The sign shall be removed upon occupancy
of the building.
      5.   Flags, either official or historical, of any state or nation.
      6.   Any sign inside a building or inside a window, the total percentage
of window coverage for signs on the interior shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%).
      7.   Owner identification or occupant identification signs for
residential structures, private warning signs and for sale or for rent signs,
none of which may exceed two (2) square feet.
      8.   Temporary signs/banners to announce conventions or business special
events and which shall be immediately removed at the end of the event. Signs
are limited to being placed no more than fourteen (14) days before the event.
      9.   Murals, providing no words are used for the intent of advertising.
All requests for murals shall be approved by the Administrator and City
Council.
      10.   Signs stating the name of a housing complex of ten (10) or more
dwelling units provided that the sign does not exceed twenty five (25) square
feet.
   M.   Removal And Disposition Of Sign:
      1.   Abandoned Signs: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a
period of two (2) months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event,
or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of premises on which the sign is
located. For signs that are conforming under the provisions of this chapter,
but no longer advertise a bona fide business, the owner may cover the message
or sign copy with paint or other materials.
      2.   Dangerous Or Defective Signs: No person shall maintain or permit to
be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in
a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired
by the owner of the premises or the owner of the sign.
      3.   Removal Of Signs: The building inspector shall cause to be removed
any sign that endangers the public safety such as abandoned, dangerous or
materially, electrically or structurally defective signs.
      Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the
determination of the building inspector ordering removal or compliance by
filing a written notice or appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days
after receipt of the notice. In cases of emergency, the Administrator and/or
building inspector may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective
sign without notice.
      4.   Disposal Of Signs; Costs: Any sign removed by the building inspector
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall become the property of the
City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate. The cost of
removal of the sign by the City shall be considered a debt owed to the City by
the owner of the property. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
CHAPTER 7
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Design Review Considerations (Where Required)
10-7-2: Off-Street Parking And Loading
10-7-3: Shoreline Development
10-7-4: Stormwater Management
10-7-5: Specific Use Provisions
10-7-6: Yard And Height Regulations
10-7-7: Manufactured Home Placement Standards
10-7-8: "Site-Built" Home Placement Standards
10-7-9: Development Agreements
10-7-9-1: Definition And Purpose
10-7-9-2: Scope Of Agreement
10-7-9-3: Elements Of Agreement
10-7-9-4: General Provisions
10-7-9-5: No Third-Party Rights
10-7-9-6: Limitation On Liability
10-7-9-7: Maintenance Agreement
10-7-1: DESIGN REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS (WHERE REQUIRED):
In reviewing the application, the Planning and Zoning Department shall consider
the following matters as related to the adopted comprehensive plan and code:
   A.   Considerations Relating To Traffic Safety And Traffic Congestion:
      1.   The effect of the site development plan on traffic conditions on
contiguous streets;
      2.   The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of
vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walk ways;
      3.   The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities to
prevent traffic congestion;
      4.   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading facilities;
      5.   The circulation patterns within boundaries of the development; and
      6.   The surfacing and lighting of off-street parking facilities.
   B.   Consideration Relating To Outdoor Advertising: Consider the number,
location, color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of outdoor advertising
signs and structures in relation to the creation of traffic hazards and the
appearance and harmony with adjacent developments.
      C.   Considerations Relating To Outdoor Landscaping:
      1.   The location, height and materials of walls, hedges and screen
plantings to insure harmony with adjacent parcels or to conceal storage areas,
utility installations or other unsightly development;
      2.   Implementation of erosion sediment control (ESC) systems; and
      3.   The planting of ground cover or surfacing to prevent dust and
erosion.
   D.   Considerations Relating To Drainage: Consider the effect of the site
development plan in relation to the adequacy of the storm and surface water
drainage proposals. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-2: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered
(requiring a building permit), or its use changed unless permanently maintained
off-street parking and loading spaces have been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      2.   Whenever a building or structure changes use or is enlarged up to
fifty percent (50%) in floor area, number of employees, seating capacity,
number of dwelling units, or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the
number of existing parking and loading spaces, additional parking spaces shall
be provided on the basis of the enlargement of change and thereafter comply
with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
      3.   If for any reason the parking and loading space requirements of this
section can be shown to be unusually high, then the parking and loading space
provisions cited herein may be reduced proportionately by the City Council.
   B.   Location Of Parking Spaces: The following regulations shall govern the
location of off-street parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for all residential dwelling units with a density of
less than ten (10) units shall be located on the same site as the use which
they are intended to serve.
      2.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories, or similar residential
uses with a density of ten (10) or more units shall be located not more than
three hundred feet (300') from the principal use.
      3.   Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses
shall be located not more than eight hundred feet (800') from the principal
use.
   C.   Joint Use: Two (2) or more nonresidential uses may jointly provide and
use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap;
provided that a written agreement approved by the City Council shall be filed
with the application for a building permit.
   D.   Access And Maneuvering Area:
      1.   Any parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle
entering or leaving the parking area from or onto a public or private street
shall be traveling in a forward motion. Residential uses with a density of less
than ten (10) units are exempt from this requirement.
      2.   Access of driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be
located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving shall be clearly
visible for a reasonable distance to any approaching pedestrian or motorist.
      3.   All maneuvering areas, ramps, access drives, etc., shall be provided
on the property on which the facility is located; however, if such facility
adjoins an alley, the alley may be used as a maneuvering area. Residential uses
with a density of less than ten (10) units are exempt from this requirement.
   E.   Width Of Drive Aisles:
      1.   Drive aisles serving individual parking spaces shall not be less
than twenty five feet (25') wide for ninety degree (90°) parking, twenty feet
(20') wide for sixty degree (60°) parking, fifteen feet (15') wide for forty
five degree (45°) parking, and twelve feet (12') wide for parallel parking (see
diagram in subsection P of this section).
   F.   Minimum Distance And Setbacks:
      1.   No part of any parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles shall be
closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling unit, school, hospital, church or
other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless separated
by an acceptably designed screen approved by the Administrator (see subsection
N, “Screening And/Or Landscaping”, of this section).
      2.   No portion of any parking facility, except driveways and approaches,
shall be located within five feet (5') of the front or side property lines.
Commercial and industrial uses are exempt from this requirement.
      3.   No portion of any parking facility shall obstruct the visibility,
for a reasonable distance, of motorists using any public or private street.
   G.   Surfacing:
      1.   All parking facilities shall be paved.
      2.   Driveways and approaches to a parking facility abutting a street
improved with curbs and gutters shall be paved with hard surfacing to their
full width for a minimum of twenty feet (20') in depth from the street right-
of-way, or where there is a lesser setback, the hard surfacing shall be from
the street to the parking facility.
      3.   Any building lot in a Commercial or a MU-C Zone used in whole or in
part as a parking facility and which abuts a City street with curbs and gutters
shall be improved with concrete sidewalks in accordance with City
specifications.
   H.   Drainage:
      1.   All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of
surface water and snow storage to prevent the drainage of the water onto
adjacent properties.
      2.   Provisions shall be made in the construction and maintenance of the
drainage facilities to protect the quality of stormwater from oils, silt, and
other contaminants.
      3.   The use of porous cement or pervious pavement is encouraged.
      4.   In areas where a proper storm drainage system is not available at
the time of parking facility construction, the on-site drainage system shall be
located and constructed so that it can be connected to a new storm drainage
system with a minimum of disruption and expense. The design of any such
drainage system shall be submitted to the Public Works Supervisor for approval.
   I.   Maintenance:
      1.   The owner of property used for parking and/or loading shall maintain
the facility in accordance with good practice without holes and free of snow,
dust, trash and other debris.
      2.   Failure to keep the parking lot surfaces reasonably clean of snow
and debris, failure to keep storm catch basins properly clean and functioning
and failure to remove and replace dead plant material or to remove noxious
weeds shall be specifically included in the term “failure to maintain the
facility in good practice” and shall be deemed a violation of this title and
therefore subject to the penalties as established.
   J.   Lighting:
      1.   Any parking area shall be properly illuminated during non-daylight
hours to avoid accidents. Residential uses are exempt from this requirement.
      2.   Any lights used to illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as
to reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
   K.   Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel
blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a
parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
   L.   Striping: All paved parking areas with a capacity over ten (10)
vehicles shall be striped to facilitate the movement into and out of the
parking stalls.
   M.   Signs:
      1.   The entrances and exits to the parking area shall be clearly marked.
      2.   Parking areas having more than one aisle or driveway shall have
directional signs or markings in each driveway or aisle.
      3.   Parking area directional signs shall have a maximum size of four (4)
square feet.
   N.   Screening And/Or Landscaping:
      1.   Slopes and other areas between the parking areas and street rights-
of-way or property lines shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, trees or
evergreen groundcover and shall be maintained in good condition.
      2.   All paved parking areas located in, or adjacent to, a Residential
District or existing residence, shall be effectively screened from view on all
sides which adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes, by an
acceptably designed wall, fence or planting screen. The fence, wall or planting
screen shall not be less than four feet (4') or more than seven feet (7') in
height and maintained in good condition. The space between the fence, wall or
planting screen, and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any Residential
District or of any existing residence shall be landscaped with grass, hardy
shrubs, trees or evergreen groundcover and shall be maintained in good
condition. In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that
the erection of the fence, walls or planting screen will not serve the intended
purpose, the Administrator may waive, specifically, this requirement.
      3.   All parking facilities of twenty (20) or more parking spaces which
abut a street right-of-way shall provide, on-site, one tree for every twenty
(20) parking spaces or fraction thereof unless declared specifically exempt by
the Administrator.
      4.   Parking facilities in the downtown area, which abut a street right-
of-way, shall provide one street tree for every twenty five feet (25') of
property abutting the right-of-way. Should the planting of a street tree be
physically unfeasible, the Administrator may require suitable landscaping
abutting the street right-of-way.
   O.   Design Standards:
      1.   All parking facilities shall be designed to City standards and
approved by the City Council. Plans for parking facilities are required prior
to construction and shall indicate ingress, egress, grade,drainage facilities,
location of all plantings, base and surface materials.
      2.   All nonresidential parking facilities with more than twenty (20)
parking spaces shall provide the equivalent of one parking space for every
twenty (20) parking spaces included in the facility for the temporary storage
of bicycles. The space for bicycle storage shall provide a convenient and
sturdy rack or bar to which bicycles can be attached to prevent theft. This
requirement may be waived by the City Council if it can be demonstrated that
due to location or predominant use of the parking facility, the bicycle space
would not be reasonably utilized.
      3.   All nonresidential parking facilities with more than ten (10)
parking spaces shall provide and reserve one parking space for every ten (10)
parking spaces included in the facility for the handicapped in accordance with
Federal Standard Specifications for facilities of the handicapped.
   P.   Parking Space Design And Dimensions: Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the following diagram:
DIAGRAM: PARKING SPACE DESIGN AND DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/24412d7d1f62bf126bd711ccecec393734b207d3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-669.gif]
 
 
Type Of Space           Minimum Distance
                        45°60°90°Parallel
Width of parking space  9'  9'  9'  9'
Length of parking space 18' 18' 19' 23'
Width of drive aisle    15' 20' 25' 12'
 
   Q.   Requirements For Each Use:
      1.   Residential Uses:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling is
required.
         b.   All vehicles other than passenger cars and pickups under six
thousand (6,000) gross vehicle weight shall be parked off the public right-of-
way.
         c.   Large vehicles over sixteen thousand (16,000) gross vehicle
weight must use designated truck routes. Service related activities are exempt
from truck route requirements (i.e., trash collection, material delivery to
projects, etc.).
      2.   Commercial Uses:
         a.   Off-street parking for commercial uses shall be provided for at
the rate of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area unless
otherwise stated in section “R” of this Code.
         b.   Businesses shall provide for off-street parking of all commercial
vehicles over sixteen thousand (16,000) gross vehicle weight.
      3.   Light Industrial And Forest Products Manufacturing Uses: Parking
shall be provided for at the rate of one parking space for every two (2)
employees (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) plus one
for each motor vehicle used for operation.
   R.   Parking Space Requirements For Specific Uses: For the purpose of this
section, the following off-street parking space requirements shall apply:
Type Of Use Parking Space Required
Type Of Use                              Parking Space Required
Commercial:                               
 Banks, financial institutions and      1 for each 250 square feet of floor
  similar uses                           area
 Bowling alleys                         1 for each 3 patrons based on maximum
                                         legal occupancy
 Dance floors, skating rinks            1 for each 3 patrons based on maximum
                                         legal occupancy
 Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns,    1 for each 3 patrons based on maximum
  nightclubs, etc.                       legal occupancy
 Funeral parlors, mortuaries            1 for each 100 square feet of floor
                                         area open to the public
 Hotels, motels                         1 per room plus 1 per each 2 employees
 Medical, dental, or eye care clinics   5 for each physician, surgeon, or
                                         dentist
 Offices, public or professional        1 for each 300 square feet of floor
  administration and services            area
 Retail stores                          1 for each 250 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Service stations providing pumps,      1 per each 2 fuel pumps and 2 per each
  repair, public garages                 service bay
 All other types of businesses          1 for each 300 square feet of floor
                                         area
Entertainment:                            
 Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters,  1 for each 4 seats; 20 inches of bench
  and similar uses                       = 1 seat
 Private clubs or lodges                1 for each 3 patrons based on maximum
                                         legal occupancy
                                         1 for each 5 persons' capacity
  Swimming pools, public or community    1 for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30
  clubs                                  square feet of floor area used for
                                         seating purposes, whichever is greater
Institutional:                            
 Churches and other places of religious 1 for each 5 seats; 20 inches of bench
  assembly                               = 1 seat
 Hospitals                              1 for each bed
 Libraries, museums, and art galleries  1 for each 400 square feet of floor
                                         area
 Nursing homes, children's homes, and   1 for each 2 beds
  similar uses
Schools (public, private, or parochial):  
 Business, technical, or trade schools  1 for each 2 students
 Colleges and universities              1 for each 4 students
                                         1 for each teacher and employee; 1 for
                                         each 4 students of legal driving age;
                                         and 1 for each 4 seats in the
 Elementary and high schools            auditoriums, gymnasiums, or stadiums.
                                         Parking spaces provided for the school
                                         may be considered as parking for the
                                         public assembly areas
 Kindergartens, preschools, and similar 2 for each classroom, but not less
  uses                                   than 4 for the building
 
   S.   Loading Spaces Required:
      1.   Quantity And Type:
 
Gross Floor Area                                  Quantity Type
14,000 - 36,000 sq. ft.                           1        A
36,001 - 60,000 sq. ft.                           2        A
60,001 - 100,000 sq. ft.                          2        A
Per additional 75,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof 1        B
 
      2.   Size: The size of off-street loading spaces shall not be less than
the following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
 
              Space Length Space Width Height Clearance
Type A spaces 35 feet      12 feet     15 feet
Type B spaces 65 feet      12 feet     15 feet
 
      3.   Access: Convenient access to loading spaces shall be provided and
shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
      4.   In Required Yards: Loading spaces may be located in required yards,
providing the space is not roofed.
      5.   Location: Loading spaces shall be located entirely on the property
they serve. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-3: SHORELINE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Shoreline areas are valuable and fragile natural
resources and as such special provisions must be made for their protection,
utilization, restoration, and preservation.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words are
defined:
   DEVELOPMENT: A use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of
structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel,
or mineral; bulk heading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any
project of a permanent or temporary nature, which occurs within a shoreline
area or below the ordinary high water mark of surface waters, or interferes
with the normal public use of surface waters and/or shoreline areas, except the
following shall be excluded from this definition:
      1.   Normal maintenance of existing structures or developments, including
damage by accident, fire, or elements.
      2.   Emergency construction necessary to protect property from damage by
the elements.
      3.   Construction and practices normal or necessary for the construction
and maintenance of irrigation structures including but not limited to head
gates, pumping facilities, and irrigation channels. Provided, that activities
of a commercial nature, alteration of the contour of the shoreline area by
leveling or filling other than that which results from normal cultivation,
shall not be considered normal or necessary activities.
      4.   Operation, maintenance, or construction of canals, waterways,
drains, reservoirs, or other facilities that now exist or are hereafter created
or developed as a part of an irrigation system for the primary purpose of
making use of system waters, including return flow and artificially stored
ground water from the irrigation of lands.
      5.   Operation and maintenance of any system of dikes, ditches, drains,
or other facilities existing on the effective date of this section which were
created, developed, or utilized primarily as a part of a drainage or diking
system.
   ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK: The ordinary high-water mark on all lakes and
streams is that mark found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining
where the presence and action of waters are common and usual, and continuation
throughout ordinary years, has created a mark upon the soil, of distinct
characteristic, from that of the abutting upland soils.
   SHORELINE AREAS: Shoreline areas shall mean those lands extending landward
for two hundred feet (200') in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane
from the ordinary high-water mark.
   SURFACE WATERS: All lakes, streams, and other bodies of water, within the
area of City jurisdiction, are the surface waters as covered by this section.
   C.   Compliance: Any person planning to conduct a development, as defined by
this section, shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   All construction development shall be set back at least forty feet
(40') from the ordinary high-water mark.
      2.   All construction development shall be in compliance with section
10-7-4, “Stormwater Management”, of this chapter.
      3.   All construction development shall have necessary permitting and/or
letters of compliance from all affected agencies before construction begins.
All future construction on the same parcel of land shall have separate
permitting and/or letters of compliance.
   D.   Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with this section shall be those
penalties prescribed in section
10-15-3 of this title. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-4: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Intent: The intent of this section is to require implementation of
surface water management techniques which rely upon natural on-site treatment
and recycling of stormwater as opposed to collection and conveyance of
untreated stormwater into ground water sources or into surface bodies of water.
However, the City has established a stormwater collection system in certain
areas of the City limits and will review proposals to determine the feasibility
of future connections to this system.
The desired goal for implementation of such regulations is the protection of
ground water quality through pretreatment of stormwater prior to infiltration
and protection of surface water resources from the effects of contaminants,
sedimentation, and erosion.
   B.   Applicability: The achievement of standards, employment of methods, and
techniques required by this section shall be applicable in the following
circumstances:
      1.   Development of every new subdivision of land within the jurisdiction
of the City of Priest River;
      2.   All commercial and industrial site development for which grading,
site development, construction, or building permits may be required pursuant to
the land use regulations of the City of Priest River;
      3.   All public projects within the jurisdiction of Priest River
including, but not limited to, street construction or reconstruction
(modification of the cross-section, not to include resurfacing), park
development, building development, or other public works construction or
development. Except as necessary to maintain the continuity of existing
stormwater handling systems, all new construction as outlined in this
subsection B, shall employ the methods for stormwater management required by
this section and shall otherwise be designed to minimize adverse impacts upon
the surface and ground water quality; and
      4.   Every building or land development permit where land- disturbing
activity is to occur on any part of sites with a slope greater than eight
percent (8%) or on sites less than three hundred feet (300') distant
horizontally from and located vertically above any surface water in the form of
a perennial or intermittent stream, river, pond, lake, wetland, or similar
surface feature which can be determined from USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle
topographic maps. Stormwater Management Plans may not be necessary for
individual building sites if runoff from the site has been accommodated by an
approved Stormwater Management Plan for the subdivision in which the site is
located. However, detailed erosion control plans may still be required. The
Administrator may allow a building permit to be issued for minor additions to
existing improvements without the preparation of a Stormwater Management Plan
if, in using their professional judgement, the requirements of this section can
be met by existing site conditions.
   C.   General Requirements: Unless otherwise lawfully excused from compliance
with the standards set forth in this section, all development to which this
section is applicable shall comply with the following requirements and methods
for stormwater management control:
      1.   Stormwater, in accordance with the performance standards set forth
herein, shall be directed by non-erosive means to grass infiltration areas
(GIAs) when appropriate. If the proposed development exceeds site limitations
for grass infiltration methods, then an acceptable alternative stormwater
collection, treatment, disposal system shall be implemented in accordance with
an approved stormwater management plan, subject to review and approval by the
City. Grass infiltration areas or other approved alternative on-site stormwater
collection and treatment systems may be approved by the City during the
development review process;
      2.   All development subject to this title shall be carried out such that
the runoff of stormwater or other surface waters shall not be accelerated,
concentrated, or otherwise conveyed beyond the exterior property lines or
project boundaries except in compliance with the provisions of Best Management
Practices (BMPs) adopted pursuant to this title or as allowed through joint
management of stormwater with adjoining property owners pursuant to agreement
approved by the City. The quality of surface runoff shall be protected by
strict compliance with the design standards and BMPs adopted pursuant to this
title, or by implementation of measures shown by a qualified, licensed
professional, to have an effective design capability which exceeds the BMPs
adopted;
      3.   Each land owner developing real property subject to the terms of
this title shall develop a comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan which
addresses and complies with the requirements and standards established by this
section and the plan criteria, design standards and BMPs approved by a
qualified, licensed professional, who shall submit both construction-quality
design drawings and supporting calculations for review by the City prior to
start of construction. Each Stormwater Management Plan shall also identify
necessary maintenance requirements; and
      4.   Each developer who proposes and implements a stormwater management
system for collection of treatment of stormwater in accordance with this
section shall also establish, including assurance of adequate funding, the
necessary maintenance system including an acceptable plan for sustained
functioning of the collection and treatment system, and, when requested, grant
the necessary easements, to the local government which may choose to provide
continued maintenance of the system by public authorities or may require the
owner to accomplish the same. For purposes of application of the design
standard and other related documents and standards, the City of Priest River
shall be designated as the "permit authority".
   D.   Performance Standards: The following performance standards shall be
applicable to all design, construction, implementation, and maintenance of
stormwater management systems pursuant to the jurisdiction exercised through
this section:
      1.   There shall be no increase in the peak rate of runoff from this site
when compared with the dissipation of stormwater in the undeveloped state for a
25-year/24-hour storm based on the first one-half inch (1/2") of stormwater
runoff. Within project boundaries, sufficient retention capacity shall be
constructed to detain surface flow to meet the performance standard established
by this subsection D. For purposes of this section, "undeveloped state" shall
mean the natural soils and vegetation in place prior to the start of any
construction or clearing activity on a site;
      2.   No stormwater shall be collected or concentrated except within a
channel protected against erosion and containing energy dissipation measures to
prevent further erosion on adjoining lands. Existing unprotected channels shall
be protected against further erosion on adjoining lands. Any site development
or construction shall preserve installed components of a stormwater management
plan. All disturbed soils shall be protected during the course of construction
to prevent exposure to stormwater and to contain eroded materials should
contact be made; and
      3.   Any and all collected stormwater shall be directed to grass
infiltration areas (GIAs) which shall be established with grass and other
approved plant materials or to an acceptable stormwater management design. GIAs
or their acceptable alternatives shall be sized to hold and treat the first
one-half inch (1/2") of stormwater runoff from all impervious surfaces. The
overall stormwater disposal system shall have the capacity to handle a 25-year/
24-hour storm based upon the appropriate Idaho Transportation Department
intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) curve, without damage to the stormwater
management system or adjacent land and improvements.
   E.   Guarantee Of Installation: No final plat shall be recorded, nor shall
any building permits be issued until the stormwater management facilities are
in place and functioning as designed or until a guarantee of financial surety
is provided to and accepted by the City. No Certificate of Occupancy will be
issued until the stormwater management system has been installed and is
functioning as designed. If, in the judgment of the Administrator, project
occupancy can be achieved without harm to the environment or potential
occupants, occupancy may proceed upon receipt of an acceptable guarantee or
financial surety to complete installation when weather conditions or other
variables allow. In no case shall such guarantee be allowed if the incomplete
improvements would result in increased erosion, sedimentation, or other damage
to the development, public improvements, subsurface or surface waters, or the
proposed stormwater management system. At any time, the City is authorized to
stop work on the installation of subdivision improvements, to embargo further
issuance of building permits in a development, to stop work on any individual
building or development of any individual building site, or to otherwise take
steps necessary to protect the waters of the City from damage as a result of
development.
   F.   Prohibited Conduct: No person shall damage, harm, or fail to install or
complete, or otherwise impair the grass infiltration areas or any portion of a
stormwater management system installed pursuant to this section. Unless other
provisions are made in the process of development review and approval,
responsibility for maintenance of stormwater elements remains with the property
owner and violation of these maintenance requirements shall constitute a
violation of this section.
   G.   Variance: A variance from the requirements of this section or from the
design standards adopted pursuant to this section may be reviewed and/or
granted based on a determination of unique site characteristics. Variances may
only be granted in such circumstances if the approval of the variance would not
otherwise impair achievements of the standards or purpose of this section,
would not impose additional burden upon adjoining or downstream lands or
landowners, or otherwise disrupt the scheme of stormwater management in the
community. It shall be incumbent upon anyone requesting a variance to provide
data showing that alternative methods of stormwater handling proposed will
produce comparable efficacy of the stormwater management measures required by
this section. No variance shall be issued unless all elements of this
subsection are met. Any request for variance shall follow the procedures
outlined in section
10-13-1 of this title. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-7-5: SPECIFIC USE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Certain unique land uses pose special problems that
may have detrimental influences on surrounding land uses. The following
performance standards for such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition
to all other provisions of this title.
   B.   Animal Clinic, Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office And Kennel:
      1.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any
residence including motels and hotels, except for an owner's residence. The
Administrator may modify these requirements if the animals are completely
housed in soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the
abutting residential property; and
      2.   Will comply with all State and local regulations relative to such an
operation and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and
odor.
   C.   Animal Commercial Feed Lots, Meat Packing, Processing Plant And
Slaughterhouse Facilities:
      1.   Will be located, when housing animals, feed lot or holding pens, not
less than six hundred feet (600') from any residence, except for an owner's
residence. The facilities shall have a minimum setback of thirty feet (30')
from any property line and view obscuring buffer;
      2.   Will be designed and located with full consideration to their
proximity to adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties, and to the reduction of nuisance factors such as odor; and
      3.   Will be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent
the creation of a nuisance and shall also be subject to the health authority's
requirements as to the elimination of waste materials and the maintenance of
water quality control.
   D.   Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases, Above Ground And For
Resale:
      1.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a
Residential Zone, a residence, motel, hotel, except for an owner's residence;
      2.   Will be erected subject to the approval of the Fire Chief; and
      3.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street
parking facilities subject to the approval of the Fire Chief.
   E.   Chemicals, Pesticide And Fertilizer Storage And Manufacturing: Will
have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved
by the Fire Chief.
   F.   Contractors' Yard:
      1.   Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from
any residence except for the owner's residence;
      2.   Will have a screening fence around areas utilized for storage of
equipment and materials; and
      3.   Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses
unless conditionally approved.
   G.   Drive-In Restaurant:
      1.   Will be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and fencing,
except for ingress and egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other
properties;
      2.   Will have a six foot (6') high, sight-obscuring fence along the
property lines that adjoin a residence. The last fifteen feet (15') to the
property line where entrances/exits exist shall be a see-through fence that
does not impede vision;
      3.   Will provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
      4.   Will avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
   H.   Filling, Grading, Lagooning, Dredging, Or Other Earth-Moving Activity:
      1.   Will result in the smallest amount of bare ground exposed for the
shortest time feasible;
      2.   Will provide temporary ground cover, such as mulch;
      3.   Will use diversions, silting basins, terraces and other methods to
trap sediments;
      4.   Will provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish
trap conditions;
      5.   Will not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainage way;
      6.   Will construct and stabilize sides and bottom of cuts, fills,
channels and artificial watercourses to prevent erosion or soil failure;
      7.   Will not have below-grade excavation except for drainage ways within
fifty feet (50') of any lot line or public right-of-way; and
      8.   Will restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than four inches
(4").
   I.   Gravel Pits, Rock Quarries, Sand And Clay Pits, And Other Natural
Resources Of Commercial Value:
      1.   The extent and method of rehabilitation shall be determined in
advance of issuing a zoning certificate with due consideration given to what is
suitable and compatible with the surrounding area;
      2.   Upon depletion of the area, all temporary buildings and structures,
except property line fences and structures for loading, measuring or weighing
of salable material in storage, shall be entirely removed from the property;
and
      3.   Safety fencing shall be erected around all pits that create a safety
hazard (non-barbed wire, 6 feet in height).
   J.   Home Occupation:
      1.   No more than one person other than members of the family residing on
the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;
      2.   A current City issued building registration is required each year;
      3.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants and not more than thirty five percent (35%) of floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
      4.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, non-
illuminating and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
      5.   No significant traffic shall be generated by the home occupation and
any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall meet
the off-street parking requirements as specified in this chapter and shall not
be located in a required front yard;
      6.   No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation, which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other
than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuation in
line voltage off the premises; and
      7.   Home occupation does not include daycares as defined in Idaho Code
title 39. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-7-6: YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in a district density provision
section and in other sections of this title, the following provisions shall be
adhered to:
   A.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and
ten feet (10') above the center line grades of the intersection streets in the
area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points along said street right-of-way lines twenty five feet (25') from the
point of intersection.
   B.   Fence And Wall Restrictions In Front Yards: In any required front yard,
no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such
yard between the height of two and a half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10').
      1.   Exception: No fences shall exceed four feet (4') in height in front
of a dwelling in a Residential Zone, beginning at the farthest architectural
projection of each side of a dwelling, or dwelling and attached garage or
carport, unless a design is submitted for approval that meets safety and design
criteria to the satisfaction of the Administrator. Fences beginning at the
farthest front corner of each side of the dwelling, or dwelling and attached
garage or carport, and extending rearward may be seven feet (7') in height.
   C.   Yard Requirements For Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings
shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side
and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front,
one rear, and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate
district.
   D.   Side And Rear Yard Requirements For Non-Residential Uses Abutting
Residential Districts: Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located
nor conducted closer than forty feet (40') to any lot line of a Residential
District, except that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to fifty
percent (50%) of the requirement if acceptable landscaping or screening
approved by the Planning and Zoning Department is provided. Such screening
shall be a masonry or solid fence between six feet (6') and eight feet (8') in
height maintained in good condition and free of all advertising or other signs.
Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of a strip of
land not less than twenty feet (20') in width planted with an evergreen hedge
or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet (4') in height at
the time of planting.
   E.   Architectural Projections: Open structures such as porches, canopies,
balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar architectural
elements shall be considered part of the building to which attached and shall
not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yard.
   F.   Exceptions To Height Regulations: The height limitations contained in
the density provision sections do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas,
antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy
except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard to the safe
landing and take-off of aircraft as determined by the Federal Aviation
Administration, at an established airport.
   G.   Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in good condition and kept
free of all weeds, debris, and trash.
   H.   Hazardous Fences:
      1.   Electric Fences: It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
any fence, where any part of the fence may be electrified, in any area of the
City except animal impound fences on residential property zoned for the keeping
of large animals as defined in chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   Barbed Wire Or Razor Wire Fences: It is unlawful for any person to
erect or maintain any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or
razor wire except as a property guard on Commercial, Industrial or Municipal
Use zoned property, or, with the approval of the Administrator, as an animal
impound fence on residential property zoned for the keeping of large animals as
defined in chapter 4 of this title. Any person wanting to use barbed wire or
razor wire fence used as a property guard on Commercial, Industrial or
Municipal Use-zoned property that borders residential property must submit a
request to, and receive the approval of, the Administrator. (Ord. 597, 8-6-
2018)
10-7-7: MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT STANDARDS:
The following manufactured home placement standards shall apply to all zoning
districts where residential uses are allowed outright or conditionally. These
standards are not intended to exceed the placement standards required for other
single-family dwellings.
Mobile homes, as defined herein cannot be allowed outright in any zoning
district but must provide proof of rehabilitation to ensure life safety.
Rehabilitation must comply with Idaho Code 44-25.
   A.   R-1 Residential Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator;
      5.   Have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. The
Administrator may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport
where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately
surrounding dwellings; and
      6.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   B.   MU-R Mixed-Use Residential Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width; (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; (Ord. 605, 8-5-2019)
      5.   Have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. The
Administrator may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport
where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately
surrounding dwellings; and
      6.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   C.   R-2 Residential Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   D.   R-5 Residential Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   E.   C Commercial Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
   This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive
covenant.
   F.   MU-C Mixed-Use Commercial Zone District: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation but have a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") of crawlspace;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   A roof must be constructed over the manufactured home that will meet
the necessary fifty (50) pounds per square foot required snow load.
   This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive
covenant. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-8: "SITE-BUILT" HOME PLACEMENT STANDARDS:
The following “site-built” home standards shall apply to all zoning districts
where residential uses are allowed outright or conditionally. These standards
are not intended to exceed the placement standards required for other single-
family dwellings.
   A.   R-1 Residential Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   Have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. The
Administrator may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport
where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately
surrounding dwellings.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   B.   MU-R Mixed-Use Residential Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width;
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator; and
      5.   Have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. The
Administrator may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport
where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately
surrounding dwellings.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   C.   R-2 Residential Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width; and
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   D.   R-5 Residential Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width; and
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   E.   C Commercial Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width; and
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator.
      This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded
restrictive covenant.
   F.   MU-C Mixed-Use Commercial Zone District: “Site-built” homes shall:
      1.   Enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
      2.   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter so that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12")
above grade at the top of the foundation;
      3.   Have a pitched roof, except that no standards shall require a slope
of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width; and
      4.   Have exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Administrator.
   This subsection shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive
covenant. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
10-7-9-1: DEFINITION AND PURPOSE:
A development agreement is a written document outlining the obligations between
the City of Priest River and the developer regarding completion of subdivision
improvements, conditional use permit conditions and/or conditions of
preliminary plat approval, long-term maintenance, and the responsibilities of
the development.
The purpose of a development agreement is to address subdivision conditions of
approval, terms of mitigation, scope of development, construction improvements,
timetables for completion, processing final plats, and the City final review
and approval process for improvements. (Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9-2: SCOPE OF AGREEMENT:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding contract among the developer
of a proposed subdivision, the property owners of the proposed subdivision, and
the City (the Parties). The agreement shall contain those terms and conditions
agreed to by the parties and those required by this title and other legal
requirements. The Administrator and/or staff of the City in conjunction with
the City Attorney, are authorized to negotiate development agreements on behalf
of the City, subject to final City Council approval. The development agreement
requirement may be waived for certain subdivisions and conditional use permits
upon a finding by the Administrator that it is not needed. (Ord. 634, 6-17-
2024)
10-7-9-3: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall be negotiated by the Administrator and/or City
staff and City Attorney and approved by the City Council. A brief statement
shall be included describing the subdivision, its location, number of lots,
preliminary plat, area map, and the date of subdivision approval by City
Council. The agreement must include but is not limited to; the following:
   A.   Any conditions of approval contained in the final City Council decision
document;
   B.   Time limit, and provisions for extension or extinguishing the
agreement;
   C.   Phasing plan, if any, and a description of any required temporary
improvements and the terms of those improvements;
   D.   A construction schedule and description of construction improvements to
be installed on and off site and the responsibilities of the developer and the
City.
   E.   Specifics of any public or private dedications and required
maintenance.
   F.   Any additional information deemed necessary by the City to fully
address the scope and responsibilities of the parties. (Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Staff shall prepare a final development agreement for City Council
consideration after completion of the negotiations and approved by the
developer. The agreement may be considered at any regular or special meeting of
the City Council, allowing time for proper meeting notice.
   B.   The agreement shall be recorded with Bonner County and run with the
land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the developer.
   C.   The development agreement shall expire as set forth in the agreement,
or upon certified letter by the City, of a release with the developer when the
terms of agreement have been satisfied or are no longer valid, whichever comes
first. If no construction is started, the development agreement shall expire
simultaneously with the preliminary plat expiration date. An extension may be
granted if a plat extension is approved. (Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9-5: NO THIRD-PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the
development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any party not a
party to the development agreement. Purchasers of lots in approved subdivisions
are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of development agreements. (Ord.
634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9-6: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the City shall not give rise to
monetary damages but shall be enforceable only by resort to an action against
the City for specific performance. A substantial and material breach of a
development agreement by a developer or owner may be cause for termination of
the agreement. No provision of any development agreement, which is contrary to
the law, may be enforced. (Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
10-7-9-7: MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT:
   A.   A maintenance agreement shall be included in a development agreement
when a developer is required to maintain existing or future City and public
services in the development.
   B.   The maintenance agreement shall set forth the duties and
responsibilities of the developer regarding the ongoing maintenance of the
public improvements that are installed by the developer that are in excess of
those required by the City and are installed for the purpose of enhancement of
the aesthetics of the development and are to be maintained by the developer.
   C.   The maintenance agreement shall be attached to or made a part of the
development agreement.
   D.   The Developer is required to warrant the improvements for a period of
one (1) year after formal acceptance by the City. (Ord. 634, 6-17-2024)
CHAPTER 8
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Wireless Communication Facilities; Regulations
10-8-1: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Definitions:
      1.   Purpose: Wireless communication facilities include antennas
(attached and freestanding) with or without equipment buildings constructed for
transmitting signals for the operation of personal communication systems. These
types of uses are necessary for the day-to-day function of everyday living and
commerce. Although necessary, these uses can have negative visual impacts to
the community. This section is intended to provide standards and a process for
permitting wireless communication facilities to assess and minimize negative
visual impacts.
      2.   Definitions:
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, discs, or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF)
signals through electromagnetic energy, which may include omni-directional
antenna (whip), directional antenna (panel), and parabolic antenna (dish).
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FREESTANDING FACILITY: A wireless communication
transmission and/or reception device(s) that is affixed to a structure erected
to support the transmission and/or reception device equipment, equipment
structures, and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but
are not limited to, metal poles, lattice towers, wood poles, and guy towers.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   A wireless communication facility shall constitute a special use and
shall be considered under the conditional use section of the Commercial and
Industrial Zoning Districts. Conditions that may be appropriate for wireless
communication facilities may include but are not limited to:
         a.   Modification of the required lot size or setbacks in the zoning
district to accommodate the use;
         b.   Control the location and number of access points to the property;
         c.   Limit the coverage or height of equipment/building structures,
because of obstructions to views or incompatibility with surrounding uses;
         d.   Reduce or expand requirements for screening or landscaping to
maintain the property in character with the surrounding area; and
         e.   Establish regulations to protect property or existing
improvements from detrimental effects of the proposed use.
      2.   Parabolic antennas, that are a component of a wireless communication
facility, shall not exceed a diameter of six feet (6').
      3.   Freestanding support structures for wireless communications
facilities shall be monopole structures unless the City Council approves a
different structure, upon good cause shown.
      4.   Communication antenna arrays may be located on an existing support
structure or building. Location of any antenna array on the existing facility
shall be permitted without a conditional use permit or a site plan review
contingent that there are no substantial changes to the existing support
structure. The antenna array shall not increase the height of said freestanding
facility or facility located on an existing building more than fifteen feet
(15'). Any antenna array that increases the height of the freestanding facility
more than fifteen feet (15') will require a conditional use permit.
      5.   Minor modifications of existing wireless communication facilities
are permitted, provided that; there are no significant changes in the visual
appearance of the facility. Minor modifications include, but are not limited
to, the addition of transmission and/or reception device(s) to wireless
communication facilities that meet the provisions of this section.
      6.   If any antenna or tower is not operated for a continuous period of
six (6) months, it shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove it within sixty (60) days after notice and an opportunity to
be heard. If the antenna or tower is not removed within the sixty (60) days the
City may, at the expense of the communication facility's owner(s), remove the
antenna or tower and file a lien against the owner of the facility for expenses
incurred in removal and any attorney fees associated with the due process or
judicial process incurred by the City.
   C.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   Wireless communication facilities, whether constructed as a
permitted use or as a conditional use, shall be designed to be compatible with,
and blend with the natural and built environment. This design includes, but is
not limited to:
         a.   Building structure and design.
         b.   The use of exterior material.
         c.   Landscaping and fencing.
      2.   All equipment and associated cabling shall be enclosed within a
structure or shall be concealed, camouflaged, or placed under ground.
   D.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Landscaping And Screening: The site shall be screened with
landscaping according to the zone in which it is located. Within one hundred
feet (100') of an existing residential use or a Residential zoned lot, the
perimeter of the site shall be landscaped with shrubs and trees that will
provide a visual screening fence.
The height of the fence shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and be
maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Setback Requirements: Support tower structures shall be set back
from all property lines as required by the International Building Code or one
foot (1') for every ten feet (10') of total tower height, whichever produces
the greater setback, as long as they are constructed to the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222
Revision E standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures" Current Standard.
      3.   Perimeter Fencing: At a minimum the entire communications facility
shall be fenced with a six foot (6') high chain link fence at its perimeter. If
the site is adjacent to a residential use or zone refer to subsection D1 of
this section.
      4.   Electromagnetic Field/Radio-Frequency Radiation Standards:
Installation of a wireless communication antenna array shall conform to
standards as required by the Federal Communication Commission's (FCC)
regulations.
      5.   Sharing Of Support Towers And Collocation Of Facilities: It is the
policy of the City of Priest River to minimize the number of wireless
communication support towers and to encourage the collocation of antenna arrays
of more than one wireless communication service provider on a single support
tower. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 9
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-9-1: Conditional Uses; Generally
10-9-2: Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
10-9-1: CONDITIONAL USES; GENERALLY:
There are some uses in each zone that due to the restrictions of that zone are
not permitted outright and must have conditional use review. A conditional use
permit shall be submitted for the Planning and Zoning Department to review.
   A.   General Standards: The Planning and Zoning Department shall review the
facts and circumstances of each proposed conditional use in terms of the
following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at
the proposed location:
      1.   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established on the
conditional use schedule for the zoning district involved;
      2.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of the Comprehensive Plan and/or this
title;
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that use will not change the essential
character of the same area;
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to
provide adequately any such services;
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic or historic feature of major importance.
   B.   Conditional Use Permits:
      1.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made
on a form provided by the Administrator. The application fee shall be set by
the Priest River City Council via resolution. Applications shall contain at
least the following information:
         a.   Name, mailing address, phone number and e-mail address of
applicant and owner;
         b.   Legal description of property involved;
         c.   Existing use and zoning;
         d.   Description of proposed use;
         e.   A plan of the site for the proposed conditional use showing the
location of all existing and proposed buildings, parking and loading areas,
traffic access and circulation, open space, landscaping, refuse and service
areas, utilities, signs, yards and any other information the Administrator may
require, to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and
requirements of this title;
         f.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining
property; the effect on the environmental elements such as noise, glare, odor,
fumes and vibration on adjoining property; a discussion of the general
compatibility with adjacent and other properties in the district;
         g.   The names and mailing addresses, prepared by a title company, of
all landowners and owners of real property, any part of which is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the subject property;
         h.   A land capability report prepared by a person or firm qualified
by training and expertise to have knowledge of the subject. The report will
identify the capability of the land to support the proposal with regards to
flooding, drainage, erosion and sedimentation, and ground movement;
         i.   Copy of the current deed;
         j.   Current title report; and
         k.   Any supplemental materials and copies requested by the
Administrator or which the applicant believes are relevant to the project.
      2.   Hearing Required: The City Council shall hold at least one public
hearing prior to deciding on a conditional use request. Notice of the hearing
will be given pursuant to the standards outlined in section
10-15-5 of this title.
      3.   Council Action: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing and
any continuances, the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the application as presented. After the review the Administrator
shall be directed to issue a conditional use permit listing the conditions
which must be complied with to maintain City Council approval.
      4.   Decision: Upon granting or denying an application, the decision
shall specify:
         a.   The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
      5.   Conditions: Conditions that may be attached to a permit may include,
but are not limited to:
         a.   Minimizing adverse impacts on surrounding property;
         b.   Controlling the sequence and timing of the development;
         c.   Controlling the duration of the development identifying the date
when the conditions are to be fulfilled and any associated resolution options;
         d.   Assuring the development is properly maintained;
         e.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
         f.   Requiring the provision for on-site public facilities or
services; and/or
         g.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally
required by code.
      6.   Validity Of Permit: To benefit from the issuance of a conditional
use permit, preliminary construction or operation must be commenced within one
year of approval. An applicant may request a maximum of two (2) extensions of
six (6) months each. Failure to receive a time extension or to commence
construction or operation before the established time limit shall automatically
invalidate permit approval.
All planned unit developments and conditional use permits, as a condition of
approval, must have a signed agreement in place for development, sustained use,
or any other special agreement as required by the City. The agreement is only
valid for the proposal as presented for approval. Any changes to the project
scope must have a new negotiated and signed agreement.
A conditional use permit shall not be completely validated until the conditions
required pursuant to subsections B3 through B5 of this section are met. Permit
approval may be revoked after the Council reviews a permit and determines the
permit conditions are not being met.
   C.   Public Sales And Open Spaces: Public sales and open spaces shall
conform to the following:
      1.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park,
playground, school or other public use as shown on the future acquisition map,
as authorized in section 67-6517, Idaho Code, is in whole or in part within a
proposed development, the Administrator shall notify the appropriate public
agencies concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days
of the date of notice, the public agencies may request the City Council to
suspend consideration on the permit for sixty (60) days from the date of the
request; however, if an agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days the
City Council shall resume consideration of the conditional use application.
      2.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the development.
      3.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and
large-scale developments, the City Council may require sufficient park or open
space facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may
be suitable for the proposed development.
   D.   Conditions Of Use; Violations: In granting any conditional use, the
City Council may prescribe appropriate conditions, bonds and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Violations of such conditions, bonds or safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall
be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-9-2: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS:
   A.   Intent: This section establishes the minimum standards and requirements
for the construction and occupation of recreational vehicle parks, which are
intended for a temporary length of stay, especially as they relate to adjacent
land uses and to the development of the whole community, to protect and secure
the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
   B.   Zoning Approval And Conditional Use Permit Required: No building permit
shall be issued for the construction of a new recreational vehicle park or
expansion of an existing recreational vehicle park within the City limits until
the proposed location is approved by the Administrator and a conditional use
permit for recreational vehicle park purposes is granted following a public
hearing held in accordance with the procedures set forth in this title. The
conditional use permit shall only be granted upon a showing being made to the
satisfaction of the City Council that such action will be compatible with the
overall development of the area where the recreational vehicle park is proposed
to be constructed. Such showing shall be made in accordance with the following
procedures:
      1.   Application: When any person desires to develop a recreational
vehicle park that person shall file a conditional use permit with the City on a
form provided by the City. A pre-application meeting between the developer and
the Administrator shall be held to discuss the site design, location, public
service needs, and related areas of concern for the proposed development.
      2.   Contents Of The Application: Together with the conditional use
permit, each application for development of a recreational vehicle park shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The name, mailing address, phone number and e-mail address of the
owner or an authorized agent and a legal description of the premises upon which
the recreational vehicle park is proposed to be located;
         b.   Name of the recreational vehicle park and address;
         c.   Vicinity map showing relationships of the recreational vehicle
park to adjacent properties;
         d.   Description of the current use and zoning;
         e.   One full sized and one (1) 11" x17" copy of a scaled site plan
showing the following:
            (1)   The extent and area used for park purposes;
            (2)   Roadways, accessways and driveways;
            (3)   Location of pads for recreational vehicles showing dimensions
of each space. Designation of each space by letter or number;
            (4)   An arrow indicating north;
            (5)   Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including
restrooms, laundries, and utility rooms to be used by guests of the park;
            (6)   Method and plan of sewage disposal;
            (7)   Method and plan for refuse removal;
            (8)   Plan for water supply;
            (9)   Plan for electrical lighting of lots and spaces;
            (10)   Provision of parking spaces and accessory vehicle area;
            (11)   Location and size of recreation area;
            (12)   Grading and drainage of the property;
            (13)   Location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to the park.
      3.   Hearing Required: The City Council shall hold at least one public
hearing prior to making a decision on a conditional use/recreational vehicle
park request. Notice of the hearing will be given pursuant to the standards
outlined in section
10-15-5 of this title.
   C.   Development Standards: The following shall be considered the minimum
standards for a new, or the expansion of an existing, recreational vehicle
park:
      1.   Landscaping And Screening Or Fencing:
         a.   Landscaped Areas: A minimum of one (1) 11/2-inch caliper shade
tree and five (5) one-gallon shrubs shall be placed every thirty five feet
(35') on the perimeter of the recreational vehicle park. Areas between
recreational vehicle sites not required to be paved shall also be landscaped
and include a minimum of one (1) 11/2-inch caliper shade tree per recreational
vehicle site. All required landscaping shall be maintained by the owner on a
continual basis.
         b.   Park Boundaries: Park boundaries shall be reasonably screened
whether by barriers or ornamental fences, walls, trees, or shrubs, measuring at
least six feet (6') in height, to assure reasonable integration with adjoining
land usages and to assure health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the area. The
individual fencing of recreational vehicle sites is prohibited.
      2.   Site Size And Density:
         a.   Site Size: Each recreational vehicle site shall be at least
twenty five feet (25') wide and at least fifty feet (50') long and shall abut
on a driveway or other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street.
Such sites shall be clearly defined and marked. Recreational vehicles shall be
parked in the sites so that there will be a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
between vehicles, including slide-outs and tip-outs, and so that each
recreational vehicle shall have a clearance of five feet (5') from the interior
roadway to not block the interior roadway. No permanent structures, such as
carports or decks may be attached to any recreational vehicle while it is in a
park.
         b.   Density: There shall not be more than twenty five (25)
recreational vehicles per acre. Minimum area shall be not less than two (2)
acres.
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   A recreational vehicle park shall be at least twenty five feet
(25') back from any street or highway.
         b.   A minimum front yard setback at the main entrance of the park
shall be twenty feet (20') from the property line, or greater if required by
underlying zone. All others shall have a ten foot (10') setback.
         c.   A minimum of five feet (5') shall be required for the sides and
rear yard.
         d.   No recreational vehicle shall be closer than five feet (5') from
the exterior boundary of the park.
      4.   Parking: Vehicle parking within recreational vehicle parks shall
conform to the following minimum standards:
         a.   A minimum of one space shall be provided as part of each
recreational vehicle site. One common guest space shall be provided for every
three (3) recreational vehicle sites.
         b.   A minimum of one space per two (2) recreational vehicle sites
shall be required for parking of boats, trailers, and related items.
      5.   Occupant Improvements: Any site occupant shall not be permitted to
erect, install or place any structure or facility upon the site.
      6.   Sanitary Dumping Station: All sanitary plumbing in the recreational
vehicle park shall connect to the public sewer system and shall comply with the
Plumbing Code and adopted appendices. All sewage disposal apparatus shall be
provided, maintained and operated so as not to create a nuisance or health
hazard.
   D.   Improvement Requirements: Improvement requirements for a new, or the
expansion of an existing, recreational vehicle park are as follows:
      1.   Paving:
         a.   Roadways within accessways and sidewalks shall be paved with a
crushed rock base and asphalt or concrete surfacing according to structural
specifications.
         b.   Minimum surfaced width of the roadway within an accessway shall
be twenty four feet (24') if there is no parking allowed, and thirty four feet
(34') if parking is allowed on one side. The first fifty feet (50') of the
accessway measured from the street shall be surfaced to a width of thirty four
feet (34') and shall be connected to an existing street.
         c.   Any unimproved public street adjacent to a new recreational
vehicle park must be improved by the developer with curb, gutter, and pavement
to a width of one-half (1/2) plus eight feet (8') of roadway.
         d.   Interior roadways shall be designed so as to provide access to
each individual unit.
         e.   Access and circulation shall meet standards set forth by the
Public Works Department.
      2.   Patios: Each recreational vehicle site shall have a patio paved with
asphalt, concrete, or suitable hard surfaced materials measuring at least one
hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   Drainage: The recreation vehicle park shall be located on a well-
drained site and shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any
water supply.
      4.   Utilities: All utilities necessary to serve the recreational vehicle
park shall be located underground and any necessary easements for maintenance
and repair shall be granted to the affected utility owner.
         a.   Electricity: An electrical outlet supplying at least two hundred
(200) amps shall be provided for each recreational vehicle site and service to
light poles and recreational vehicle sites shall be underground, waterproof and
shall comply with all Federal, State, and local standards.
         b.   Gas Service Connections: The park shall not provide gas service
connections to any vehicles within the park. All gas service to recreational
vehicles must be made from installed gas bottles and may not be supplied by
separate external exchange tanks.
   E.   Water Supply:
      1.   Connection To Public Water System Required: All water connections
shall connect to the public water system. Connection fees for each unit shall
be the same as for manufactured home parks.
      2.   Accessible, Adequate And Potable Water Supply Required: An
accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water shall be furnished in
each recreational vehicle park. A minimum of five (5) gallons per minute is
required.
      3.   Piping: All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the State of Idaho regulations for Public Drinking Water
Systems, section 1.8500.
      4.   Water Outlet: One frost proof exterior water spigot shall be
provided at each recreational vehicle site. A minimum of five (5) gallons per
minute per recreational vehicle site is required.
   F.   Public Access: Parks must have frontage on at least one public street
with a fifty foot (50') or wider right-of-way. Secondary access may be provided
to public streets with narrower rights-of- way if approved by the Public Works
Department. Access roads shall be provided to each recreational vehicle site.
Each access road shall have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24'). No
recreational vehicle site shall have direct frontage on any public street.
Entrance driveways shall be located not closer than one hundred fifty feet
(150') from any intersection of public streets.
   G.   Insects And Rodent Control: Insect control and rodent control measures
to safeguard public health, as recommended by Panhandle Health District, shall
be applied in the recreational vehicle park.
   H.   Inspection Of Premises: The building official or City Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times and upon proper
notification to the manager, the premises of the park for inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this section.
Enforcement of this section shall be vested in the City Chief of Police upon
written complaints made by the building official, Administrator, Fire Chief,
Panhandle Health District, or any of their designed representatives.
   I.   Pets: Pet control will be in accordance with title 5 of this Code.
   J.   Service Buildings: Recreational vehicle parks shall provide flush-type
toilet fixtures, showers, and laundry facilities located for the benefit of all
guests in accordance with industry standards. The location of these facilities
shall be at least fifteen feet (15'), but not more than five hundred feet
(500'), from any recreational vehicle site and shall not reduce the required
amount of recreation area described in subsection K of this section. The
following shall be the minimum standards required:
      1.   Restrooms: Must be well lighted, ventilated with screened openings,
and constructed of moisture proof materials permitting satisfactory cleaning.
Floors of concrete or similar material, slightly pitched to the floor drain. At
least two (2) flush-type toilets for female and one flush-type toilet and one
urinal for males for every five (5) recreational vehicle sites shall be
required.
      2.   Showers: Must be well lighted and ventilated with screened openings
and constructed of moisture proof materials permitting satisfactory cleaning.
Floors of concrete or similar material, slightly pitched to the floor drain.
Showers may be part of the restroom. At least one shower per sex for every five
(5) recreational vehicle sites shall be provided but in no instance shall there
be less than two (2) shower rooms. Each shower shall have a dressing area, and
both shall be in a separate compartment from the toilet. Dressing rooms shall
have a bench or stool included.
      3.   Laundry Facilities: One laundry unit per ten (10) recreational
vehicle sites shall be required, but in no instance shall there be less than
one laundry unit. Such unit may be housed in the same building as the restroom
but shall be separate from the toilet rooms and shall have an exterior entrance
only.
   K.   Recreational Areas: A recreation area shall be required in each
recreational vehicle park. The recreation area shall be a minimum of five
percent (5%) of the total park or four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square
feet, whichever is larger. The recreation area shall be clearly designed on the
site plan, shall be accessible to all recreational vehicle sites, and shall not
be reduced below the minimum size or developed into rental spaces. Recreational
areas shall be landscaped with grass and shade trees and maintained (by
developer or owner) in a dust free manner.
   L.   Recreational Park Operations:
      1.   Assigned Space Required: No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to
remain in the park without an assigned recreational vehicle space.
      2.   Duration Of Stay: Stays within the park are limited to:
         a.   Not more than ninety (90) consecutive days or for not more than
one hundred eighty (180) days out of the calendar year; or
         b.   The duration of one of the recreational vehicle owner's
employment at a seasonal job, plus ten (10) days after the seasonal job ends;
or
         c.   The duration of one of the recreational vehicle owner's
employment at a construction project, plus ten (10) days after the construction
job ends.
         d.   If either subsection L2b or L2c of this section exceed the time
allowed in subsection L2a of this section, then the actual period of employment
plus ten (10) days shall control.
      3.   Permanent Office For Park Attendant: Recreational vehicle parks
shall have a park attendant on site at all times. A permanent site-built office
shall be constructed for the attendant. A permanent site-built house may be
constructed for the use of the attendant.
   M.   Required Illumination Of Park Street And Walkway Systems: A lighting
plan shall be approved by the Administrator.
   N.   Refuse Disposal: All recreational vehicle parks shall have a central
collection area for refuse. The area shall be screened from view by a fence
measuring not less than six feet (6'). Collection containers shall be weather,
insect, and rodent proof.
   O.   Accessory Uses Within A Recreational Vehicle Park: Accessory uses
within a park for the benefit of the guests, such as convenience store, fuel
stops, canteens, pools, and clubhouses shall be permitted upon review.
   P.   Notices; Orders: Whenever the Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer
determines that there has been a violation or there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section, or of
any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice of such alleged violation shall
be given to the person responsible by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or
Code Enforcement Officer.
      1.   Notice Requirements: Notices shall:
         a.   Be written;
         b.   State the alleged violation(s);
         c.   Allow a reasonable period of time to cure the alleged violation
(s). In cases where the violation is a violation of Life Safety Codes or is an
immediate danger to life and/or property or is a violation which cannot be
corrected, the violation shall be cause to close the recreational vehicle park
until the violation is corrected. In all other cases, the reasonable time for
correcting the violation shall be set forth in the notice by the Administrator
or Code Enforcement Officer, based upon the type of violation and what action
must be taken to correct or cure the violation. The original reasonable time
set may be extended by the Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer in cases
where availability of materials or the weather justifies such an extension;
         d.   Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the
case may require; provided, that such notice or order be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant by registered
mail to his last known address, or when a copy has been posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the notice, or when he has been served with
such notice by any other method authorized or required by State law; and
         e.   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will
affect compliance with the provisions of this section and with the regulations,
adopted pursuant thereto.
   Q.   Violations: Any person or corporation, whether owner, lessee,
principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of
this section or permits any such violation or fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor statute
contained in Idaho Code section 18-113. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Subdivision Regulations
10-10-2: Lot Line Adjustment/Minor Notational Change
10-10-1: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of these regulations are to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to provide for:
      1.   The harmonious development of the area;
      2.   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with
other existing or planned streets and roads;
      3.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air, and recreation;
      4.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
      5.   Continuous growth pattern in the City, avoiding scattered
subdivision of land that would result in:
         a.   The lack of water supply, sewage service, drainage or other
public services; and
         b.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services;
      6.   The requirements as to the extent and the way:
         a.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
         b.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections, or
other facilities shall be installed;
      7.   The manner and form of making and filing any plat;
      8.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approval authorities;
      9.   It is the expressed intent of this chapter that the developer will
be directly responsible for the installation and funding of all utilities,
roads and streets, and improvements in the subdivision and any extension of
existing utilities, roads and improvements required to serve the proposed
subdivision.
   B.   Interpretation: All subdivisions as defined shall be submitted for
approval by the Council and shall comply with the provisions of these
regulations. These regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and
where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply.
   C.   Combining Of Permits: The Administrator is hereby required to
coordinate with other City departments concerning all permits which may be
required in this Code and previously or subsequently adopted City ordinances.
   D.   Scope: This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part
of the subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of this
chapter. Nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed or covenants running with the land to
which the City is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provision of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
   E.   Financial: To protect the citizens of Priest River from the additional
costs of revenue and non-revenue generating improvements attributable to
development, it shall be the financial responsibility of the developer to
provide for the construction of all improvements. This shall include but not be
limited to all roads and streets, utilities, drainage structures, water supply
and sewer systems, fire hydrants and water mains, street name signs, walkways
and street lighting within the subdivision and any extensions of the same
required to serve the subdivision.
The developer shall provide suitable guarantees to the City of Priest River
that the tax base and revenue from the development provide sufficient income to
cover operation and maintenance costs prior to the City accepting the
responsibility for operation and maintenance.
   F.   Procedure For Subdivision Approval:
      1.   Subdivision Approval Required: Any person desiring to create a
subdivision as herein defined shall submit all necessary applications to the
Administrator. No final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder or
improvements made on the property until the plat has been acted upon by the
Administrator and approved by the Council.
      2.   Enforcement:
         a.   Sale Of Land In A Subdivision: No owner or agent of the owner of
any land located within a subdivision shall transfer, sell, agree to sell, or
negotiate to sell any land by reference to, exhibition of or using a plan or
plat that has not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed by the
ordinances of the City. Any sale or transfer contrary to the provisions of the
City is void. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the
instrument or transfer of other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of this
chapter.
         b.   Permits: The building inspector shall not issue building or
repair permits for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has
not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed herein.
         c.   Public Improvements: The City hereby defines its policy to be
that the City will withhold all public improvements of whatsoever nature,
including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewerage facilities
and water service from all subdivisions and developments which have not been
approved, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been
accepted by the Council, in the manner prescribed herein.
         d.   Revision Of Plan After Approval: No changes, erasures,
modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after
approval has been given by the Mayor or Council and endorsed in writing on the
plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the Mayor and Council.
         e.   Floodway Encroachment: Prohibit encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      3.   Pre-Application:
         a.   Application: The subdivider shall submit a pre-application to
enable the Administrator to review and comment on the proposed subdivision. The
pre-application shall include at least one copy of a sketch plan. The sketch
plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision,
in schematic form and include the following:
            (1)   The general layout and approximate dimensions of streets,
blocks and lots in sketch form;
            (2)   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on,
and adjacent to, the proposed subdivision site; and
            (3)   The areas set aside for schools, parks and other public
facilities.
         b.   Administrator Action: The Administrator shall notify the
subdivider within thirty (30) days from the date of receiving an acceptable
pre-application as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal
with this chapter, and shall provide the necessary forms and check lists, as
well as the additional following concerns:
            (1)   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or
State policies, goals and objectives or comprehensive plans;
            (2)   Determine if additional special use permits or Code conflicts
such as rezone, special development permit or variance are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits;
            (3)   Consideration of any unique environmental features or
hazardous concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the
subject property, such as areas that have been designated by the State as areas
of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
            (4)   Consideration of other local and State agencies that the
subdivider should contact before preparing a preliminary plat.
      4.   Preliminary Plat:
         a.   Application: The subdivider shall file with the Administrator a
complete subdivision application form and preliminary plat data as required in
this chapter.
         b.   Content Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of the preliminary plat
and related information shall be in such a form as stipulated by the City;
however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the Administrator may
also be required. The subdivider shall submit to the Administrator at least the
following:
            (1)   Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated; each
copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall have
dimensions of not less than twenty four inches (24") by thirty six inches
(36"), shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch (1") to one hundred
feet (100'), shall show the draft date, and shall indicate thereon, by arrow,
the general northerly direction;
            (2)   Six (6) sets of preliminary engineering plans (not meant to
be cross sections or detailed designs) for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks
and other required public improvements; however, such engineering plans shall
contain sufficient information and detail to enable the City Council to make a
determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable
code, regulations, ordinances, and standards.
            (3)   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary
plat; and
            (4)   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the
proposed development within any special development area, such as hillside,
planned unit development, floodplain, cemetery, manufactured home, large-scale
development, hazardous and unique areas of development.
         c.   Requirements Of Preliminary Plats: The following shall be shown
on the preliminary plat or shall be submitted separately:
            (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision;
            (2)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses
of the subdivider or subdividers and the name of the surveyor who prepared the
plat;
            (3)   The name and address of all adjoining owners of property
whether or not bisected by a public right-of-way as shown on record in the
County Assessor's Office;
            (4)   The legal description of the subdivision;
            (5)   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision,
such as: residential single-family, two family and multiple housing,
commercial, industrial, recreational or agricultural and a showing of any sites
proposed for parks, play-grounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
            (6)   A map of the entire area scheduled for the development if the
proposed subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
            (7)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat
to the surrounding area (1/2 mile minimum radius, scale optional);
            (8)   Names and addresses on self-sticking address labels, of all
property owners in a three hundred foot (300') radius of proposed development,
prepared by a title company;
            (9)   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision
and the adjacent land;
            (10)   Streets, street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths,
including adjoining streets or roadways;
            (11)   Lot lines and blocks showing the dimensions and numbers of
each;
            (12)   Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land
slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two foot (2') intervals where
the land slope is ten percent (10%) or less, referenced to an established bench
mark, including location and elevation;
            (13)   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not
limited to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages,
bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, and their respective profiles;
            (14)   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed
restrictions;
            (15)   Any dedications to the public and/or easements, together
with a statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such; and
            (16)   A statement as to whether or not a variance, as specified in
section
10-13-1 of this title, will be requested with respect to any provision of this
chapter describing the particular provision, the variance requested, and the
reasons for it.
         d.   Administrator Review:
            (1)   Certification: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, and all
other data, the Administrator shall certify the application as complete and
shall affix the date of application acceptance on it.
            (2)   Review By Other Agencies: The Administrator shall refer the
preliminary plat and application to as many agencies as deemed necessary. Such
agencies may include the following:
   (A)The appropriate utility companies;
   (B)The Superintendent of the school district; and
   (C)Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
            (3)   Administrator Review: Upon expiration of the time allowance
for department and agency review, the Administrator shall prepare a report to
the City Council.
         e.   Public Notification: Shall be consistent with Idaho Code.
         f.   City Council Action:
            (1)   Hearing By City Council: Within reasonable time following the
Administrator's recommendation, the City Council shall review the preliminary
plat, comments from concerned persons and agencies, and the report from the
Administrator, to arrive at a decision on the preliminary plat.
            (2)   City Council's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a
proposed subdivision, the City Council shall consider the objectives of this
chapter and at least the following:
   (A)The conformance of the subdivision with the comprehensive plan;
   (B)The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed
development;
   (C)The public financial capability of supporting services for the proposed
development; and
   (D)Any other health, safety or environmental problems that may be brought to
the City Council's attention.
            (3)   Action On Preliminary Plat: The City Council may approve,
approve conditionally, disapprove or table the preliminary plat for additional
information. Such action shall occur within thirty (30) days of the date of the
regular meeting at which the plat is first considered by the City Council. The
action and the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing by the
Administrator and forwarded to the applicant. Upon granting or denying a
preliminary plat the City Council shall specify:
   (A)The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
   (B)The reasons for approval or denial; and
   (C)The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
         g.   Appeals: Any person or aggrieved party who appeared in person or
writing before the City Council may appeal the City Council's action to the
District Court.
         h.   Approval Period:
            (1)   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the
acceptance of the final plat application by the Administrator within two (2)
years after action by the City Council shall cause all approvals of the
preliminary plat to be null and void, unless an extension of time is applied
for by the subdivider and granted by the City Council.
            (2)   Development may be phased. Such phasing shall be included
with the preliminary plat application, be approved by the City Council, and be
specifically addressed within a development agreement.
      5.   Final Plat:
         a.   Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the Administrator the
following:
            (1)   Three (3) copies of the final plat; and
            (2)   Three (3) copies of the final engineering construction
drawings for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other public improvements.
         b.   Content Of The Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under title 50, chapter 13 of Idaho Code and
shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable
the same to be placed on one sheet of eighteen inch (18") by twenty four inch
(24") drawing paper, with no part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one
inch (1"). The reverse of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the
drawing, but may contain written matter as to dedications, certifications and
other information. The final plat shall include at least the following:
            (1)   A written application for approval of such final plat as
stipulated by the City Council;
            (2)   Plat certificate prepared by a title company licensed in the
State of Idaho;
            (3)   Such other information as the Administrator may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved the final plat;
            (4)   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting
all requirements or conditions thereof;
            (5)   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this
Code; and
            (6)   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards.
         c.   Administrator Review:
            (1)   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the final plat, and compliance
with all other requirements as provided for herein, the Administrator shall
certify the application as complete and shall affix the date of acceptance
thereon.
            (2)   Resubmittal Of Final Plat: The Administrator shall review the
final plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved
preliminary plat. If the Administrator determines that the final plat differs
from that which was approved as preliminary plat or conditions which have not
been met, the Administrator shall require that the final plat be submitted to
the City Council as required in the preliminary process.
            (3)   Submission To City Council: Upon the determination that the
final plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the Administrator shall place the final plat on the
City Council agenda within forty five (45) days from the date that as
acceptable final plat application was received and acknowledged by the
Administrator.
         d.   Agency Review: The Administrator may transmit one copy of the
final plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the
departments and agencies as he deems necessary to insure compliance with the
preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and
the legal review of the performance bond.
         e.   City Council Action: The City Council, at its next meeting
following receipt of the Administrator's report, shall consider the
Administrator's findings, and comments from concerned persons and agencies to
arrive at a decision on the final plat. The City Council shall approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove, or table the final plat for additional information
within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is
first considered. A copy of the approved plat shall be filed with the
Administrator. Upon granting or denying the final plat the City Council shall
specify:
            (1)   The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
            (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
            (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
a permit.
         f.   Approval Period: Final plat shall be filed with the County
Recorder within two (2) years after written approval by the City Council;
otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless prior to said
expiration date an extension of time is applied for by the subdivider and
granted by the City Council.
         g.   Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the City
Council, the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of surety bond
or other acceptable guarantee and the inclusion of the following signatures on
the final plat, the Administrator shall submit the final plat to the County
Recorder for recording:
            (1)   Certification and signature of the Mayor and Public Works
verifying that the subdivision has been approved;
            (2)   Certification and signature of the City Clerk, if required,
and the City Planning and Zoning Administrator verifying that the subdivision
meets the City's requirements and has been approved by the City Council; and
            (3)   Certification of the sanitation restrictions on the face of
the plat per section 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   G.   Design Standards:
      1.   Minimum Design Standards Required: All plats submitted pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, and all subdivisions, improvements and
facilities done, constructed or made in accordance with said provisions shall
comply with the minimum design standards set forth hereinafter in this chapter;
provided, however, that any higher standards adopted by any Highway District,
State Highway Department or Health Agency shall prevail over those set forth
herein.
      2.   Dedication: Within a proposed subdivision, arterial and collector
streets, as shown on the comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the public
in all cases; in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to public
use.
      3.   Location: Street and road location shall conform to the following:
         a.   Street Location And Arrangements: When an official street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans;
         b.   Minor Streets: Shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by
through traffic;
         c.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets
extend to the boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future
extension of said streets into adjacent areas. A reserve strip may be required
and held in public ownership;
         d.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper
relation to topography to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients;
         e.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or
commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and
off-street loading and parking. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited in all
cases;
         f.   Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial
street, it shall be required that there be frontage roads approximately
parallel to and on each side of such arterial street; or, such other treatment
as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and to
separate through traffic from local traffic;
         g.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Unless otherwise approved by the City
Council, cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than five hundred feet (500') in
length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround having a minimum radius
of fifty feet (50') for right- of-way;
         h.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where
unusual circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a
tract in conformance with this chapter and where satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to
be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of
the street shall be dedicated within such tract; and
         i.   Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited
except within planned unit developments.
      4.   Specifications:
         a.   Street Right-Of-Way Widths: Street and road right-of-way widths
shall conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive development
plan and the rules of the State department having jurisdiction; minimum right-
of-way standards are as follows:
 
Highway And Street Types Widths
Expressway or freeway    160 - 260 feet
Major arterial           120 feet
Minor arterial           80 feet
Collector street         60 feet
Minor street             50 feet
 
         b.   Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%)
on either minor or collector streets, and six percent (6%) for arterial
streets.
         c.   Street Alignment: Shall be as follows:
            (1)   Horizontal Alignment: When street lines deflect from each
other by more than ten degrees (10°) in alignment, the centerline shall be
connected by a curve having a minimum radius of five hundred feet (500') for
arterial streets, and three hundred feet (300') for collector streets. Between
reverse curves on collector and arterial streets there shall be a minimum
tangent distance of two hundred feet (200'); and
            (2)   Vertical Alignment: Minimum stopping sight distances shall be
two hundred feet (200') for minor streets and designed in accordance with
design speed for collector and arterial streets.
      5.   Street Names: The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
         a.   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name within
the City except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street;
street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing
streets shall not be used; and
         b.   All new streets shall be named as follows: Streets having
predominantly east-west direction shall be named "Avenue" or "Road"; streets
having a predominantly north-south direction shall be named "Street" or "Way";
meandering streets shall be named "Drive", "Lane", "Path", or "Trail"; and cul-
de-sacs shall be named "Circle", "Court", or "Place".
      6.   Intersections: Intersections shall conform to the following:
         a.   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees
(90°) or as closely thereto as possible, and in no case shall streets intersect
at less than seventy degrees (70°);
         b.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/
2') and ten feet (10') above the center line grades of the intersection streets
in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line
joining points along said street right-of-way lines twenty five feet (25') from
the point of intersection;
         c.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at
any one intersection;
         d.   T-Intersections: T-intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic;
         e.   Centerline Offsets: Street centerline shall be offset by a
distance of at least one hundred twenty five feet (125'); and
         f.   Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall be extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') each way from
the intersection. An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade
in rolling terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain, will be permitted.
      7.   Pedestrian Walkways: Right-of-way for pedestrian walkways in the
middle of long blocks may be required where necessary to obtain convenient
pedestrian circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas; the pedestrian
easement shall be at least ten feet (10') wide.
      8.   Easements: Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along
front lot lines, rear lot lines and side lot lines when deemed necessary; total
easement width shall not be less than ten feet (10'). Unobstructed drainage way
easements shall be provided as required by the City Council. If an easement
exists for solar access it should comply with the State Code 55-615.
      9.   Lots: Lots shall conform to the following:
         a.   Zoning: The lot width, depth and total area shall not be less
than the requirements of any applicable Zoning Ordinance or this title;
         b.   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots, the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, to allow
for future re-subdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow
for the ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide
blocks. Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated the
plat thereof shall be approved by the City Council prior to the taking of such
action.
      10.   Public Sites And Open Spaces: Public sites and open spaces shall
conform to the following:
         a.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park,
playground, school or other public use, as shown on the future acquisition, as
authorized in section 67-6517, Idaho Code, is located in whole or in part
within a proposed subdivision, the Administrator shall notify the appropriate
public agency concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30)
days of the date of notice, the public agency may request the Governing Body to
suspend consideration on the subdivision for sixty (60) days. If an agreement
is not reached within sixty (60) days, the City Council shall resume
consideration of the subdivision;
         b.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision; and
         c.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments,
the City Council may require sufficient park or open space facilities of
acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may be suitable for the
proposed development.
      11.   Protective Covenants: Protective covenants should be prepared and
recorded as part of a subdivision.
   H.   Improvement Standards:
      1.   Responsibility For Plans: It shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider of every proposed subdivision to have prepared by a registered
engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross-
section, specifications and other supporting data, for all required public
streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction plans shall be based
on preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat and
shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are
subject to approval by the responsible public agencies. All construction plans
shall be prepared in accordance with the public agencies' standards or
specifications.
      2.   Required Public Improvements: Every subdivider shall be required to
install the following public and other improvements in accordance with the
conditions and specifications as follows:
         a.   Monuments: Survey monuments shall be set in accordance with
section 50-1303, Idaho Code;
         b.   Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed
in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City
Council;
         c.   Curbs And Gutters: The curbs, gutters, drainage and drainage
structures shall be provided in accordance with standard specifications of the
City. Such construction shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Administrator;
         d.   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities are
encouraged and may be required subject to the City Council's adopted policies,
ordinances, and code;
         e.   Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified
by the Public Works Department, Highway District or State Highway Department;
         f.   Storm Drainage: An adequate storm drainage system shall be
required in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision
shall be established by an engineer. Construction shall follow the
specifications and procedures established by an engineer;
         g.   Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: All public water supply or
sewer systems (serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be
constructed in accordance with any adopted local plans and specifications. All
new public water supply or sewer systems shall be an extension of an existing
public system whenever possible. If the proposed public water supply or sewer
system is not an extension of an existing public system, there shall be a
showing by the subdivider that the extension is not feasible and not to the
best interest of the public;
         h.   Maintenance And Operation Of Public Water Supply And Sewer
Systems: The subdivider shall provide for a perpetual method of maintenance and
operation of the public water supply or sewer system, serving two (2) or more
separate premises or households, to insure the continued usefulness of the
system;
         i.   Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Adequate fire protection shall be
required in accordance with the appropriate Fire District standards;
         j.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the
appropriate locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local
standards. The subdivider shall be responsible for the purchase and
installation of all required street signs. The design and installation of such
signs shall comply with City standards;
         k.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks and crosswalks shall
be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications as adopted
by the City Council;
         l.   Street Lighting: Street lights may be required to be installed at
intersections throughout the subdivision. A subdivider shall conform to the
requirements of the City and the public utility providing such lighting; and
         m.   Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required
for the protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial
streets, waterways, railroad rights-of-way or other features. Subdivision plats
shall show the location of any greenbelt areas.
      3.   Guarantee Of Completion Of Improvement/Bond: Before consideration of
or the acceptance of same for maintenance within a development, the Mayor and
City Council must be satisfied that all improvements required by this chapter
have been constructed. With City Council approval, in lieu of the completion of
the improvements, or should the subdivider wish to sell lots prior to the
completion and acceptance of the improvements, a bond executed by a surety
company, based on an estimate by an engineer, shall be furnished by the
subdivider in an amount equal to the cost of construction of such improvements.
The surety will be subject to the condition that the improvements will be
completed within twelve (12) months after approval of the final plat, and in
event that they are not completed, the City may proceed with the work and hold
the owner and the bonding company jointly responsible for the costs thereof. As
an alternative, with City Council approval, the subdivider may deposit a
certified check, cash deposit, negotiable bond, or irrevocable bank letter of
credit.
         a.   Surety Bond:
            (1)   Accrual: The bond shall accrue to the City covering
construction, operation and maintenance of the specific public improvement;
            (2)   Amount: The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred
fifty percent (150%), or an amount deemed acceptable to the City Council, of
the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specific public
improvement, as estimated by an engineer and approved by the City Council;
            (3)   Term Length: The term length in which the bond is in force
shall be for a period to be specified by the City Council for the specific
public improvement;
            (4)   Bonding For Surety Company: The bond shall be with a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Idaho, acceptable to the City
Council; and
            (5)   Escrow Agreement: The escrow agreement shall be approved by
the City Council.
         b.   Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Negotiable Bond, Or Irrevocable
Bank Letter Of Credit:
            (1)   Treasurer, Escrow Agent, Or Trust Company: A cash deposit,
certified check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit or
such surety acceptable by the City Council shall be deposited with an escrow
agent or trust company;
            (2)   Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified
check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to
one hundred fifty percent (150%), or an amount deemed acceptable to the City
Council, of the estimated cost of construction for the specific public
improvement, as estimated by an engineer and/or approved by the City Council;
            (3)   Escrow Time: The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified
check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be for a
period to be specified by the City Council; and
            (4)   Progressive Payment: In the case of cash deposits or
certified checks, an agreement between the City Council and the subdivider may
provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the
certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the
extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in
accordance with a previously entered into agreement.
         c.   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat:
            (1)   The construction of improvements required shall have been
completed by the subdivider and approved by the City Council; or
            (2)   Surety acceptable to the City Council shall have been filed
in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond, irrevocable
bank letter of credit or surety bond.
         d.   Inspection Of Public Improvements Under Construction: Before
approving a final plat and construction plans and specifications for public
improvements, an agreement between the subdivider and the City Council shall be
made to provide for checking or inspecting the construction and its conformity
to the submitted plans.
         e.   Penalty In Case Of Failure To Complete The Construction Of A
Public Improvement: In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to
complete such work within the period of time as required by the conditions of
the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it shall be the
responsibility of the City Council to proceed to have such work completed. In
order to accomplish this, the City Council shall reimburse itself for the cost
and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check,
irrevocable bank letter of credit, or negotiable bond which the subdivider may
have deposited in lieu of a surety bond or may take such steps as may be
necessary to require performance by the bonding or surety company and is
included in a written agreement between the City Council and the subdivider.
         f.   Subdivisions Approved Prior To Enactment Of This Chapter: In the
event a subdivider is in progress of completing improvements and/or has been
approved and not yet began public improvements as approved prior to enactment
of this chapter, this subdivider will be required to complete, upon
notification from the City, the public improvements within twelve (12) months
after notification. This requirement is governed by the following:
            (1)   Proper notification must be given to the developer/
subdivider;
            (2)   The time limit will start on the date of notification;
            (3)   Consideration will be given to the standards that were
required of the developer/subdivider prior to the enactment of this chapter.
The penalty for not completing the approved public improvements will be that
the developer/subdivider will be required to resubmit their proposal to the
City Council and follow the prescribed procedure as outlined in this chapter.
   I.   Detection Of Violation, Enforcement, And Penalties:
      1.   Detection Of Violation: The Administrator shall periodically
research the County Assessor's records and perform the necessary investigation
to detect any violations of this chapter.
      2.   Enforcement: No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the
Idaho Code shall be admitted to the public land records of the County or
recorded by the County Recorder, until such subdivision plat has received final
approval by the City Council. No public board, agency, commission, official or
other authority shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the
construction of any of the public improvements required by this chapter until
the final plat has received the approval by the City Council. The City Attorney
shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take
steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this chapter.
      3.   Penalties: Penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall be as follows: Violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. The land owner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any
other person, who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City Council or any other public official or
private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of this chapter or of the Idaho Code.
   J.   Variances: See section
10-13-1 of this title for variance procedures. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-10-2: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT/MINOR NOTATIONAL CHANGE:
   A.   Lot Line Adjustment Within Platted Subdivisions: The procedures set
forth in this section shall be used to process applications for minor
notational changes as defined, and any adjustment of platted lot lines between
two (2) or more existing lots or parcels, where land taken from one lot or
parcel is added to an adjacent lot or parcel. Applications for lot line
adjustments may include:
      1.   The combining of two (2) or more lots;
      2.   Any adjustment of existing subdivision plat lot lines where lots are
eliminated or no more than three (3) additional lots or parcels than originally
existed are created; and where no lot or parcel is reduced below the minimum
lot or parcel size for zoning district in which the lots or parcels are
located; and which no new public roads or City utility main line extensions are
required; and when notice of such division has been supplied to landowners as
elsewhere provided for in this Chapter.
      3.   The procedure may not be used where it creates or expands
nonconformity with land use pursuant to this title or any applicable Land Use
Ordinances.
   B.   Application For Adjustment Of Lot Lines/Minor Notational Changes: All
applications made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the City
Planning and Zoning Department. Any person contemplating a lot line adjustment/
minor notational change is encouraged to contact the Administrator prior to
submission of the application for discussion of procedures, standards and
criteria which are applicable to the proposed application.
      1.   All applications for adjustment of lot lines and minor notational
changes shall include:
         a.   Two (2) full sized copies and one reduced 11"x17" copy of the
final plat, prepared and stamped by an Idaho licensed professional land
surveyor and containing:
            (1)   The location of existing structures;
            (2)   Location, dimensions and area (in acres) of proposed lots.
All proposed lots shall be numbered in a systematic order;
            (3)   Name of the larger subdivision or tract of which it forms a
part;
            (4)   Names of the subdivider and surveyor;
            (5)   The "initial point" and description thereof, shall be
indicated on the drawing in conformance with Idaho Code;
            (6)   Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal
property lines, Township lines, or section lines, intersecting, crossing or
contiguous to the subdivision, and the status of adjoining property shall be
indicated (name of subdivision or un- platted area);
            (7)   The accurate location and description and filing of all
monuments shall be in accordance with "the Corner Perpetuation Act", title 55,
chapter 16, Idaho Code;
            (8)   The length and bearings of the lines of all lots, streets,
alleys and easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvature, radii and
tangent bearings in the case of curved lines (the system of lengths and
bearings of the boundary lines);
            (9)   All lots shall be numbered consecutively in each block, and
each block lettered or numbered as set forth at 50-1304, Idaho Code. All
streets shall bear the street or road name as it appears on the official road
name list;
            (10)   The accurate outline of all property that is offered for
dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon and all property
owners in the division;
            (11)   Private restrictions if any;
            (12)   North point, graphic scale and date (whether true north or
magnetic north shall be indicated);
            (13)   A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor of the
State of Idaho to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him that
all the monuments, shown thereon, actually exist and that their positions are
shown;
            (14)   Location of all watercourses, base flood elevations, the
elevations derived from flood insurance rate maps, and approximate area subject
to inundation of stormwater overflow;
            (15)   Wetland boundaries as depicted on national wetland inventory
maps or as delineated by a professional authorized by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers to perform wetland delineations, and any proposed easements or
easements of record for drainage channels, overhead and underground utility
lines, sanitary sewers, and water systems within the tract;
            (16)   Owner's certificate. A notarized description of the property
encompassed by the plat, dedications and restrictions; and
            (17)   All plat certificates required by this Code.
         b.   A copy of the preliminary title report;
         c.   A copy of the current recorded deed for the subject property;
         d.   Applications shall additionally include one copy of the plat,
currently recorded, marked with distinguishable lines as to clearly indicate
the existing and proposed lot lines;
         e.   A letter from Panhandle Health District or the City stating the
requirements for sanitary restrictions are not affected by the adjustment of
the lot lines; and
         f.   Additional information reasonably required for a thorough review
of the application, as may be asked by the Administrator.
No application submitted pursuant to this subsection B shall be deemed complete
nor any plat recorded, until all fees have been paid.
   C.   Procedures For Administrative Review And Approval Of Lot Line
Adjustment/Minor Notational Changes:
      1.   The applicant shall file an application for a lot line adjustment or
minor notational change with the Administrator, who shall have thirty (30) days
to examine the application to determine its completeness. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Administrator shall inform the applicant in
writing of additional items or information necessary to complete the
application.
      2.   Upon the determination of the Administrator that an application is
complete, the Administrator shall cause a report to be made specifying whether
the application is in conformance with the provisions of this section, and if
not, the changes that could be made in the application to bring it into
conformance.
      3.   The Administrator shall consider the facts of the application and
relevant Code standards and shall approve the application as submitted or
subject to specific modifications upon finding adequate evidence that:
         a.   No additional lots are being created and no lot is being reduced
below the minimum lot size required by zoning; and
         b.   The proposed lot line adjustment is in accord with the purpose of
this chapter and of the zone district in which it is located.
      4.   The Administrator shall provide due notice to adjacent property
owners and publish notice in the newspaper of record.
      5.   The Administrator shall set forth the decision in writing explaining
the reasons for the decision, and the City Code standards used in making the
decision and findings of fact and conclusions in support of the decision. If
the Administrator denies the application, the Administrator shall also set
forth in writing the actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
      6.   Changes in an approved application, resulting in the modification of
the terms and conditions of approval may be approved by the Administrator upon
a written request by the applicant, provided:
         a.   No additional lots are created;
         b.   The changes are consistent, and substantially conform, with the
original preliminary plat approval; and
         c.   The changes do not result in any violation of this Code.
      7.   Any decision or determination made by the Administrator in the
administration of this section may be appealed to the City Council. The appeal
must be submitted to the City Council within ten (10) days from such decision
or determination.
      8.   The lot line adjustment application approval shall be valid for a
period not to exceed one calendar year from the date of approval. Within one
year of the approval, the applicant shall submit the final plat to the
Administrator. At any time prior to the expiration of the application approval,
an applicant may make a written request to the Administrator for a single
extension of the application approval for a period of up to one year. The
Administrator may consider such request for extension. The extension request
must be approved or denied prior to the expiration date of the approval.
   D.   Final Plat For Lot Line Adjustments, Notational Changes To Be Drawn,
Time For Filing, Signing: Upon approval of the paper copy of the final plat,
the applicant shall cause a final plat to be drawn, suitable for recording and
in compliance with the requirements for plats set forth at title 50, chapter
13, Idaho Code. The Administrator shall be authorized to sign the final plat
upon the confirmation that:
      1.   The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this
Code;
      2.   The final plat conforms with the approved application; and
      3.   The conditions of approval have been completed.
   E.   Property Line Adjustment Within Un-Platted Lands: The procedure for
property line adjustments for un-platted lands shall be the same as platted
lands except that a record of survey shall be used when no additional parcels
or lots are created. When additional parcels or lots are created with un-
platted lands the properties shall be divided as a platted subdivision as is
elsewhere provided for in the City Municipal Code. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018; amd.
Ord. 618, 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDs)
SECTION:
10-11-1: Planned Unit Development (PUD) Regulations
10-11-1: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The intent of the planned unit development (PUD) is to permit
building and development flexibility by permitting a PUD within any zoning
district through a rezone and/or conditional use permit or in those areas
designated as PUD on the City's official zoning map. Map designation of a PUD
still requires the processing of a conditional use permit for a PUD.
   B.   Goals: It shall be the policy to guide development of land and
construction by encouraging PUDs to achieve the following goals:
      1.   A choice of development environments by allowing a variety of
building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a reduction in
lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements, provided
appropriate amenities are provided by the development;
      2.   A more useful pattern of open space, more convenience in the
location of accessory commercial uses and services;
      3.   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural
topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and
prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
      4.   A more efficient use of land that is generally achieved through
shorter utilities and streets;
      5.   A development pattern in harmony with land use density,
transportation and community facilities objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   Conflicting Provisions: Whenever there is a conflict or difference
between the provisions of this section and those of other sections of this
Code, the provisions of this section shall prevail. Subjects not covered by
this section shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in
this title.
   D.   Density: The overall density of a PUD shall not exceed the provisions
of the underlying zone(s) except as provided in subsections J and P of this
section. Common open space and buffering may be included in calculation of the
overall density.
If a PUD is in more than one zoning district, the space and density
requirements shall be calculated separately for each zone. However, the
distribution of dwellings or other land uses within the PUD need not be
affected by the zoning district boundaries.
   E.   Uses Permitted:
      1.   A variety of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational or
combinations of these land uses may be permitted within a PUD. Residential
areas within PUDs may include both single-family and multi-family dwelling
units such as townhouses, garden apartments, common wall single-family and
multi-family dwellings, either as separately deeded lots, condominiums or as
lease or rental housing.
      2.   Zero lot line development and condominiums.
   F.   Ownership Requirements:
      1.   The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names and with the
consent of the recorded owner or owners of property included in the
development. An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property
owner or a person having an existing interest in the property to be included in
the PUD. However, the application may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable
interest in such property.
      2.   Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire
project shall be under single ownership or control and legal title must be
presented with the final development plan or approval may be granted subject to
this condition.
   G.   Common Open Space:
      1.   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross land area developed in
any PUD project shall be reserved for common open space and/or recreational
facilities for the residents or users of the area being developed. The
applicant/developer shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Council, the
proposed common area/open space is a percentage of the total area developed to
adequately serve the needs and impacts of the development.
      2.   The required amount of common open space land reserved under a PUD
shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area for
the use of each owner who buys property within the development and/or be
dedicated to the public and retained as common open space for parks, recreation
and related uses. Public utility and similar easements and rights-of-way for
watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable for common open
space dedication unless such land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or other
similar purpose and is approved by the City Council.
      3.   The responsibility for the maintenance and security of all open
spaces shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final
development plan. The City may require sufficient guarantees to insure such
maintenance and security.
      4.   Common open space shall meet the following standards:
         a.   The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space
shall be provided in a manner to meet the needs of the PUD.
         b.   The uses intended for the common open space must be appropriate
to the scale and character of the PUD, considering its size, density, expected
population, topography, and the number and type of structures and uses
provided.
         c.   Common open space should be suitably improved for its intended
use, although common open space containing natural features, existing trees,
and ground cover worthy of preservation may be proposed to be left unimproved.
The buildings, structures, and improvements which are permitted in the common
open space shall be appropriate to the uses which are approved for the common
open space and shall conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open
space having regard to its topography and unimproved condition. The City may
use conditions of approval or require guarantees that insure required
improvements are constructed.
         d.   The development schedule must coordinate the improvement of the
common open space and the construction of all buildings and facilities within
the PUD.
         e.   The use and improvement of the common open space shall be planned
in relation to any existing public or semi-public open space which adjoins or
is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of the PUD.
         f.   The form of ownership and maintenance of the open space must be
approved by the City prior to recording of the final PUD. The individual or
organization shall not dispose of the common open space without prior written
approval by the City Council.
   H.   Perimeter Requirements: If topographical or other barriers do not
provide adequate protection for existing or planned uses adjacent to the PUD,
the City may impose any or all of the following requirements:
      1.   Structures located within the perimeter of the PUD must be set back
by a distance sufficient to protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent
existing uses.
      2.   Such structures located adjacent to the perimeter of the PUD must be
permanently screened or buffered in a manner approved by the City Council.
Screening/buffering includes but is not limited to: installation of berms;
fencing; landscaping or combination thereof.
      3.   Modification of perimeter requirements can be made when
accommodating subsection G4e of this section.
   I.   Underground Utilities: Underground utilities, including telephone and
electrical systems, are required within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances
to these systems which can be effectively screened may be exempted from this
requirement if the City Council finds that such exemption will not violate the
intent or character of the proposed PUD.
   J.   Increased Residential Density:
      1.   To provide for an incentive for quality PUDs, the City Council may
authorize an increased density in excess of that permitted in the applicable
Residential Zoning District. The increased density shall be negotiable.
Character, identity, architectural and site variation incorporated in a
development shall be considered cause for density increases, provided these
factors make a substantial contribution to the objectives of the PUD,
including:
         a.   Landscaping, streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing
landscaping, pedestrian way treatment and recreational areas.
         b.   Siting, visual focal points, use of existing physical features
such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation, circulation pattern,
physical environment, variation in building setbacks and building grouping
(such as clustering).
         c.   Design features, street sections, architectural style, harmonious
use of materials, parking areas broken by landscaping features and varied use
of housing types.
         d.   Public and/or community services, such as water and sewer, are
appropriate for the proposed densities.
         e.   Unbuildable lands cannot be used in density calculations.
         f.   Increased density will not permit overcrowding.
   K.   Commercial And Industrial Uses:
      1.   When PUDs include commercial and industrial or both, uses, the
buildings and establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking
areas and common ingress and egress points in order to limit the number of
encroachments and intersections. Planting screens or fences must be provided on
the perimeter of the commercial/industrial areas abutting residential
development or zone districts.
      2.   The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and
harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged
facilities for traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and
facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient
from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
      3.   All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for
immediate improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise
maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
      4.   Access roads shall not have a substantial adverse effect on
properties adjoining the access roads.
   L.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Approval Procedure: The granting of a conditional use permit for a
PUD shall require a pre-application, the submission of a preliminary
development plan and approval by the City Council of a final development plan
as specified within this title.
      2.   Pre-Application Meeting: The developer shall meet with the
Administrator prior to the submission of a preliminary development plan. The
purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and
effect of this chapter and the criteria and standards contained herein, and to
familiarize the developer with the Comprehensive Plan, this title, subdivision
chapter, and such other plans and ordinances as are deemed appropriate.
      3.   Preliminary Plan - Filing:
         a.   An application for a preliminary PUD shall be filed with the
Administrator. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information filed in triplicate:
            (1)   Name, mailing address, e-mail address, and phone number of
applicant;
            (2)   Name, address, and phone number of registered surveyor,
registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the
preliminary development plan;
            (3)   Legal description of property including plat map;
            (4)   Description of existing use;
            (5)   Zoning districts;
            (6)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator
showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and any other
items the Administrator or City Council may require demonstrating the
relationship of the PUD to the Comprehensive Plan and to existing schools and
other community facilities and services;
            (7)   A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the
Administrator showing topography at two foot (2') contour intervals except in
areas of steep or high slopes where five foot (5') contours are required;
location and type of residential, commercial and industrial land uses, layout
and dimensions of lots and building setback lines; preliminary improvement
drawings showing water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas
and such other characteristics as the Administrator or City Council deem
necessary. The plan will show the proposed general layout; the location of
various types of land uses; the approximate location, use, height, and bulk of
buildings; the proposed density of population in each distinct residential
area; the location and size of recreational spaces, parks, schools, and other
facilities which are intended for public use; the provisions for automobile
parking; and the size and floor space of commercial or industrial uses;
            (8)   Proposed schedule for the development of the site;
            (9)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the
land in question to file the final plan of the proposed development plan within
two (2) years;
            (10)   A preliminary plat, in accordance with other provisions of
this title, when the PUD includes a platted subdivision;
            (11)   A land capability report, prepared by a person or firm
qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge of the subject,
identifying the capability of the land to withstand disturbance without risk of
substantial harmful consequences of floods, sewage, drainage, erosion,
sedimentation, or geological or surface slippage;
            (12)   A public utility plan for sanitary sewer, water, and storm
drainage;
            (13)   A plan showing the design and construction standards and
location of proposed streets, grades, and public ways, together with a traffic
study of existing roads to build out; and
            (14)   Additional copies of the above shall be required if
requested by the Administrator.
         b.   The applicant shall also submit a written statement providing the
following information:
            (1)   An explanation of the character of the PUD and the reasons
why the PUD is consistent with all applicable City ordinances and Code and why,
in the applicant's opinion, the PUD is in the public interest;
            (2)   Two (2) copies of restrictive covenants, grants or easements,
or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings, and structures including easements or grants for public utilities;
            (3)   Proof of the present ownership of all of the land included
within the PUD and the applicant's interest in the land proposed for
development;
            (4)   The form of organization proposed to own and maintain the
common open space;
            (5)   Letters of comment from the appropriate road, fire, school,
health, sewer and water districts and other appropriate agencies shall be
provided. The letters shall indicate that the agency has reviewed the proposal,
and stipulate any conditions or requirements necessary for approval;
            (6)   A development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction of the project can be expected to begin;
            (7)   The approximate dates in which phases of the project will be
built; and
            (8)   The approximate date when the development will be completed.
      4.   Preliminary Plan - Notice: Following the filing of a complete
application as determined by the Administrator, and prior to granting a
conditional use permit for a PUD, at least one public hearing, before the City
Council, in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard
shall be held. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the
time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City. Notice by mail shall be given by mailing of the public
notice fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to property owners within three
hundred feet (300') beyond the external boundaries of the land to be
considered, excluding streets and alleys, and any additional area that may be
substantially impacted by the proposed special use as determined by the
Administrator, using the last known name and address of such owners on the
latest adopted tax roll of the County. The applicant shall bear the
responsibility and costs of public notice by mail and by publication. The City
shall have the responsibility of preparing the public notice for the applicant,
and the applicant shall supply self-addressed stamped envelopes of all property
owners according to the tax roll of the County for official mailing by the
City. Additional notice requirements as provided for by Idaho Code section 67-
6512, shall be met as required.
      5.   Preliminary Plan:
         a.   Review For Approval - City Council: Within thirty (30) days after
the public hearing the City Council shall review the preliminary development
plan to determine if it is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter; whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of the
community and neighborhood and whether the benefits, combination of various
land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses in the surrounding area
justify the deviation from standard district regulations. The City Council's
approval in principle of the preliminary development plan shall be necessary
before an applicant may submit a final development plan. Approval in principle
shall not be construed to endorse a precise location of uses, configuration of
parcels or engineering feasibility.
         b.   Consideration Of General Standards: The City Council shall
consider the general standards applicable to conditional use permits and
criteria for special uses before approving in principle a preliminary
development plan.
         c.   Costs And Fees: The City Council shall not decide on a
preliminary plan unless permitting costs and fees, that are the responsibility
of the applicant/developer, have been paid.
         d.   Signed Agreement: All PUDs and conditional use permits, as a
condition of approval, must have a signed agreement in place for development,
sustained use, or any other special agreement as required by the City. The
agreement is only valid for the proposal as presented for approval. Any changes
to the project scope must have a new negotiated and signed agreement.
      6.   Final Plan - Filing: An application for approval of the final
development plan must be filed within two (2) years of approval of a
preliminary development plan. The final plan shall be filed with the
Administrator by at least one property owner or person having a presently
existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. Applications
shall be signed by the owner, attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application for final development plan. Each
application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be
revoked if construction on the project has not begun within two (2) years from
the date of issuance of the approval unless specifically allowed otherwise by
the City Council. At a minimum, the application for a final plan shall contain
the following information:
         a.   A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions
and bearings of the property lines, areas in acres, topography, existing
features of the development site; including major wooded areas, wetlands,
structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses;
         b.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan;
the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
         c.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing of each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for
each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposes an exception from
standard zoning districts or other ordinances or Code sections governing
development;
         d.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary:
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations;
waste disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earth
work required for site preparation and development;
         e.   Site plan showing: building(s), various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationship;
         f.   Preliminary building plans and proposed exterior elevations;
         g.   Landscaping plans;
         h.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal
statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and
maintenance of the land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas
which are to be commonly owned and maintained; and
         i.   A final plat if a subdivision is included in the PUD.
      7.   Final Plan - City Council Recommendation:
         a.   Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final development
plan, the Administrator shall recommend that the final development plan be
approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved.
The Administrator may, upon showing cause, request and receive time extensions
from the City Council. The Administrator shall then transmit all papers
constituting the record and the recommendations to the City Council.
         b.   The City Council shall find that the facts submitted with the
application and presented to them establish that:
            (1)   The proposed development can be initiated within two (2)
years of the date of approval or as otherwise stipulated by the City Council;
            (2)   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will
not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations;
            (3)   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not
generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the
PUD;
            (4)   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
locations proposed;
            (5)   Any exception from standard district requirements is
warranted by the design and other amenities incorporated in the final
development plan and is in accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of
the City Council;
            (6)   The area surrounding said development can be planned and
zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed
development;
            (7)   The PUD is in general conformance with the Comprehensive
Plan;
            (8)   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for
the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed; and
            (9)   Permitting costs, that are the responsibility of the
applicant/developer, have been paid by the applicant/developer.
      8.   Final Plan - City Council Action:
         a.   Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final recommendation
of the Administrator, the City Council shall agendize the application to a
meeting to approve, approve with supplementary conditions or disapprove the
application as presented. Upon granting or denying the application the City
Council shall specify:
            (1)   The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
            (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
            (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
a permit.
         b.   Prior to an approval of a final plan, the City may require the
applicant/developer enter into a Development Agreement with the City setting
forth: the scope of the project; conditions of development; and describing all
improvements and amenities which the applicant/developer has agreed to
construct.
         c.   If the application is either approved or approved with
conditions, the City Council shall direct the Administrator to issue zoning
permits only in accordance with the approved final development plan and the
supplementary conditions attached thereto.
      9.   Extensions: Extensions for final plan filing of up to six (6) months
and/or initiation of construction of a project of up to two (2) years may be
granted by the Administrator, upon the applicant/developer showing cause for an
extension.
   M.   Planned Unit Development Review Criteria: A PUD may be approved only if
the proposal conforms to the following criteria to the satisfaction of the City
Council:
      1.   The proposal produces a functional, enduring and desirable
environment;
      2.   The proposal is consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan and this
title;
      3.   The design and site planning is compatible with existing uses on
adjacent properties. Design elements to be considered include but are not
limited to density, architectural style, placement of buildings upon land,
building heights and bulk, off-street parking, open space, privacy, and
landscaping;
      4.   The proposal is compatible with natural features of the site and
adjoining properties. Natural features to be considered include: topography,
native vegetation not restricted by law, wildlife habitats, watercourse,
floodplains, floodways and view corridors;
      5.   The location, design, and size of the proposal are such that the
development will be adequately served by existing public facilities or
services. Addition to, or expansion of, existing facilities or the creation of
new facilities may be required as a condition of PUD approval. Additions and
expansions shall be the responsibility of the developer;
      6.   The proposal provides adequate private common open space area, as
determined by the City Council, of no less than ten percent (10%) of gross land
area, free of buildings, streets, driveways or parking area. The common open
space shall be accessible to all users of the development and usable for open
space and recreational purposes;
      7.   Off-street parking provides parking sufficient for users of the
development and shall be integrated into the development to minimize exposure
and impact;
      8.   The proposal indicates the form of management, acceptable to the
City, for the perpetual maintenance and security of all common property;
      9.   The location, design and size of the proposal are such that the
traffic generated by the development can be accommodated safely on major
streets and without requiring unnecessary utilization of other local streets
without appropriate improvements and mitigation measures;
      10.   That the accesses to the PUD, traffic congestion in the streets
which adjoin the PUD and the burden on public facilities which serve or are
proposed to serve the PUD have been adequately addressed by the development;
      11.   All elements of the design of the land, including vehicular ingress
and egress, internal circulation of vehicles, pedestrian walkways, buildings,
structures and related improvements, landscaping, signs, and exterior
illumination are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and
vehicular safety and welfare are protected, and physical disruption of
surrounding property will not result; and
      12.   The City Council may require dedication of land and/or the
construction of non-vehicular travel ways that will facilitate non-vehicular
travel within the development and complement a City-wide non-vehicular
transportation system.
   N.   Professional Services Required As Condition Of Approval: The City
Council shall have the authority to require the applicant to utilize
appropriate competent professionals for a specific input regarding special
areas of concern, such as traffic, hydrology and engineering studies, as a
condition for approval of a PUD.
   O.   Public Services And Facilities: The City Council may, as a condition of
approval of PUDs, and when the need is caused by the PUD, require mitigation of
impacts to the extent required by the PUD to public services and facilities
including but not limited to: schools, parks, playgrounds and associated
services. Areas for such services may be set aside and negotiated for public
use or be permanently reserved for the owners, residents, employees, or patrons
of the development.
   P.   Modification Of Development Standards: In order to achieve the purposes
of these provisions, the following standards may be modified with conditions
imposed:
      1.   Any provision pertaining to site performance standards including,
but not limited to, height, bulk, setback or maximum dimensions of any
facility;
      2.   Any provision establishing buffering, landscaping or other similar
requirements pertaining to site design;
      3.   Any provision pertaining to the minimum or maximum dimensions of any
lot(s);
      4.   Any provisions pertaining to the type of facilities and uses
allowed;
      5.   Any provisions pertaining to sign regulations; and
      6.   Any provision pertaining to off-street parking and loading.
   Q.   Security For Improvements: The City Council may, as a condition of
approval of a final PUD, require the applicant to enter into a contract with
the City to install the required public improvements. The applicant shall
furnish an irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond or other sufficient
security acceptable to the City for the installation and associated costs.
However, if an applicant/developer completes all public improvements prior to
lease, sale or use of properties, bonding will not be required. The
Administrator may extend the completion date for additional six (6) month
periods upon written request from the applicant showing cause and need for the
extension.
In the event the developer fails to complete such work within the period of
time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of
public improvements, the guarantee shall be forfeited to the City. The City
shall arrange to have such work completed up to the amount of the guarantee. In
no case shall the City be required to expend any funds other than those
provided by the guarantee. In order to accomplish this, the City shall
reimburse itself for any cost and expense thereof by appropriating the
guarantee.
   R.   Parties Bound: Once the preliminary development plan is approved, all
persons and parties, their successors, heirs, or assigns, who own, have, or
will have by virtue of purchase, inheritance or assignment, any interest in the
real property within the proposed PUD, shall be bound by the conditions
attending the approval of the development and the provisions of this title.
   S.   Administration And Enforcement: Building permits and other permits
required for the construction or development of property under the provisions
of this section shall be issued only when in the opinion of the Administrator,
the work to be performed meets the requirements of the final plan and program
elements of the PUD. Any determination made by the Administrator, regarding
administering this section, can be appealed to the City Council.
   T.   Minor And Major Changes:
      1.   Minor adjustments may be made and approved by the Administrator when
a building permit is issued. Minor adjustments are those which may affect the
precise dimensions or siting of buildings, but which do not affect the basic
character or arrangement of buildings of the approved final plan, nor the
density of the development or the open space requirements. Such dimensional
adjustments shall not vary more than ten percent (10%) from the original.
      2.   Major adjustments are those which, in the opinion of the
Administrator, substantially change the basic design, density, open space or
other requirements of the PUD. When, in the opinion of the Administrator, a
change constitutes a major adjustment, no building or other permit shall be
issued without prior review and approval by the City Council of such
adjustment.
   U.   Fees: It is the intent of the City for the applicant/developer to
assume all permitting costs associated with processing a PUD. Permitting costs
shall include processing fees, postage and reasonable professional fees such as
engineering and legal service fees. The City may set such fees by resolution.
(Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 12
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Manufactured Home Park Regulations
10-12-1: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The intent of this section is to provide for the development of
manufactured home parks for placement of manufactured homes as defined by Idaho
State law, and establish minimum standards for the design, construction,
alteration, extension, and maintenance of manufactured home parks and related
utilities and facilities and authorize the issuance of permits, license and
inspections of such manufactured home parks. All manufactured home parks shall
be subdivided pursuant to the City Subdivision Code. The City Council is hereby
authorized to make and, after public hearing, to adopt such written regulations
as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
section. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the
provisions of this section and the penalty for violation of the provisions
thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of
this section, as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Uses And Developments Permitted: The following uses and developments
may be conducted or constructed in the manufactured home park:
      Accessory buildings such as storage buildings, attached or detached.
      Carports and patios.
      Commercial rental.
      Convenience store without fuel sale.
      Individual manufactured homes as part of a manufactured home park.
      Manufactured home park.
      Pools and club houses.
   C.   General Standards: The manufactured home park development standards
contained in the following subsections shall apply to all areas where
manufactured home parks are permitted. The following subsections describe the
standards for design, issuance of permits, authorizing the licensing of
operations, authorizing the inspection of manufactured home parks, and fixing
penalties for violations.
      1.   Minimum Area Requirements: The minimum area required for a new
manufactured home park shall not be less than two (2) acres. Expansion of an
existing manufactured home park must increase the overall size to not less than
two (2) acres.
      2.   Density: Density shall not exceed ten (10) manufactured homes per
acre, excluding road area requirements, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      3.   Recreation Area: A recreation area may be required to serve the
needs of park residents.
   D.   Permits: No person shall construct, alter or extend any manufactured
home park within the limits of the City unless he holds a valid permit issued
by the City in the name of the person for the specific construction, alteration
or extension proposed. When any person desires to develop a manufactured home
park, that person shall file an application with the City on forms furnished by
the City. A pre-application meeting between the developer and the Administrator
may be held to discuss the site design, location, public service needs, and
related areas of concern for the proposed development.
      1.   All applications for permits shall be made to the City and shall
include at least the following:
         a.   Name, mailing address, email address, and phone number of
applicant;
         b.   Interest of the applicant in the manufactured home park (i.e.,
owner, agent, etc.);
         c.   Location and legal description of the manufactured home park;
         d.   Description of existing use and zoning district;
         e.   Certificate of Ownership issued by a licensed title company as to
the ownership of record, and any interest of record, and a list of all property
owners of record within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of
the proposed development; and
         f.   Complete site plan and specifications of the proposed park
showing:
            (1)   The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
            (2)   The number, location and size of all manufactured home lots.
            (3)   The location and width of roadways, driveways and walkways.
            (4)   The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures.
            (5)   The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
            (6)   Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and
sewage disposal facilities.
            (7)   Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to
be constructed within the manufactured home park.
            (8)   The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
            (9)   Provisions for extra parking and recreation space, size and
location.
            (10)   Location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to the park.
            (11)   Grading and drainage of property.
            (12)   An enlarged plot plan of a typical manufactured home space
showing the stand, patio, carport, storage space, parking, sidewalk, utility
connections and landscaping.
      2.   All applications shall be accompanied by a conditional use permit.
      3.   When, upon review of the application and public hearings, the City
is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this section and
regulations issued hereunder, a permit shall be issued.
   E.   Inspection Of Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   The building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
satisfactory compliance with this section and regulations issued hereunder.
      2.   The building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the
purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement
of this section and regulations issued hereunder.
      3.   The building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the
manufactured home park.
      4.   It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of manufactured home
parks, and manufactured homes contained therein, or of the person in charge of
them, to give the building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer free access to
such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
      5.   It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park
to give the owner or his agent or employee access to any part of the
manufactured home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this section and regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   F.   Notices, Hearings, And Orders:
      1.   Whenever the building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provisions of this section, or its regulations, the building
inspector or Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of the alleged
violation to the person to whom the permit was issued. The notice shall:
         a.   Be in writing;
         b.   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
         c.   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires;
         d.   Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been sent by
registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this State;
and
         e.   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will
affect compliance with the provisions of this section and its regulations.
      2.   Any person affected by any notice that has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this section, or its regulations, may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council
authority; provided that such person shall file in the Office of the City Clerk
a written petition requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds for it within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served.
The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay and suspension
of the notice.
Upon receipt of the petition, the City Council shall set a time and place for
the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice.
At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why the notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than thirty (30) days from when the petition was filed;
provided that upon application of the petitioner the City Council may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the thirty (30) day period
when, in their judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reasons for such postponement.
      3.   After the hearing the City Council shall make findings as to
compliance with the provisions of this section and its regulations and shall
issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice that
shall be served as provided in chapter 16 of this title.
      4.   The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and
decisions of the City Council, and together with a copy of every notice and
order related to it shall be entered as a matter of public record. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek relief from it in any
court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this State.
      5.   Whenever the building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer finds
that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public
health, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence
of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem
necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply with it immediately, but upon petition to the City Council shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
   G.   Standards For Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   Space:
         a.   See subsection C2 of this section;
         b.   Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a minimum
outdoor living area of three hundred (300) square feet;
         c.   Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a patio paved
with asphalt, concrete or suitable hard surfaced material which shall have a
minimum area of one hundred forty (140) square feet with a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The patio shall not occupy more than one-half (1/2) of the outdoor
living area;
         d.   Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a covered
carport paved with asphalt, concrete or suitable hard surfaced material and
have a minimum width of ten feet (10').
         e.   All utilities necessary to serve the manufactured home park shall
be located underground and any necessary easements for maintenance and repair
shall be granted to the affected utility owner.
   H.   Environmental, Open Space, And Access Requirements:
      1.   General Requirements: Condition of soil, ground water level,
drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health
or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable
smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to
unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion, or shall be used
for any purpose that would expose persons or property to hazards.
      2.   Soil And Ground Cover Requirements: Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every manufactured home park, excepting those areas used for flower
beds, vegetable gardens and designated recreational areas, shall be paved, or
covered with stone screening, or other solid material, or protected with grass
lawn that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust.
   I.   Site Drainage Requirements: The ground surface in all parts of every
manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water
in a safe, efficient manner.
   J.   Park Areas For Nonresident Uses:
      1.   No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of
park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.
      2.   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the
sale of a manufactured home located on a manufactured home stand and connected
to the pertinent utilities.
   K.   Required Separation Between Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by at least fifteen feet (15').
      2.   An accessory structure that has an area exceeding twenty five (25)
square feet and is attached to a manufactured home or located within ten feet
(10') of its window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be
considered to be part of the manufactured home.
   L.   Required Recreational Areas:
      1.   In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate six (6) or
more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more recreational areas that
shall be easily accessible to all park residents.
      2.   The size of the recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of
two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area
shall contain less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      3.   Recreation areas shall be located as to be free of traffic hazards
and should where topography permits, be centrally located.
   M.   Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips, And Screening:
      1.   Boundary Lines: All manufactured homes shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any park property boundary line abutting upon a
public street or highway and at least fifteen feet (15') from other park
boundary lines.
      2.   Adjoining Pavement: There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet
(10') between an individual manufactured home and adjoining pavement of a park,
street, or common parking area or other common areas.
      3.   Front Yard: A minimum front yard setback for a manufactured home
park shall be ten feet (10') from the property line except as provided for in
subsection M1 of this section.
      4.   Side Yards: Each individual unit shall have yards on each side of a
minimum five feet (5').
      5.   Rear Yard: Each individual unit shall have a rear yard of a minimum
ten feet (10').
      6.   Boundary Development: A solid, sight obscuring fence or wall of not
less than six feet (6') in height, is required to surround the manufactured
home park. The fence or wall may be placed up to the property line if adequate
vision clearance for entrances and exits is maintained. Gates may be required
at entryways other than the main entry for emergency services and emergency
exits.
   N.   Park Street System:
      1.   General Requirements: All manufactured home parks shall be provided
with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads
to each manufactured home lot. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted
to topography.
      2.   Access: Access to manufactured home parks shall be designed to
minimize the congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the park
streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width
of thirty six feet (36') where parking is permitted on both sides and a minimum
road pavement width of twenty eight feet (28') where parking is limited to one
side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one hundred feet (100') long
and does not provide access to abutting manufactured home lots within such
distance, the minimum road pavement width may be twenty four feet (24'),
provided parking is prohibited at both sides.
      3.   Internal Streets: Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
         a.   All streets, except minor streets - thirty six feet (36').
         b.   Minor streets, no parking - twenty four feet (24').
         c.   Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to one thousand feet
(1,000') and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an
outside roadway diameter of at least sixty feet (60') or other Fire District
approved configuration.
   O.   Required Illumination Of Park Street Systems: A street lighting plan
shall be approved by the Administrator.
   P.   Street Construction And Design Standards: Pavement, grades and
intersections shall be constructed to meet the City Public Works standards and
specifications.
   Q.   Required Off-Street Parking:
      1.   Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all manufactured home
parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished
at the rate of at least one and one-fourth (11/4) car spaces for each
manufactured home lot.
      2.   Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide
convenient access to the manufactured home that it is intended to serve.
   R.   Walks:
      1.   General Requirements: All parks shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual manufactured homes, the
park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
      2.   Common Walk System: A common walk system shall be provided and
maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such
common walks shall have a minimum width of five feet (5') (ADA accessible).
      3.   Individual Walks: All manufactured home stands shall be connected to
common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces
connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width
of two feet (2').
   S.   Manufactured Home Stands: The area of the manufactured homes stand
shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the manufactured
home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting
on the superstructure. Stands must be paved with asphalt or concrete surfacing.
All manufactured homes shall be skirted within thirty (30) days of installation
and setup.
   T.   Water Supply: Each space shall be connected to the City water system
(where available) and served by an individual water meter.
   U.   Sewage System: Each space shall be connected to the City sewer system
(where available) and served by an individual sewer connection.
   V.   Electrical Distribution System: Every park shall contain an electrical
wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances that
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations governing such systems.
   W.   Refuse Handling:
      1.   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured
home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
      2.   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent- proof
containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any manufactured home lot, unless otherwise approved by the Administrator.
Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly
store all refuse.
      3.   Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse
containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to
facilitate cleaning around them.
      4.   All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once
weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from Municipal or
private agencies, the manufactured home park operator shall provide this
service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or
covered containers.
      5.   Where Municipal or private disposal service is not available, the
manufactured home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting it
to a disposal site approved by the health authority.
   X.   Insect And Rodent Control:
      1.   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures
to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements of the health
authority.
      2.   Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris that may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests.
      3.   Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage.
Lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least one foot (1')
above the ground.
      4.   Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
      5.   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as
to prevent the growth of ragweed and other noxious weeds considered detrimental
to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any
description.
   Y.   Fuel Supply And Storage:
      1.   Fuel Oil Supply Systems: All fuel oil systems shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems.
      2.   Firewood Storage: Shall be either in an enclosed building or neatly
stacked out of view.
   Z.   Fire Protection:
      1.   The manufactured home area shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the local fire authority.
      2.   Manufactured home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials.
      3.   Portable fire extinguishers, or a type approved by the local fire
authority, shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations
designated by the local fire authority and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
      4.   Fires shall be made only in stoves, fire pits approved by the local
fire authority, or other equipment intended for such purposes.
      5.   Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with current
International Fire Code requirements.
   AA.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Responsibilities Of The Park Management:
         a.   The person to whom a permit for a manufactured home park is
issued shall operate the park in compliance with this section and its
regulations and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
         b.   The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this section and inform them of the duties and responsibilities
under this Code and its regulations.
         c.   The park management shall supervise the placement of each
manufactured home on its manufactured home stand, which includes obtaining a
setting permit from the City, securing its stability and installing all utility
connections.
         d.   The park management shall keep all common grounds landscaped and
mown.
      2.   Responsibilities Of Park Occupants:
         a.   The park occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements
of this section and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain their
manufactured home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a
clean and sanitary condition.
         b.   The park occupants shall be responsible for proper placement of
their manufactured home on its manufactured home stand and proper installation
of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park
management.
         c.   The park occupants shall keep private lawns mown and lots weed
free.
      3.   Restrictions In Occupancy: A manufactured home shall not be occupied
for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a manufactured home stand
and connected to water, sewerage and electrical utilities.
      4.   Skirting: All manufactured homes in the City shall be skirted with a
prefinished metal skirting or a solid, opaque skirting that is compatible in
appearance with the home's siding. No unfinished wood or ply-wood shall be
allowed. The skirting shall be in contact with the ground but shall not attach
the manufactured home to the ground. The skirting shall be rodent- proof, be
maintained in good repair at all times and shall extend around the entire
perimeter without gaps or holes, other than required for ventilation, or
access, which shall be screened. Skirting shall be required within thirty (30)
days of the manufactured home installation. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 13
VARIANCES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Variances; Provisions
10-13-1: VARIANCES; PROVISIONS:
   A.   General: The City Council may authorize in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for
issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of
convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of
this title would result in unnecessary hardship.
Per Idaho Code 67-6516, A variance shall not be considered a right or special
privilege but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue
hardship because of characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in
conflict with the public interest.
   B.   Application And Standards For Variances: A variance from the terms of
this title shall not be granted by the City Council unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the Administrator containing:
      1.   Name, mailing address, e-mail address, and phone number of applicant
(s);
      2.   Property address;
      3.   Legal description of property;
      4.   A site plan of the property that is under consideration, drawn to
scale, showing location of all improvements, and the specific information
concerning the requested variance;
      5.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      6.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That an undue hardship exists because of site characteristics,
and whether special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this title;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district;
         e.   That granting the variance will better contribute to the intent
of the district as provided in this title and described in the Comprehensive
Plan that will its denial;
         f.   Whether granting this variance is in conflict with the public
interest; and
         g.   Whether the requested variance is the minimum necessary to
alleviate the hardship.
   C.   Hearing Required: The City Council shall hold at least one public
hearing prior to making a decision on a variance request. Notice of the hearing
will be given pursuant to the standards outlined in section
10-15-5 of this title. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 14
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-14-1: Nonconforming Uses; Regulations
10-14-1: NONCONFORMING USES; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located.
It is the intent of this title to permit nonconforming uses to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district. A destroyed residential structure may be
approved, upon City Council consideration, for reconstruction upon the same
footprint. Any change to the structure size, height, or placement shall be
subject to the conditional use process.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   The lawful use of land or structures existing on the effective date
of this title may be continued. With approval of the Administrator,
nonconforming uses or structures may be altered or expanded. The extension of a
nonconforming use to a portion of a structure which was arranged or designed
for the nonconforming use at the time this title becomes effective is not an
expansion of a nonconforming use. A nonconforming structure which conforms with
respect to use may be altered or expanded if the alteration or expansion does
not cause the structure to deviate further from the standards of this title.
      2.   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, further use of the property shall conform to this title.
      3.   A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not be
changed back to a nonconforming use, unless approved through the conditional
use process.
      4.   A nonconforming use may be changed with the approval of the
Administrator to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restrictive
nature.
      5.   Nothing contained in this regulation shall require any change in the
plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure upon which
construction has commenced prior to the adoption date of this title. If the
designated use will be nonconforming, it shall be in operation within two (2)
years of the effective date of this title; otherwise, future use of the
property shall be in conformance with the zoning district in which the property
is located.
      6.   Normal repairs and alterations may be made to a lawful nonconforming
building, provided that no structural alterations shall be made, except those
required by law. No existing nonconforming structure designed, arranged,
intended for, or devoted to, a use not permitted under this title for the
district in which the structure is located shall be enlarged, extended,
structurally altered, or moved unless the use is changed to a use permitted
under the regulations specified by this title for the district in which the
building is located; and provided that nothing in this title shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or
part thereof declared to be unsafe and ordered to be strengthened or restored
to a safe condition, unless the building has been destroyed by an extent
exceeding seventy five percent (75%) of full value, as determined by
consideration of the assessed value referred to below.
      7.   When a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is
damaged by fire or by any other cause so that the cost of renewal of the
damaged parts exceeds seventy five percent (75%) of the cost of the replacement
of the entire building (exclusive of foundations) using new materials, then the
building, unless expressly approved by the City Council, shall not be rebuilt
unless the building and its construction and uses conform fully to this title
and other codes of the City as applied to new buildings and structures and to
uses for the district in which it is located. The determination of whether a
building is destroyed to the extent described above shall rest with the
Administrator.
   C.   Schedule Of Continuance - Nonconforming "Open Land Uses": The
alternative provided to meet compliance with nonconforming "open land uses" is:
All uses of land for outdoor work or storage purposes, which after the adoption
of this title or amendments thereto, exist as a nonconforming use, shall be
completely enclosed within a view-obscuring fence, approved by the City
Council, within two (2) years, the fence shall be of a sufficient height so
that the fence and supplemental landscaping will at all seasons of the year
completely screen all operations of such establishments from view from adjacent
land and buildings. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-15-1: Administration
10-15-2: Permits Required
10-15-3: Enforcement
10-15-4: Schedule Of Fees, Charges, And Expenses
10-15-5: Hearing Notice
10-15-1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Administrator: The City Council shall appoint an Administrator to
administer this title. The Administrator may be provided with the assistance of
such other persons as the City Council may direct.
For the purpose of this title, the Administrator shall have the following
duties:
      1.   Advise interested persons of the Zoning Code provisions.
      2.   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest.
      3.   Aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications.
      4.   Investigate all violations of this title and notify in writing the
person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation.
      5.   Issue zoning permits, notifications and such similar administrative
duties.
      6.   Assist the City Council in carrying out the provisions of this
title.
   B.   Duties Of The City Council: For the purpose of this title, the City
Council shall have the following duties:
      1.   Initiate proposed amendments to this title and conduct timely
reviews of the complete Zoning Code.
      2.   Review all proposed amendments to this title and make associated
decisions.
      3.   Review all conditional use permits, subdivisions, and planned unit
developments as specified in this title and under the conditions as herein
detailed with such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this
title.
      4.   Review such variances from the terms of this title as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special conditions, a
literal enforcement of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so
that the spirit of this title shall be observed, and substantial justice done.
      5.   Conduct an annual review of fees provided for in this title. (Ord.
597, 8-6-2018)
10-15-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Zoning Permits Required: No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall any building,
structure or land be established or changed in use without a permit therefor
issued by the Administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity
with the provisions of this title.
   B.   Application: The application for a zoning permit shall be signed by the
owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information
supplied on the application. At a minimum, the application shall contain the
following information to the Administrator's satisfaction:
      1.   Name, mailing address, e-mail address, and phone number of
applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Existing use;
      4.   Proposed use;
      5.   Zoning district;
      6.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of
the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on
the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or
alteration;
      7.   Building heights;
      8.   Number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths;
      9.   Number of dwelling units;
      10.   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
      11.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this title.
   C.   Approval Of Zoning Permits: Within thirty (30) days after the receipt
of a complete application, the Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application in conformance with the provisions of this title.
   D.   Expiration Of Zoning Permit: If the work described in any zoning permit
has not begun within the timeframe stated in other sections of this title and
adopted Building Code, said permit shall expire; it shall be revoked by the
Administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons
affected.
   E.   Record Of Zoning Permits: The Administrator shall maintain a record of
all zoning permits and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
   F.   Failure To Obtain A Zoning Permit: Failure to obtain a zoning permit
shall be a violation of this title and will be subject to all conditions as
delineated in section
10-15-3 of this chapter.
   G.   Construction And Use To Be As Provided In Applications, Plans, And
Approvals: Zoning permits issued based on plans and applications approved by
the Administrator do not guarantee approval by the City Council. The zoning
permit acts as an administrative review for zoning matters and must accompany
any other application forms that are required in the zoning and building
process. The Administrator's approval of the zoning permit authorizes only the
use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments hereto, and no other use, arrangement, or construction, contrary to
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-15-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violations: Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Administrator. The
Administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate and
take action thereon as provided by this title.
   B.   Penalties: The City Attorney and/or the prosecuting attorney shall, in
addition to taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to
civilly enjoin any violation of this title. Penalties for failure to comply
with or violations of the provisions of this title shall be as follows:
"Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day the violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official or any other person, who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be found guilty of
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or
any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or of the Idaho
Code."
(Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
10-15-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES:
The Administrator may review and recommend to the City Council a schedule of
fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits,
amendments, appeals, subdivisions, variances, conditional use permits, plan
approvals, and any other matters pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this title requiring investigations, inspections, legal
advertising, postage and other expenses. The City Council shall establish by
resolution the schedule of fees and it may be altered or amended only by the
City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid
in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 597, 8-6-
2018)
10-15-5: HEARING NOTICE:
Whenever a hearing is required by this title for a conditional use permit,
variance, appeal or amendment, the hearing shall be held at least once to
receive testimony from interested or affected agencies and citizens. At least
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time, place and a summary
of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or a paper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice shall also be provided to
property owners whose property is within or adjacent to the area bounded by
lines three hundred feet (300') from the external boundaries of the property
under consideration. Notice shall be provided by a placard (sign) posted on the
property involved stating the time, the place, and purpose of the hearing.
These are only the minimum hearing notice requirements. The Administrator or
City Council may, when deemed appropriate, provide additional notice. (Ord.
597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 16
APPEALS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Appeals; Provisions
10-16-1: APPEALS; PROVISIONS:
   A.   Administrative Appeals: Appeals to the City Council concerning
interpretation or administration of this title may be initiated by any person
aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the legislative authority affected by
any decision of the Administrator. Such appeal shall be made within fifteen
(15) days after the decision of the Administrator by filing with the
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal
process is being taken. The Administrator shall transmit to the City Council
all the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is based.
   B.   Appeals To The City Council: The applicant or any affected person who
appeared in person or in writing before the City Council may appeal the
decision of the City Council to the District Court.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action taken unless the Administrator certifies to the City Council after
the notice of appeal is filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the
applications, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by a District Court based upon an
application, with notice to the Administrator showing due cause. (Ord. 597, 8-
6-2018)
CHAPTER 17
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Amendments; Provisions
10-17-1: AMENDMENTS; PROVISIONS:
   A.   General: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or
good zoning practices require, the City Council may, by ordinance and subject
to procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the
regulations, restrictions and boundaries or classification of property.
   B.   Initiation Of Zoning Amendments: Amendments to this title may be
initiated in one of the following ways:
      1.   By staff initiative;
      2.   By adoption of a motion by the City Council;
      3.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by same amendment.
   C.   Application: Applications for amendments to the Official Zoning Map
adopted as part of this title shall contain at least the following information:
      1.   Name, mailing address, e-mail address and phone number of the
applicant;
      2.   Proposed amending ordinance, formatted as currently approved by the
City Council;
      3.   Present land use;
      4.   Present zoning district;
      5.   Proposed use;
      6.   Proposed zoning district;
      7.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the Administrator may require;
      8.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered;
      9.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the
Comprehensive Plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with
the surrounding area; and
      10.   A fee as established by the City Council.
   D.   Transmittal To The City Council: Zoning districts shall be amended in
the following manner:
      1.   Requests for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
Administrator who shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested;
      2.   If the request is in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan,
the Administrator may recommend, and the City Council may adopt or reject the
Code amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided; and
      3.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, the request shall be submitted to the City Council, which may adopt or
reject an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan under the notice and hearing
procedures provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code, after the Comprehensive
Plan has been amended, as hereinafter provided for.
   E.   City Council Public Hearing: The City Council shall hold a public
hearing and make decisions on proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may
consist of text or map revisions.
      1.   Zoning Code Text Amendment: The City Council, prior to adopting,
revising, or rejecting a Zoning Code text amendment shall conduct at least one
public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard.
      2.   Zoning Code Map Amendment: The City Council, prior to adopting,
revising, or rejecting a Zoning Code map amendment that is in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard.
   F.   Action By City Council: The City Council, prior to adopting, revising
or rejecting the amendment to this title shall conduct at least one public
hearing. Following the City Council hearing, if the City Council makes a
material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice
and hearing shall be provided before the City Council adopts the amendment.
Upon granting or denying an application to amend this title, the Council shall
specify:
      1.   The code and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
In the event the City Council shall approve an amendment, such amendment shall
thereafter be made a part of this title upon the preparation and passage of an
ordinance.
   G.   Resubmission Of Application: No application for a reclassification of
property which has been denied by the City Council shall be resubmitted in
either substantially the same form or with reference to substantially the same
premises for the same purposes within a period of one year from the date of
such final action; unless there is an amendment in the Comprehensive Plan which
resulted from a change in conditions as applying to the specific property under
consideration. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 18
ADOPTION
SECTION:
10-18-1: Adoption; Provisions
10-18-1: ADOPTION; PROVISIONS:
   A.   Effective Date: This title shall be in full force and effect upon
publication according to law.
This title and/or its summary shall be published in one issue of the Bonner
County Daily Bee, which is hereby declared to be the official newspaper of the
City for the publication of this Code.
   B.   Repeal: Any provision of any ordinance or Code section of the City of
Priest River in conflict herewith, or contrary hereto, is hereby repealed.
   C.   Severability: Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph,
section or other part of these regulations are held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall affect only that part so held
invalid. (Ord. 597, 8-6-2018)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Methods
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: General Provisions
12-1-4: Administration
12-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-6: Fees
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Idaho, in
section 46-1020 through 46-1024 Idaho Code, authorized local governmental units
to adopt a floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies
floodplain areas and that sets forth minimum development requirements in
floodplains that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Priest River, Idaho does
ordain as follows.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Priest River are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health, and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
      1.   To protect human life and health;
      2.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
      3.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
      6.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      7.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
      8.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
      1.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
      4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      5.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other
areas. (Ord. 529, 11-2-2009)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted, so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: Low cost buildings that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet, such as detached two (2) car garages, boathouses, small pole barns
and storage sheds, designed not to be used for human habitation. Accessory
structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; shall be anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures; service utilities
such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this
chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as
sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRAWL SPACE: An enclosed area subgrade or below the flood protection elevation
and as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
for the automatic entry and exits of floodwaters.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might
be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools,
nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations,
installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form FEMA (form 81-3-1) uses to track
development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with
community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance
premium rate with section B completed by community officials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary floodway
map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: An elevation that shall correspond to the elevation
of the one percent (1%) chance flood (100-year flood) plus any increased flood
elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard. The flood
protection elevation (FPE) in the city is defined in "The Flood Insurance Study
For The Bonner County, Idaho And Incorporated Areas" (FIS) effective November
18, 2009, as base flood elevation (BFE), base flood elevation with floodway or
as otherwise indicated on the FIS or on the panel directly referenced for the
specific area of development. In AO zones the FPE is determined as an elevation
of two feet (2') above adjacent grade.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height (less than 1 foot).
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement
and crawl space). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at subsection
12-1-5B1b of this chapter. For crawl space exception see FEMA technical
bulletin 11-01.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date hereof.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of adopted floodplain management regulations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle, which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known
to have occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular
stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based
upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed
or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In
inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one
hundred (100) years; this means that in any given year there is a one percent
(1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before damage occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any
other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature
of its operations. (Ord. 529, 11-2-2009)
12-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Priest
River.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For The
Bonner County, Idaho And Incorporated Areas" dated November 18, 2009, with
accompanying flood insurance maps, are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at the
office of the city clerk, Priest River city hall, Priest River, Idaho. The best
available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in
subsection
12-1-4C2 of this chapter shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is
issued which incorporates the data utilized under subsection
12-1-4C2 of this chapter.
   C.   Penalties For Noncompliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of
the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, for each violation,
and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the city of Priest River from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
   D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   E.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city of Priest River, any officer, agent or employee thereof, or the
federal emergency management agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 529, 11-2-2009)
12-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Establishment Of Development Permit:
      1.   Development Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special flood
hazard established in subsection 12-1-3B of this chapter. The permit shall be
for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in section
12-1-2, "Definitions", of this chapter, and for all development including fill
and other activities, also as set forth in section
12-1-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      2.   Application For Development Permit: Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Priest River and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and
the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
         a.   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (as
defined) of all structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
         c.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 12-1-5B2 of this chapter; and
         d.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   B.   Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The planning and zoning
administrator is hereby appointed to be the floodplain administrator and to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties of
the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Permit Review:
         a.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
         b.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
         c.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development will increase base flood elevations more than one foot (1'). If
base flood elevations increase more than one foot (1'), require a FEMA
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) before construction begins and
letter of map revision (LOMR) for as built conditions.
         d.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of subsection 12-1-5D1 of this chapter are met.
            (1)   If a floodway encroachment is permitted that increases base
flood elevations, require a FEMA conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
before construction begins and letter of map revision (LOMR) for as built
conditions.
      2.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data (In A Zones): When flood protection
elevation data has not been provided (A zones) in accordance with section
12-1-3, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this
chapter, the planning and zoning administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to establish a flood protection
elevation and administer subsections
12-1-5B, "Specific Standards", and
12-1-5D, "Floodways", of this chapter.
      3.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study, FIRM, or as required in subsection C2 of this section, obtain
and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (as defined) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether
or not the structure contains a basement.
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures
where flood protection elevation data is provided through the flood insurance
study, FIRM, or as required in subsection C2 of this section:
            (1)   Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation (in relation
to mean sea level), and
            (2)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection A2c of this section.
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
      4.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the department of water resources
and development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management
agency.
         b.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
      5.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where
needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   Variance:
         a.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the city clerk
on the form provided by the city of Priest River, and include at minimum the
same information required for a development permit and an explanation for the
basis for the variance request.
         b.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, as
determined by the administrator, the variance request will be set for public
hearing at the next city council meeting in which time is available and for the
matter to be appropriately noticed and heard.
         c.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be
published in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice
shall be provided to all adjoining property owners. A legal description of the
subject property and mailing labels for the adjoining properties prepared by an
Idaho licensed title company shall be provided by the applicant as part of the
complete application information referenced in subsection D1b of this section.
         d.   The burden to show that the property meets the criteria for a
variance is on the applicant.
         e.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection D1d of this
section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
         f.   The city shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request.
      2.   Criteria For Variances:
         a.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
         b.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         c.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         d.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
            (3)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
         e.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
         f.   Variances should be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances.
      3.   Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be
in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and denial. If the
variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice along with the
written decision that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below
the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will likely
be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   E.   Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the administrator.
      1.   Filing An Appeal: An appeal must be filed with the city clerk within
fourteen (14) days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the
administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure
to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the
interpretation of the administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts
relied upon by the appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in
the interpretation.
      2.   Consideration Of An Appeal: Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the
appeal will be scheduled for the next available city council meeting to be
heard. The city council shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            (11)   The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      3.   Decision: The city council decision on an appeal shall be in writing
and set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the
decision. (Ord. 529, 11-2-2009)
12-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following
standards are required:
      1.   Anchoring:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
      2.   AH Zone Drainage: Adequate drainage paths are required around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      3.   Construction Materials And Methods:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         c.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
      4.   Utilities:
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
         b.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
         c.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      5.   Subdivision Proposals:
         a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         b.   All subdivision proposals shall have utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;
         c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
         d.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
      6.   Review Of Building Permits: Where flood protection elevation data is
not available either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another
authoritative source (subsection 12-1-4C2 of this chapter), applications for
building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be
reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment
and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past
flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2')
above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where flood
protection elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
12-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 12-1-3B, "Basis For Establishing The
Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", or subsection 12-1-4C2, "Use Of Other Base
Flood Data (In A Zones)" of this chapter, the following provisions are
required:
      1.   Residential Construction:
         a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above
the flood protection elevation.
         b.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
            (4)   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second.
            (5)   All building utility systems within the crawl space shall be
elevated above flood protection elevation or be designed so that floodwaters
cannot enter or accumulate within the system component during flood conditions.
            (6)   The interior of a crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade (LAG) and the height of the below grade crawl space, measured
from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space
foundation must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
            (7)   Below grade crawl spaces constructed in accordance with the
requirements listed in this subsection shall not be considered basements.
However, applicants who construct buildings that have below grade crawl spaces
are hereby advised that such buildings will have higher flood insurance
premiums than buildings that have crawl spaces with interior elevations at or
above the lowest adjacent grade.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above
the flood protection elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
         a.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
12-1-4C3b of this chapter;
         d.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection B1b of this section;
         e.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
(1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base
flood level will be rated as 1 foot below).
      3.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites:
            (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
            (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
            (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
            (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which
a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated at or above the flood protection elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         b.   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones AH and
AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the above manufactured home
provisions must be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at or
above the flood protection elevation, or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      4.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
         c.   Meet the requirements of subsection B3 of this section and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
   C.   Before Regulatory Floodway: In areas where a regulatory floodway has
not been designated: No new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within the AE zone on the
community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   D.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection 12-1-3B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a
registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection D1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
   E.   Standards For Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones): Shallow flooding areas
appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in
these zones range from one to three feet (3') aboveground where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized
as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures and manufactured homes within AO zones shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building,
one foot (1') or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least 2
feet above highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified).
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures within AO zones shall either:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot (1') or more above the
depth number specified on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is
specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is
used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as in subsection B2c of this section.
      3.   Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
      4.   Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated three feet (3') above the depth specified on the FIRM or at least five
feet (5') above highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
   F.   Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to
the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard
area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above the base flood elevation or to the
height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the
critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the flood protection elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 529, 11-2-
2009)
12-1-6: FEES:
The city council is authorized to establish permit fees which provide for the
reimbursement of costs incurred by the city in the administration of this
chapter. Such costs include, but are not limited to, those associated with the
processing and professional review of the permitting and proposed development
as identified in this chapter. The city council is hereby authorized to
establish said fees by resolution. (Ord. 529, 11-2-2009)
