CITY CODE
of
SPIRIT LAKE, IDAHO
1995
Code current through:
Ord. 638, passed 8-12-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Spirit Lake, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 638, passed August 12, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 642
CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE, IDAHO
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE, IDAHO, REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 420 IN
ITS ENTIRETY PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
WHEREAS, Ordinance No. 420 was adopted by the City Council of the City of
Spirit Lake, Idaho, on March 15, 2010; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has reviewed Ordinance No. 420 and determined that it
is no longer necessary, appropriate, or beneficial to the community; and
WHEREAS, the repeal of Ordinance No. 420 is in the public interest and will
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Spirit
Lake.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Spirit Lake, Idaho, as follows:
SECTION 1. REPEAL Ordinance No. 420 is hereby repealed in its entirety.
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
SECTION 3. EFFECTIVE DATE This ordinance shall be in full force and effect
after its passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
Passed under suspension of the rules, upon which a roll call vote was taken and
duly enacted an Ordinance of the City of Spirit Lake, Kootenai County, Idaho at
a convened meeting of the City of Spirit Lake City Council held on the 9th day
of December 2025.
 
_______________________
Jeremy Cowperthwaite
Mayor
Attest
___________________
Michelle Wharton
City Clerk/Treasurer
 
SUMMARY OF SPIRIT LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 642
 
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE, IDAHO, REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 420 IN
ITS ENTIRETY PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
Section 1 provides for the repeal of Ordinance No. 420. Section 2 provides for
severability. Section 3 provides the ordinance is effective on passage,
approval, and publication.
The foregoing is a summary of Ordinance No. 642 This Ordinance was passed on
the 9th day of December 2025. The full ordinance is on file with the Spirit
Lake City Clerk and will be promptly provided to any citizens on personal
request. Dated this 9th day of December 2025.
 
 
__________________________
                   Michelle Wharton
                      City Clerk/Treasurer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF LEGAL ADVISOR
 
I, Joseph G. Huston, am the City Attorney for the City of Spirit Lake, Idaho. I
have examined the attached summary of Spirit Lake Ordinance No. 642 and find it
to be a true and complete summary of said ordinance which provides adequate
notice to the public of the context thereof.
 
   DATED this _____ day of December 2025
 
 
 
                                 
                  Joseph G. Huston, City Attorney
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 461
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE
OF IDAHO, ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF SPIRIT LAKE FOR REVISING, CODIFYING AND
COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE AS CODIFIED BY
STERLING CODIFIERS THROUGH AND INCLUDING CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE ORDINANCES 1
THROUGH 460, EXCEPT FOR THE ZONING ORDINANCE 317 AS AMENDED; PROVIDING THAT THE
UNLAWFUL ALTERATION OR MODIFICATION OF THE CODE IS A MISDEMEANOR; PROVIDING
SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
IT IS ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Spirit Lake,
Kootenai County, Idaho as follows:
   Whereas, provisions of Title 50, Chapter 9 of Idaho Code authorize
publication of compiled ordinances of a city by compilation and codification.
   Section 1: This ordinance is the initial codification of the ordinances of
the city of Spirit Lake from Ordinance 1 through 460, except for the Zoning
Ordinances 317, as amended.
   Section 2: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Spirit Lake, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature, together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 3: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open. The Zoning Ordinance 317, as amended, shall
remain in effect as adopted and enforceable, although not codified herein. Each
ordinance of a general nature subsequently adopted by the city council shall be
deemed incorporated into said City Code upon its effective date unless
expressly provided to the contrary.
   Section 4: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
   Section 5: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm or
corporation to violate this section.
   Section 6. Severability: The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance
before the declaration of partial invalidity.
   Section 7. Repeal of Conflicting Provisions: All provisions of the current
ordinances of the City of Spirit Lake which conflict with the provisions of
this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
   Section 8. Effective Date: This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same
shall be effective upon passage and publication of this ordinance as provided
by law.
Enacted by the city council as an ordinance of the City of Spirit Lake on the
13 day of August, 2002.
Approved by the Mayor on the 13 day of August, 2002.
CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE
ATTEST:
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Spirit Lake. This City
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SPIRIT LAKE CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its
appropriate title heading, its chapter heading, and its section heading, and to
the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself,
when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal document. (1995
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of City of a general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1995 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of the City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each copy of the City
Code. (1995 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to
maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City
Council. (1995 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the City; manufactured home ordinances; zoning ordinances; subdivision
ordinances; and all special ordinances. (1995 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by
virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this City Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered
as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(1995 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.    No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, as far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.    This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of adoption of this Code. (1995 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1995 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.    Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or
persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this City Code which contains any express provisions excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
   B.    The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1995 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings as herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Spirit Lake, County of Kootenai, State of Idaho.
CODE: The City Code of Spirit Lake, Idaho, and amendments thereto.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of Spirit
Lake, Idaho.
COUNTY: The County of Kootenai, State of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Spirit Lake".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable only
by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed 1
.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State law
2
. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by the Idaho Code
or by this City Code, a misdemeanor is punishable by imprisonment in a County
jail not exceeding six (6) months or by a fine not exceeding three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or both 3
.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Spirit Lake".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things directly to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The term "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to
write, by such person's proper mark. (1995 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 18-111.
2 2. I.C. § 18-111.
3 3. I.C. § 18-113.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords
to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any
manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
(1995 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Administrative Penalties And Appeal Process
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1
:
   A.    Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to
comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the City is
guilty of a misdemeanor unless a civil penalty or infraction penalty is either
specifically provided for such violation or necessitated by operation of law.
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of
the City, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the
City shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. For infraction violations of any ordinance
of the City, unless another infraction penalty is specifically provided, the
penalty shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Civil penalties shall be as set
forth in this Code. (Ord. 578, 2-13-2018)
   B.    Civil Action: The City may undertake civil legal action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions
of any ordinance of the City and/or to recover the reasonable costs of
activities deemed necessary to bring about compliance herewith. (Ord. 424, 11-
18-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.    The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
Code, where any action which is of a continuing nature or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, as
appropriate. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
   B.    In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced. (1995 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating any duty. (1995
Code)
1-4-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES AND APPEAL PROCESS:
   A.    Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this section to
establish the procedure by which a civil administrative penalty for non-
compliance with an ordinance is administered.
   B.    Issuance Of Administrative Civil Penalties:
      1.    The City may assess and collect administrative civil penalties as
allowed by the applicable City ordinance provision for violation of the City
ordinance. (Ord. 569, 6-13-2017)
      2.    The charging officer shall issue a notice of offense under the
applicable City ordinance and the amount of the penalty. The notice shall
include notice of the right to appeal if such notice of violation is contested.
(Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
   C.    Appeal Process:
      1.    The person receiving the notice of violation may appeal the civil
penalty by filing a request for a hearing with the City Council ("Council")
with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the
notice of violation. The request for hearing shall identify the person who
received the notice; their address; and a statement in ordinary and concise
language of the notice protested and the grounds for the protest, together with
all material facts in support thereof; and the date and signatures of the
requesting parties.
      2.    As soon as practical, the City Clerk shall give each party written
notice of the time and the place of the hearing, which must be provided at
least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, either by
causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the party personally or by
mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the
address shown on the request. Continuances of the hearing may be granted by the
Council on request of the person cited for good cause shown, or on the
Council's own motion.
      3.    Following the hearing, the Council shall issue a final written
order of decision on the appeal. Such decision shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the address provided by the appellant in their request. (Ord. 569,
6-13-2017)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Elected Officials
1-5-2: Duties Of The Mayor And Council Members
1-5-3: City Council Meetings
1-5-4: Salaries
1-5-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS:
The publicly elected officials of the city shall be a mayor and four (4)
council members. The election of each and their associated terms of office
shall be in accordance with Idaho Code 1
.
   A.    Mayor: A majority of the votes for any candidate running for the
office of mayor shall be required for election to that office. In the event
that no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, there shall be a
runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of
votes cast conducted pursuant to Idaho Code, section 50-162. (Ord. 458, 9-25-
2001; amd. Ord. 433, 10-13-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 50-203, 50-401 et seq.
1-5-2: DUTIES OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The duties of the mayor and council members shall be those prescribed by title
50, and any other applicable parts, of Idaho Code. (Ord. 433, 10-13-1998)
1-5-3: CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.    Publication In Designated Newspaper: After passage, approval and
publication of this subsection in the city's designated newspaper 1
, all regular council meetings will be held on the second Tuesday of each month
at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the Community/Senior Center, unless otherwise
posted.
   B.    Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by
any three (3) members of the council; provided, that notice of such special
meetings must be delivered to the members at least forty eight (48) hours
before the scheduled time of the meeting.
   C.    Notice Requirements:
      1.    Posting Of Notice: Notice to the public shall be posted in four (4)
places within the city limits that are open to the general public and shall
include time and place of meetings; tentative agenda of regular council
meetings; subjects to be discussed if meeting is a special meeting, workshop,
executive session or other gathering where a quorum of the council is present.
      2.    Dispensing With Notice For Emergency Meeting: The notice provided
for in this subsection C may be dispensed with in the event a special meeting
is called to deal with an emergency involving injury or damage to persons or
property or the likelihood of such injury or damage. Posting should be twenty
four (24) hours. (Ord. 521, 8-12-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  1-8-2 of this title.
1-5-4: SALARIES:
The salaries of the mayor and city council shall remain the same until such
time as they are modified as prescribed by Idaho Code.
   A.   The mayor of Spirit Lake shall receive a monthly salary in the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   Each member of the council shall receive a monthly salary in the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   C.   Whenever any member of the city council serves as mayor pro tem for at
least a thirty (30) day period, such council member shall receive the amount
designated for the mayor on a pro rata basis.
   D.   Upon passage, this section does not alter the annual salary to be paid
to the mayor or members of the city council. (Ord. 433, 10-13-1998; amd. Ord.
563, 8-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord. 599, 8-19-2020; Ord. 600, 8-19-2020)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Wilful Obstruction Of Officers Or Employees
1-6-1: WILFUL OBSTRUCTION OF OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES:
   A.    Unlawful Act: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully resist,
delay, obstruct or to aid or encourage another person to wilfully resist, delay
or obstruct any law enforcement or public officer, city employee or public
utilities employee from discharging his or her official duties.
   B.    Penalty: Any person found to be guilty of violating this section shall
be guilty of committing a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished pursuant to
the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 337, 9-12-1988; amd. Ord. 482, 4-12-2005)
CHAPTER 7
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-7-1: Creation Of Right
1-7-2: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-7-3: Form Of Petition
1-7-4: Time For Filing Petitions
1-7-5: Printing Of Petition Sheets For Signatures; Time Limits For Perfecting
Petition
1-7-6: Verification On Sheets For Signatures
1-7-7: Examination And Certification Of Signatures
1-7-8: Sufficiency Of Petition; Notification; Effect Of Control; Action;
Election
1-7-9: Form Of Ballot
1-7-10: Conduct Of Election
1-7-11: Canvass Of Returns
1-7-12: Prohibited Acts; Penalties
1-7-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this City shall have the right to enact ordinances through the
initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process,
according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum,
there shall be attached or appended to the petition the signatures of the legal
voters of the City equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of voters registered to vote at the last general election in the City. (Ord.
324, 6-9-87)
1-7-3: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of                   ,
Idaho: "We, the undersigned citizens and qualified electors of the City of
                   , respectfully demand that the following proposed ordinance,
to-wit: (setting out full text of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the
qualified electors of the City of
                                                      , for their approval or
rejection at an election to be called in accordance with Idaho Code Section 50-
501(3), and each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I am
a qualified elector of the City of                   ; my residence and post
office are correctly written after my name.
Name                   Street and Number                   
Post Office                  
(Here follow numbered lines for signatures)
(The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the City Council shall
be in substantially the same form with appropriate title and changes, setting
out in full the text of the ordinance to be referred to the people for their
approval or rejection.) (Ord. 324, 6-9-87; 1995 Code)
1-7-4: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be
filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer not less than sixty (60) days following the
final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-5: PRINTING OF PETITION AND SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES; TIME LIMITS FOR
PERFECTING PETITION:
   A.    Printing Specifications: Before or at the time of beginning to
circulate any petition for initiative or referendum, the person or persons,
organization or organizations under whose authority the petition is to be
circulated, shall send or deliver to the City Clerk-Treasurer a copy of such
petition duly signed by at least twenty (20) electors eligible to sign such
petition. The Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately examine the petition and
specify the form and kind and size of paper on which the petition shall be
printed and circulated for further signatures. All petitions and sheets for
signatures shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger paper, on pages
eight and one-half inches in width by thirteen inches (81/2" x 13") in length,
with a margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4") at the top of binding,
and the sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon from one to
twenty (20) for signatures, the petition shall be prepared in sections, with
each section numbered consecutively. Each section of a petition must have a
printed copy of the petition as the first page, and each section shall have
attached to it not more than ten (10) sheets for signatures.
   B.    Approval Of Petition: The City Clerk-Treasurer shall indicate in
writing on the petition that he has approved it as to form, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall inform the person or persons, organization or organizations under whose
authority the petition is to be circulated, in writing, that the petition must
be perfected with the required number of certified signatures within sixty (60)
days following the date of approval as to form. Any petition that has not been
perfected with the required number of certified signatures within the sixty
(60) days allowed shall be declared null and void ab initio in its entirety.
(Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
Each and every sheet of every such petition containing signatures shall be
verified on the face thereof in substantially the following form by the person
who circulated said sheet of said petition, by his or her affidavit thereon,
and as a part thereto:
State of Idaho   )
)ss.
County of                )
I,                        , being first duly sworn, say: That I am a qualified
elector of the State of Idaho: that every person who signed this sheet of the
foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in my presence. I believe
that each has stated his or her name, post office address and residence
correctly, that each signer is a qualified elector of the State of Idaho, and
County of                     .
Signature              
Post Office Address              
Subscribed and sworn to before me this       day of               , 19      .
(Notary Seal)Notary Public              
Residing at              
(1995 Code)
1-7-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
   A.    Examination: All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
presented on the same day to the City Clerk- Treasurer, who shall make a
cursory examination of them to determine whether the petitions apparently
contain the necessary number of signatures.
      1.    If the total number of signatures on the petitions is not
sufficient to satisfy the number required by Section
1-7-2, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the
City Clerk-Treasurer who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition
of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be gathered, if
within the time limit of subsection
1-7-5B.
      2.    If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveals:
         a.    Erasures on any signature;
         b.    Illegible or undecipherable signatures;
         c.    Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
         d.    Duplicate signatures;
         e.    Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have
their names removed from the petition;
the City Clerk-Treasurer shall summarily reject such signatures and they shall
not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and
initialed by the Clerk-Treasurer. If the total number of signatures not
rejected is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by Section
1-7-2, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the
Clerk-Treasurer who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of
the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be gathered, if
within the time limit of subsection
1-7-5B.
   B.    Filing Of Petitions: All petitions presented to the City Clerk-
Treasurer found to apparently contain the necessary number of signatures, after
the cursory examination provided for above, shall be filed with the City Clerk-
Treasurer and become public records of the City not to be returned. The City
Clerk-Treasurer shall examine each such signature purported to be that of a
registered elector of the City, and compare each such signature with the
registration documents available to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Clerk-
Treasurer shall summarily reject all signatures which are not the signatures of
a registered elector of the City; and such rejected signatures shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed
by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Clerk-Treasurer may take not to exceed
ten (10) days after filing of the petition to complete his examination. The
City Clerk-Treasurer shall certify each signature found to comply with all of
the requirements of this Chapter by an appropriate mark following each
signature.
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall total the number of certified signatures, and if
found to total the number of signatures required by Section
1-7-2, shall proceed as provided in subsection
1-7-8B. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; EFFECT OF CONTROL; ACTION;
ELECTION:
   A.    Insufficient Signatures: In the event that a petition filed with a
City Clerk-Treasurer does not contain the required number of certified
signatures, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall inform the person or organization
under whose authority the petition was circulated that the petition is
defective for lack of certified signatures, and specify the number of
additional signatures required to make the petition valid. The petition must be
perfected within thirty (30) days of the date that the City Clerk-Treasurer
finds the petition defective for lack of certified signatures. If the petition
is not perfected within the thirty (30) day period, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
declare the petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
   B.    Notification Of Petitioners: In the event that a petition filed with a
City Clerk-Treasurer is found by the City Clerk-Treasurer to contain the
required number of certified signatures, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
promptly, by certified mail, inform the petitioners, and shall also notify the
City Council at its next meeting, that the initiative or referendum petition is
in proper form.
      1.    If the petition is for a referendum, the City Council shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of certification of the petition to repeal the
ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the Council repeals the
ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
      2.    If the petition is an initiative petition, the City Council shall
have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance substantially as proposed by the
petition. In the event the Council passes such ordinance, the initiative
petition shall be null and void.
      3.    In the event the City Council neither repeals the ordinance which
is the subject of a referendum petition, nor enacts an ordinance which is the
subject of an initiative petition, an election shall be ordered by the City
Clerk-Treasurer to be conducted City-wide. A special election for initiative or
referendum shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days following the
certification of the petition; provided, that in the event a Municipal election
will occur within the ninety (90) days, the initiative or referendum shall be
submitted at the time of the Municipal election. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
The City Council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
   A.    Two Hundred Fifty Words Or Less: If the full text of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance to be voted upon does not exceed two hundred fifty (250)
words in length, it may be set out in full on the election ballot; or
   B.    Two Hundred Fifty Words Or More: If the full text of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance to be voted upon exceeds two hundred fifty (250) words in
length, and the Council votes not to have it printed in length on the election
ballot, it shall, with the assistance of the City Attorney, prepare a short
title and description of the ordinance or proposed ordinance which shall
clearly and impartially state its purpose and effect, which short title and
description shall be printed on the election ballot. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as
near as practicable, in like manner as general elections, except as otherwise
provided. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-11: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The Mayor and Council shall meet within five (5) days after said election to
canvass the votes cast at such election, and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
immediately announce the results. Any initiative measure approved by a majority
of the votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less
than a majority of the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of
such announcement. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
1-7-12: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTIES:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   A.    False Signature: Signs any name other than his own to any initiative
or referendum petition;
   B.    Signing More Than Once: Knowingly signs his name more than once on the
same initiative or referendum petition;
   C.    Unregistered Voter: Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or
referendum petition if he is not a registered City elector;
   D.    False Statements: Wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or
exhibits any false statement or representation concerning the contents, purport
or effect of any initiative or referendum petition for the purpose of obtaining
any signature to any such petition, or for the purpose of persuading any person
to sign any such petition;
   E.    Fraudulent Signatures: Presents to any officer for filing any
initiative or referendum petition to which is attached, appended or subscribed
any signature which the person so filing such petition knows to be false or
fraudulent, or not the genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such
petition or whose name is attached, appended or subscribed thereto;
   F.    Fictitious Names: Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or
referendum petition knowing the same to contain false, forged or fictitious
names;
   G.    False Affidavits: Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative
or referendum petition or the signatures appended thereto;
   H.    Pecuniary Reward: Offers, proposes or threatens for any pecuniary
reward or consideration:
      1.    To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any
initiative or referendum petition or any part thereof or any signatures
thereon;
      2.    To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning, promoting
or circulating any initiative or referendum petition;
      3.    To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use
any recall petition or any power of promotion or opposition in any manner or
form for extortion, blackmail or secret or private intimidation of any person
or business interest;
and such person shall be punished in accordance with Section
1-4-1 of this Title. (Ord. 324, 6-9-87)
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Corporate Seal
1-8-2: Official Newspaper
1-8-3: Depositories Designated
1-8-4: Elections
1-8-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.    A seal in circular form with the words "City of Spirit Lake, Idaho",
on the outer circle and the words "Kootenai County" with the representation of
a fir tree on the interior and center of said circle, shall be, and the same is
hereby made the Corporate Seal of the City, to be used in all cases which, by
the laws of Idaho, and the custom of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by
a municipal corporation.
   B.    Said seal shall be and remain in the custody of the Clerk- Treasurer
of the City, to be used by him as prescribed in subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 94, 5-10-1921)
1-8-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
All legal notices and public announcements of the City required by Idaho Code
to be published shall be published in the "Coeur d'Alene Press", which shall be
the official newspaper of the City. (Ord. 315, 4-8-1986)
1-8-3: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
The City Treasurer, or any other designated official, is hereby ordered,
required and directed to keep any public monies and any money which during the
ordinary course of City business comes under the control of the City Treasurer,
or other designated officials, in the following named depositories:
Bankcda
State of Idaho Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP)
The City Treasurer, or any other designated official, is hereby ordered,
required and directed to keep and deposit monies belonging to or in the care of
the City in the manner required by section 50-1013 and chapter 1, title 57,
Idaho Code, in the above named depositories. (Ord. 591, 3-1-2019)
1-8-4: ELECTIONS:
   A.    Hours Of Polling Places For City Elections: The polls for all general
and special City elections shall be open from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
remain open until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 491, 9-20-2005)
CHAPTER 9
EMERGENCY POWERS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Legal Authority
1-9-2: Purpose And Intent
1-9-3: Scope
1-9-4: Definitions
1-9-5: Public Health Emergency Orders
1-9-6: Process For Enacting Public Health Emergency Orders
1-9-7: Exclusions
1-9-8: Suspension And Waiver Of Certain City Services, Ordinances, And Policies
And Procedures
1-9-9: Force Majeure
1-9-10: Penalty
1-9-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-304 and 50-606 authorizes the City of Spirit Lake to
pass ordinances granting certain powers to the Mayor related to public health
emergencies. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City finds that the preservation of public health, safety, and welfare may
require immediate action by the City in response to emergencies. Therefore, the
City hereby authorizes the Mayor certain powers for immediate response to
foreseeable, imminent, or present public health emergencies. (Ord. 610, 3-23-
2020)
1-9-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the procedures for activating the emergency powers of
the Mayor and the specific powers of the Mayor during a public health
emergency. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations will have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The words “shall”, “will”, or “must” are always
mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this Chapter, but not
defined herein will have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in
any gender apply to the feminine, masculine, and nonbinary genders.
 
                               The foreseeable, imminent, or present threat of
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY:       any pathogen, agent, vector, or environmental
                               condition, including hazardous materials, which
                               does or may cause illness or injury to humans.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDER: An advisory, social distancing, isolation, or
                               quarantine order enacted by the Mayor.
                               The separation of infected persons, or of
                               persons suspected to be infected, from other
ISOLATION:                     persons to such places, under such conditions,
                               and for such time as will prevent transmission
                               of the infectious agent.
                               The restriction placed on the entrance to and
QUARANTINE:                    exit from the place or premises where an
                               infectious agent or hazardous material exists.
                               Actions taken to maintain distance from other
                               people, including avoiding or canceling
SOCIAL DISTANCING:             congregate settings and mass gatherings such as
                               by ordering the closure of bars, restaurants and
                               other places of public accommodation. (Ord. 610,
                               3-23-2020)
 
1-9-5: PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
The Mayor, as authorized by this ordinance and Idaho Code sections 50-304 and
50-606, may issue the following orders, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor
following consultation with or review of information issued by local, regional,
statewide, or nationwide public health authorities.
   A.   Advisory Order. Where a public health emergency is foreseeable or
imminent, the Mayor may enact an advisory order, which order may provide
information and recommended guidelines for preventing, detecting, and/or
mitigating the onset or spread of a public health hazard.
   B.   Social Distancing Order. Where a public health emergency is imminent,
the Mayor may enact a social distancing order, which order may establish any or
all of the following:
      1.   Appropriate restrictions regarding the operation or occurrence of
planned or foreseeable commercial, recreational, or expressive gatherings or
events.
      2.   Restrictions on travel through or visitation within the community.
      3.   Postponement or cancellation of public meetings and hearings.
      4.   A limit on the number of persons who may gather in one location and
may apply to indoor or outdoor venues.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   A social distancing order must include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order.
   C.   Isolation Order. Where a public health emergency is present and poses a
clear threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor may enact an isolation
order, which order may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the isolation order.
      7.   An isolation order must include an effective date and an anticipated
expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the imposition of
the initial order. An isolation order will be effective only when and for so
long as the public health emergency is present or for so long as the subject(s)
of the isolation order poses a threat to public health. Any person who is the
subject of an isolation order is entitled to appeal the isolation order or to
request a modification of any provision of such order by filing a written
appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal will be heard by City Council at their
next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term of the isolation
order, the Police Chief or designee will review such appeal and issue a written
decision. The Police Chief’s decision will be final.
   D.   Quarantine Order. Where a health emergency is present and poses a clear
threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor may enact a quarantine order,
which order may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical or other areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the quarantine.
      7.   A quarantine order must include an effective date and an anticipated
expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the imposition of
the initial order. A quarantine order will be effective only when and for so
long as the public health emergency is present or for so long as the subject(s)
of the quarantine order poses a threat to public health. Any person who is the
subject of a quarantine order is entitled to appeal the quarantine order, or to
request a modification of any provision of such order by filing a written
appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal will be heard by City Council at their
next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term of the quarantine
order, the Police Chief or designee will review such appeal and issue a written
decision. The Police Chief’s decision will be final. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-6: PROCESS FOR ENACTING PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
   A.   Issuance of an Order. The Mayor will prepare a written order and
publish it pursuant to this section.
   B.   Notice to the City Council. Following the issuance of any order
authorized by this chapter, the Mayor will advise the City Council at a
properly noticed public meeting of the issuance of the order and the basis for
its issuance as soon as is reasonably practicable but no later than seven (7)
days after the date that the order is issued.
   C.   Council Veto. The City Council may reverse or alter the order issued by
the Mayor by a majority vote of the full City Council.
   D.   Publication of Public Health Emergency Order. As soon as possible and
prudent under the circumstances, the Mayor will cause a Public Health Emergency
Order to be published as follows:
      1.   Posting the order in a prominent place at the Spirit Lake City Hall;
      2.   Posting the order on the City’s website;
      3.   E-mailing the order to all persons subscribed to City e-mail
notification services;
      4.   Posting the order to all City social media accounts;
      5.   Providing the order to local media outlets; and
      6.   Notifying other government agencies, including School Districts,
Highway Districts, and the Panhandle Health District.
   Except as may be specifically stated in the Public Health Emergency Order,
such order will be effective upon posting at the Spirit Lake City Hall. (Ord.
610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-7: EXCLUSIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by a Public Health Emergency Order
duly enacted by the Mayor, the following activities are exempt from the scope
of such order:
   A.   Any expressive and associative activity that is protected by the United
States and Idaho Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly, and/or
religious activity.
   B.   Activities necessary to operate critical infrastructure and utilities.
   C.   Activities necessary to operate and use medical facilities and
services.
   D.   Activities necessary to buy, sell, or otherwise deliver food and
necessities. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-8: SUSPENSION AND WAIVER OF CERTAIN CITY SERVICES, ORDINANCES, AND POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES:
During a Public Health Emergency and upon issuance of a Public Health Emergency
Order, the Mayor may suspend certain non-critical City government services and
functions as deemed necessary and advisable given the specific public health
emergency and in consideration of the health of employees and the general
public. During such time, the Mayor may also suspend the regular meetings of
City boards and commissions, including but not limited to Planning & Zoning,
the Parks and Recreation Commission, and the Historical Preservation
Commission. To facilitate such suspension of meetings, the ordinances providing
for the regular meetings of these commissions will be temporarily suspended.
Those ordinances providing the timeline for processing applications will also
be suspended. The Mayor is also authorized to waive such internal rules,
regulations, and procedures as deemed necessary to protect the health and
welfare of City employees. The Mayor may authorize the City Clerk to act on
his/her behalf and exercise the authority granted to the Mayor under this
section. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-9: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the context of this chapter, a public health emergency is a force majeure.
No person is entitled to recover from the City of Spirit Lake any costs
incurred, or profits lost, as may be alleged to be attributed to the enactment
of a Public Health Emergency Order. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
1-9-10: PENALTY:
It is unlawful to violate any provision or directive of a duly enacted social
distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order while such order is in
effect. The violation of any provision or directive of a social distancing
order, isolation order, or quarantine order is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Spirit Lake City Code
1-4-1. (Ord. 610, 3-23-2020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Duties
2-1-2: Meetings
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; DUTIES:
   A.   Commissioners; Appointment And Term: There is hereby created a City
Planning and Zoning Commission which shall be comprised of five (5) voting
members, to be known as Commissioners, who shall be appointed or removed in
accordance with Idaho Code, section 67-6504. The term of each Commissioner
shall be three (3) years. (Ord. 347, 5-14-1990; amd. Ord. 351, 11-13-1990; Ord.
399, 6-13-1995)
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The commission shall be governed by and have those duties prescribed
by Idaho Code and the City's Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   After Planning and Zoning Commissioners submit plan recommendations,
all plans must go to City Council for final approval. (Ord. 347, 5-14-1990;
amd. Ord. 593, 4-18-2019; Ord. 625, 2-14-2023)
2-1-2: MEETINGS:
At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine
(9) months in a year. (Ord. 521, 8-12-2008)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 559, 11-12-2014)
CHAPTER 3
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Commission Established
2-3-4: Organization, Officers, Rules, Meetings
2-3-5: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2-3-6: Special Restrictions
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the city of Spirit Lake through
identification, evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings,
sites, districts, areas, structures, and objects that reflect significant
elements of the city's, state's, and the nation's historic, architectural,
archaeological, and cultural heritage. (Ord. 550, 7-9-2013)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
BUILDING: A structure constructed for habitation. This includes both
residential and nonresidential buildings, main and accessory buildings.
CONTRIBUTING: A historic property listed to the National Register of Historic
Places as part of a historic district and meeting the requirements identified
in the nomination for conveying the architectural and or historical
associations for which the district was listed.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: Resources associated with human manipulation of the
environment and encompasses all the resources that are potentially eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places, that being sites
buildings, structures, districts, and objects. This is inclusive archaeological
sites, traditional cultural places, and built environment resources.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY (LANDMARK): In order for any historic property to
be designated in the ordinance, it must, in addition, meet the criteria
established for inclusion of the property in the National Register of Historic
Places or be at least seventy five (75) years old, retain architectural
integrity, and have historic significance in the community.
DISTRICT: A geographically definable area-urban or rural, small or large-
possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
buildings, structures, and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by
plan or physical development.
EXCEPTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE: The quality of historic significance achieved outside
the usual norms of age, association, or rarity.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The identification, evaluation, recordation,
documentation, curation, acquisition, management, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, stabilization, maintenance, interpretation, conservation of,
and public education related to buildings, structures, objects, districts,
areas, and sites significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or
culture of the city, this state, its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, district, area or site that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
community, the state or the nation.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE: The physical association of a building, structure, site,
object, or district with historic events, trends, persons, architecture, or
method of construction, or that have yielded or may yield information important
in prehistory or history.
INTEGRITY: The ability of a resource to convey its significance through the
following seven aspects of qualities that, in various combinations, define
integrity: location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling or
association. Refer to Section VIII of the National Register Bulletin 15 "How to
Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation" for additional guidance on
evaluating integrity.
NATIONAL REGISTER ELIGIBLE PROPERTY: Any prehistoric or historic district,
site, building, structure, or object eligible for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places maintained by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior.
This term includes artifacts, records, and remains that are related to and
located within such properties. The term includes properties of traditional
religious and cultural importance to an Indian tribe and that meet the National
Register criteria. The property must be at least 50 years old or of exceptional
significance.
NATIONAL REGISTER LISTED PROPERTY: Any prehistoric or historic district, site,
building, structure, or object included in the National Register of Historic
Places maintained by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior. This term includes
artifacts, records, and remains that are related to and located within such
properties. The term includes properties of traditional religious and cultural
importance to an Indian tribe and that meet the National Register criteria.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES: The national listing of properties
significant to our cultural history because of their documented importance to
our history, architectural history, engineering, or cultural heritage.
NON CONTRIBUTING: A property listed to the National Register of Historic Places
as part of a historic district that either was constructed outside the
district's period of significance or does not meet the requirements identified
in the nomination for conveying the architectural and or historical
associations for which the district was listed.
OBJECT: A construction that is of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical,
or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a
specific setting or environment.
SITE: A place where a significant event or pattern of events occurred. It may
be the location of prehistoric or historic occupation or activities that may be
marked by physical remains; or it may be the symbolic focus of a significant
event or pattern of events that may not have been actively occupied. A site may
be the location of ruined or now non-extant buildings or structures or the
location itself possesses historic cultural or archaeological significance.
STRUCTURE: A work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a
definite pattern of organization. (Ord. 550, 7-9-2013; amd. Ord. 638, 8-12-
2025)
2-3-3: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
   A.    There is hereby created a historic preservation commission, which
shall consist of no more than seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the council, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   B.    All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest,
competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The council shall
endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or
experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history,
urban planning, archaeology, engineering, conservation, landscape architecture,
law, or other historic preservation related disciplines.
   C.    Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one
1-year term; two (2) 2-year terms; two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms, with each term expiring on
December 31 of the last year of the term. Commission members may be reappointed
to serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   D.    The members of the commission may be reimbursed by the city for
expenses related to official training and events in support of historical
commission activities incurred in connection with their duties, with prior
approval of the mayor and dependent on the availability of funds budgeted for
that given fiscal year.
   E.    A majority of the then appointed membership of the historic
preservation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. (Ord. 550, 7-9-2013; amd. Ord. 608, 3-10-2020)
2-3-4: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS:
   A.    The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are
necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter. Rules
of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be available for public
inspection.
   B.    The commission shall elect officers from among the commission members.
The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice
chairperson shall, lacking the chairperson, perform the duties of the
chairperson.
   C.    All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and follow
the requirements of Idaho open public meeting laws. The commission shall keep
minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings,
and actions.
   D.    The commission may recommend to the council, within the limits of its
funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the
services of technical experts or other persons as it deems necessary to carry
on the functions of the commission. (Ord. 550, 7-9-2013)
2-3-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the council and shall be authorized to:
   A.    Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.    Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest, or
donation.
   C.    Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
   D.    Recommend the lease, sale, or other transfer or disposition of
historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and
in a manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   Cooperate with the federal, tribal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   F.    Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the city, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
   G.    Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation in the city.
   H.    Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties in the city.
   I.    Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter
private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of their official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   J.    Review nominations of properties to the national register of historic
places for properties within the city’s jurisdiction. (Ord. 550, 7-9-2013; amd.
Ord. 638, 8-12-2025)
2-3-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code 67-4612, the city of Spirit Lake may provide
by ordinances, special conditions or restrictions for the protection,
enhancement and preservation of locally designated historic properties. (Ord.
550, 7-9-2013)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment
2-4-2: Terms Of Office
2-4-3: Commission Organization And Recordkeeping
2-4-4: Duties And Responsibilities
2-4-5: Effect
2-4-1:   ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   There is hereby established the Spirit Lake Development Impact Fee
Advisory Commission, which shall consist of at least five (5) members and no
more than seven (7) members, all of whom shall reside within the City. The
mayor shall appoint these members with the consent of the city council. Members
may be removed for cause upon majority vote of the city council. Appointments
shall be made in a manner ensuring that Committee membership meets the
requirements set forth in Section 67-8205, of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 636, 6-10-
2025)
2-4-2:   TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Terms shall
expire on December 31 of the final year of the designated term.
   B.   The initial appointment of members shall be to terms staggered in
length by one year. To establish such staggered terms, two (2) members shall be
appointed to an initial term of one (1) year, two (2) members shall be
appointed to an initial term of two (2) years, and all other members shall be
appointed to an initial term of three (3) years.
   C.   Upon the expiration of the initial terms, all subsequent appointments
shall be for terms of three (3) years.
   D.   Vacancies on the commission occurring other than by expiration of the
term shall be filled by the mayor with the consent of the city council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   E.   Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms. (Ord.
636, 6-10-2025)
2-4-3:   COMMISSION ORGANIZATION AND RECORDKEEPING:
   A.   The commission members shall meet and organize by electing a
chairperson and vice- chairperson at the first meeting of each year. Each
elected chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve for a term of one (1)
year.
   B.   The commission shall meet a minimum of two (2) times per year.
   C.   The city clerk shall approve and designate a recording secretary to
create and maintain records for the commission. (Ord. 636, 6-10-2025)
2-4-4:   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters pertaining
to City development impact fees; specifically including those responsibilities
set forth in Section 67-8205 of the Idaho Code pertaining to development impact
fee advisory committees.
   B.   Recommend policies and procedures with respect to the foregoing for
approval by the City Council.
   C.   Perform such other tasks that may be expressly requested of by the City
Council. (Ord. 636, 6-10-2025)
2-4-5:   EFFECT:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing
any of the power of the City Council or City officers, or the delegation to the
Spirit Lake Development Impact Fee Advisory Commission of any authority or
discretionary powers imposed by law in such council or officers. The City
Council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity
require the appointment of an Impact Fee Advisory Committee to act in a purely
advisory capacity to such Council, for the purpose enumerated in this chapter.
(Ord. 636, 6-10-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Statutory Authority; Purpose
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Fee Amount Established; Exemptions
3-1-4: Exemptions
3-1-5: Engaging In Business Without License Prohibited; Expiration
3-1-6: Application For License; Contents; Fee To Accompany Application
3-1-7: Investigation Of Applications; Recommendations, And Disclaimer
3-1-8: Appeal Procedure
3-1-9: Contents Of License
3-1-10: Display Of License; Operation After Expiration Of License Prohibited;
Transfer
3-1-11: Change In Location Or Owner Of Licensed Business
3-1-12: Mailing Of Application Forms; Failure To File License Application
3-1-13: When Fees Due And Payable; Penalty For Late Payment
3-1-14: License Fee; Penalties
3-1-15: Use Of Funds
3-1-16: Operation Without License; Injunction
3-1-17: Mobile Food Concessions; Permit; Application; Regulations
3-1-18: Mobile Food Concessions; Permit Issuance
3-1-19: Revocation
3-1-20: Violation; Penalty
3-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
The licensing of all wholesale and retail businesses within the city and the
establishment of a license fee, uniform to all classes imposed, pursuant to the
statutory authority vested in the city by Idaho Code, section 50-307, is hereby
declared to be justified and necessary for the purpose of protecting and
providing services to residents of the city and the businesses and occupations
doing business therein. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION: All activities, occupations, callings, trades, pursuits
or professions located or engaged in within the city with the object of gain,
profit, benefit or advantage. Each business location shall be deemed a separate
business, unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business.
This chapter is intended to regulate the safety of the premises which a
business occupies and compliance with the city's land use and public health and
safety ordinances. It is not intended to regulate the practice of certain
professions which are otherwise regulated by state or federal authorities.
Examples of such professions are the practice of medicine, architecture,
dentistry, etc.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Commencing, conducting or continuing in any business or
occupation, the exercise of corporate and franchise powers and the liquidating
of a business where the liquidators hold themselves out to the public as
conducting such business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in doing
business when he does one act of:
   A.   Selling any goods or performing any services for compensation;
   B.   Soliciting business or offering or holding out goods or services for
sale or hire;
   C.   Acquiring any premises, or using any vehicle for the purpose of
delivery of any goods, either at wholesale or retail unless licensed under
another section of this code. "Premises" means all lands, structures, places
and equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business,
and also any personal property, including any vehicle, which is either affixed
to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on said
premises.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-3: FEE AMOUNT ESTABLISHED; EXEMPTIONS:
There is hereby established upon and shall be collected from every person
engaged in doing any business or occupation within the city regulated hereby a
license fee for the privilege of engaging in business in an amount of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per business. The license fee for less than six (6)
months of any calendar year shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). License fees
which remain unpaid in the month of February of each calendar year, or any
month thereafter, shall be charged double the annual license fee provided
hereby. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.    Persons qualifying as nonprofit or charitable businesses or
occupations, including charitable activities, within the meaning of the United
States internal revenue code. Possession of a certificate of tax exempt status
from the internal revenue service shall be required to qualify for this
exemption, except that the mayor and council may waive the license fee for bona
fide charitable or civic groups within the city, including, but not necessarily
limited to, private schools, churches, fraternal organizations and fraternal
clubs or lodges, with respect to their educational, religious, or fraternal
activities, but this exemption shall not apply to any noncharitable business
activity for profit engaged in by such otherwise exempt organizations.
   B.    Any agency of the United States government, any state of the United
States, any political subdivision of the state of Idaho, including, but not
necessarily limited to, counties, school districts, irrigation or sewer
districts, or fire districts. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-5: ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED; EXPIRATION:
No person shall engage in any business or activity in the city for which a
license fee is established by this chapter, without first obtaining and being a
holder of a valid business and occupation license, issued under the provisions
of this chapter. No license required hereby shall be deemed valid without
paying the license fee imposed by this chapter, which license fee shall
accompany the application for the license. Such license shall expire at the end
of the calendar year in which it is issued. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS; FEE TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
The application for a license shall be made to the city clerk on a form
provided by the city. The application shall set forth the name of the
applicant, his residence, place of business, the nature of the business and the
amount of the license fee prescribed by this chapter and shall be accompanied
by a deposit of the license fee by the applicant. Every application shall be
personally signed by the applicant or his legally authorized agent. (Ord. 420,
4-11-1997)
3-1-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS; RECOMMENDATIONS, AND DISCLAIMER:
The city may cause any applicant for a new business and occupation license to
be investigated for compliance with the laws of the state and of the city. The
aforesaid investigation may be conducted by the fire marshal, the building
official, or their respective designee. If it appears that all conditions
requisite to the issuance of a license have been substantially met and that no
life safety hazards exist at the premises, a license shall be issued. The
license will be conditional until such time that the applicant is in total
compliance with the applicable laws, including building, fire, and life safety
codes. Building and occupational licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be valid until the end of the final day of the calendar year in which they are
issued.
If the licensee fails to comply with applicable laws within sixty (60) days
after the license is issued, the city may revoke the license and shall notify
the applicant of such decision.
The city of Spirit Lake, by granting a city business license, does not warrant
or affirm the safety of any business property. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant aggrieved by a license denial by the city may appeal such
decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
within ten (10) days of such decision by the mayor. However, any applicant, if
denied a license by reason of the fire marshal, the building official, or their
designee, shall first exhaust all rights of appeal of such decisions as
otherwise provided by this code. The mayor shall transmit said notice of appeal
to the council, which shall consider it at its next regular meeting, at such
hearing, the applicant may appear and speak on his own behalf explaining why
the subject premises complies with applicable laws.
The council shall proceed to determine said appeal; and if it decides in favor
of the applicant, it shall pass a motion to that effect. If it decides against
the license applicant, it shall state its reasons therefor on the record. The
council may defer action upon said appeal for not longer than five (5) weeks
from the date of the appeal hearing. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-9: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
   A.    The name of the licensee and any other name under which business is to
be conducted;
   B.    Type of principal business;
   C.    The name and address of each business so licensed;
   D.    The amount of license fee therefor;
   E.    The dates of issuance and expiration thereof;
   F.    Such other information as the city clerk shall determine necessary.
(Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; OPERATION AFTER EXPIRATION OF LICENSE PROHIBITED;
TRANSFER:
Every licensee, under this chapter, shall display such license in a prominent
location upon the licensed premises. No person shall operate a business or
occupation on premises which should be licensed pursuant to this chapter after
the issued license has expired or when it has been denied, suspended, or
revoked or for any other reason become ineffective. No licensee shall loan,
sell, give, or assign to any other person or allow any other person to use or
display, or to destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession any
license which has been issued to said licensee. No person shall operate a
business or occupation which should be licensed pursuant to this chapter
without first applying for and obtaining the license required hereby. (Ord.
420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-11: CHANGE IN LOCATION OR OWNER OF LICENSED BUSINESS:
Any change of owner or owners or location shall automatically void any existing
license granted under this chapter and shall necessitate application and
issuance of a new license. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-12: MAILING OF APPLICATION FORMS; FAILURE TO FILE LICENSE APPLICATION:
The city may, but is not required, to mail to persons forms for applications
for licenses; but failure of any person to receive any such forms shall not
excuse the person from making application for and securing the license required
and payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder. If any person fails,
neglects or refuses to file his application and to pay any fee as and when
required herein, the city will determine the amount of fee payable and by mail
to notify such person of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall
thereupon be immediately due and payable, subject to the person's right to
appear before the council and show cause why his enterprise should not be
subject to licensure pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-13: WHEN FEES DUE AND PAYABLE; PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
Each annual license fee herein provided shall become due and payable on January
1 of each calendar year as to any business which must be licensed hereby.
Failure to pay any license fee within fifteen (15) days after the day upon
which it is due and payable shall render the person subject to a penalty of ten
dollars ($10.00) per licensed premises, in addition to other charges or
penalties as provided herein. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-14: LICENSE FEE; PENALTIES:
Any license fee, including penalties thereon, may be collected by inclusion
with the utility charges submitted to the premises which should be licensed
pursuant to this chapter. No civil action or judgment shall bar or prevent a
criminal prosecution for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-15: USE OF FUNDS:
All funds received by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be paid
into the general fund of the city to fund public safety related activities
concerning the business community of the city. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-16: OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE; INJUNCTION:
The operation or conducting of any business or occupation for which a license
is required by this chapter without having a valid license as provided herein
is hereby declared to be a criminal violation. In addition to any other remedy
provided by this chapter, the city may bring a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain an order enjoining any person from operating
or conducting any business or occupation in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-17: MOBILE FOOD CONCESSIONS; PERMIT; APPLICATION; REGULATIONS:
   A.    The concessionaire must obtain a valid public health permit for the
mobile food concession to be used prior to issuance of the city permit. All
city permits shall be issued on a monthly calendar basis. Application for such
city permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city clerk twenty (20) days
in advance of the issuance of such city permit. The city clerk shall charge ten
dollars ($10.00) for each monthly mobile food concession. Permits shall be
renewed by the first business day following the first day of each month, or the
permit shall immediately expire and a new permit shall be required.
   B.    Each mobile food concession unit must have attached thereto or to a
part thereof a trash and garbage disposal container capable of holding all
trash and garbage generated by the operation of the concession. The container
shall be emptied periodically as necessary in order to ensure, at all times,
public access and use of the container. Each concessionaire or their employees
shall at all times keep their cart and the immediate area (within 10 feet) free
of litter, grease, and other debris which results from their operation.
   C.    Mobile food concessions may operate at approved locations only from
sunrise until sunset of each day, except those operating under a sports
tournament permit.
   D.    Mobile food concessionaires shall not use the city utilities or
property without written permission from the city, and after providing a
deposit to defray the costs thereof.
   E.    All mobile food concessions shall contain at least one functional fire
extinguisher approved by the fire department.
   F.    All mobile food concessionaires shall agree in writing to hold the
city harmless from any injury or damage resulting from the operation of the
concession on public property. Each such concessionaire shall possess
comprehensive general liability and automobile liability insurance as
appropriate in an amount at least equal to the amount required by the Idaho
tort claims act.
   G.    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for mobile food concessions to
operate without having been awarded a permit. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-18: MOBILE FOOD CONCESSIONS; PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.    The city clerk may issue a permit for the operation of a mobile food
concession after receiving a properly completed application, accompanied by
payment of the monthly permit charge and the public health permit as required;
providing that all other requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
   B.    A separate permit shall be required for each month, or portion
thereof, of operation and shall be issued by the city clerk upon the applicant
again complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.    A separate application and permit shall be required for each
individual mobile food concession cart or like device.
   D.    Each mobile food concession shall be permanently numbered, and each
city and public health permit issued will be correspondingly numbered and apply
only to the respectively numbered cart or other like device.
   E.    Each city and public health permit shall be continuously displayed in
a conspicuous place on each mobile food concession. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-19: REVOCATION:
Any license for a mobile food concession issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the mayor or city council for violation of any law of the city,
county, state, or of the United States, applicable to the business for which
the license was issued. Such revocation must be preceded by notice in writing
to the licensee from the city clerk, informing the licensee that the mayor or
city council has determined that the concession permit should be revoked,
stating the reasons therefor. The licensee may then appear within ten (10) days
before the mayor and show cause why the license should not be revoked. At such
hearing, which shall not extend beyond one hour in length, the licensee may be
represented by counsel, may testify personally, and may present evidence.
Should the mayor determine that such license should be revoked, he shall notify
the licensee of his determination. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
3-1-20: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or operates any mobile
concession business without having first obtained a license as herein provided
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this chapter
occurs shall be deemed a separate offence. This licensing provision may also be
enforced by civil action initiated by the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 420, 4-11-1997)
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: License Required; Term
3-2-3: Application For License
3-2-4: License Fees
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
GAMES OF SKILL: Any automatic machine or device wherein a person deposits any
coin, token or slug, which said token or slug may have been purchased by any
coin, and in return therefor received the opportunity of playing or operating
such machine without any prospect of reward in money, merchandise, or any other
article of value to be won as a result of such play or operation.
MECHANICAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENT: Any automatic machine or device where a person
deposits a coin, which operates said mechanical instrument. (Ord. 203, 2-11-70)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
   A.    Requirement; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
maintain, operate or permit to be operated, any mechanical musical instrument
or game of skill on or in the premises owned by him or over which he has
control, without first having secured and paid for a license for each and every
such mechanical musical instrument or game of skill; provided, however, that no
license shall be required for any machines vending sanitary napkins.
   B.    Term Of License: All license fees shall be issued for a period of one
year beginning with January 1 and expiring December 31 of the same year in
which issued. Any such license secured for a fractional part of a year shall be
paid for at the rate required for the entire year. (Ord. 203, 2-11-70)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Licenses as described in Section
3-2-2 shall be obtained from the Clerk-Treasurer after application has been
made to the City Council and permission has been given to such applicant. No
person of questionable moral character shall be entitled to hold such license,
nor shall any such license be issued for a machine to be installed in or on any
premises, which in the opinion of the Council, shall be unsuitable. The license
for each machine shall be attached in plain view of such machine and shall
license such machine for operation on such premises as may be specified in said
license. An operating license must be obtained for each separate premises in
which machines are placed and such license shall not be transferable from one
machine to another, nor may a machine licensed to any premises be transferred
to any other premises. (Ord. 203, 2-11-70)
3-2-4: LICENSE FEES:
 
Mechanical musical instrument $25.00
Pinball machines              15.00
Pool tables                   25.00
Bowling machines              15.00
Other games of skill          15.00
 
(Ord. 203, 2-11-70)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Alcoholic Beverages Code Adopted
3-3-2: Code Available To Public
3-3-3: City License Required
3-3-4: Licensing Requirements
3-3-5: License Denial; Appeal
3-3-6: License Categories; Fees
3-3-7: Open Containers Of Alcoholic Beverages
3-3-8: License Revocation
3-3-9: Hours And Days Of Sale
3-3-10: Penalty
3-3-1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts those parts of title 23, alcoholic beverages, of the
Idaho Code, including any future changes to title 23, which are applicable to
and legally enforceable by a city government. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986)
3-3-2: CODE AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC:
Three (3) copies of title 23, alcoholic beverages, of the Idaho Code, shall be
kept on file by the city clerk-treasurer and shall be available to the public
for examination upon demand. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986)
3-3-3: CITY LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person to engage in the retail sale of liquor, beer
or wine within the corporate limits of the city only after first having
procured an appropriate city license. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986)
3-3-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.    Qualifications: Possession of a current license issued by the
department of law enforcement of the state of Idaho and/or the board of county
commissioners of Kootenai County, Idaho, shall be prima facie evidence of an
applicant's qualification to receive and maintain a city license.
   B.    Application: Application for the initial issuance of, the renewal of,
or the transfer of a city license shall be in writing on the application form
(s) provided by the city clerk-treasurer, and shall be signed and sworn to by
the applicant in the presence of the city clerk-treasurer.
   C.    City Council Approval; Record Of Proceedings:
      1.    The city clerk-treasurer shall process each application in a timely
manner. The mayor and council shall examine and vote upon an application within
forty (40) days following the submission of said application to the city clerk-
treasurer.
      2.    In all cases where the council is considering applications for
licenses, transfers or renewals thereof, a transcribed verbatim record of the
proceeding shall be made. If the application for a license, transfer or renewal
is denied, a transcribed, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be kept for
a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision has been
rendered on the matter.
   D.    Issuance: Upon approval of an application by the council, the city
clerk-treasurer shall, at the earliest convenience of the applicant, during
normal city hall business hours, and upon payment by the applicant of the
applicable fee, issue the approved license to said applicant.
   E.    Licensing Period: The licensing period shall be from January 1 to
December 31. Whenever an initial license is issued for the period date of
issuance through December 31, then the fee shall be prorated by using the
following formula: annual fee divided by three hundred sixty five (365), times
the number of days remaining in the year from the date of issuance of the
license. In no case shall the fee be for less than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 314,
3-5-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
3-3-5: LICENSE DENIAL; APPEAL:
   A.    Justification For Denial Of Application: Whenever the Council denies
an application or fails to approve an application within forty (40) days from
the date of receipt of said application by the City Clerk-Treasurer, the
Council shall specify, in writing:
      1.    The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the
application.
      2.    The reasons for denial or delay.
      3.    The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   B.    Applicant's Recourse To Denial: An applicant denied a license,
transfer or renewal thereof or aggrieved by a decision of the Council pursuant
to this chapter may, within thirty (30) days, after all remedies have been
exhausted under City ordinances and procedures, seek judicial review under the
procedures provided in Idaho Code, sections 67-5215 and 67-5216. For the
purposes of Idaho Code, sections 67-5215 and 67-5216, a city shall be construed
to mean an agency. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
3-3-6: LICENSE CATEGORIES; FEES:
   A.    Categories And Fees: The categories of retail licenses, and their
associated fees, shall be:
      1.    Liquor and wine sold for on premises consumption by the drink, and
wine in an unopened container for off premises consumption: Two hundred twenty
five dollars ($225.00) per year.
      2.    Beer for on premises consumption by the bottle, can or glass, and
for off premises consumption by the bottle or can: Two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year.
      3.    Beer for off premises consumption by the bottle or can: Fifty
dollars ($50.00) per year.
      4.    Wine for on premises consumption by the drink: Two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year.
      5.    Wine for off premises consumption by the bottle: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per year.
      6.    Transfer of each existing license: Twenty dollars ($20.00).
   B.    Fees Nonrefundable: No part of any licensing fee shall, once paid in
acceptance of a license or transfer, be refundable. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986)
3-3-7: OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.    Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession
of an open container or receptacle containing beer, liquor, wine or any other
consumable liquid containing alcohol and/or to consume beer, liquor, wine or
any other consumable liquid containing alcohol within the City limits of Spirit
Lake, except when:
      1.    That person is on private real property with the permission of the
property owner, or
      2.    That person is inside of an establishment licensed to sell beer,
liquor or wine by the glass or drink, or
      3.    That person is within the confines of the Community Center Complex
buildings and permission to consume alcoholic drinks has been granted by the
Community Center Board, or
      4.    The substance containing alcohol is a medication either prescribed
for that person by a medical doctor, or is a patent medicine commonly sold over
the counter without prescription. (Ord. 426, 3-10-1998)
   B.    Penalty For Violation:
      1.    Any person found guilty by a court of law of violating this section
shall be guilty of committing a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished
pursuant to the laws of the State of Idaho.
      2.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
3-3-8: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The Mayor and Council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel
any license issued under this chapter for just cause, giving notice to and
allowing the licensee recourse in the manner as provided in section
3-3-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
3-3-9: HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE:
The hours and days during which establishments holding a current City of Spirit
Lake license to sell liquor by the drink shall be those set in title 23,
chapter 9 of the Idaho Code, except that the hours of sale shall be extended
from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and liquor may be sold
on Sundays, Memorial Day, and Thanksgiving. The hours of sale of beer and wine
shall be those set in title 23, chapter 9 of the Idaho Code, except that the
hours of sale shall be extended from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. (Ord. 481, 2-2-2005)
3-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
committing a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 314, 3-5-1986; amd. Ord. 481, 2-2-2005)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Applicability
3-4-2: Registration Required
3-4-3: Registration Fee
3-4-4: Nuisance Prohibited
3-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies throughout the city of Spirit Lake. Every person
soliciting door to door, unless exempt by state and federal law, is responsible
for compliance with its terms. Fundraising activities for students from school
districts recognized by the state of Idaho are exempt from these requirements.
(Ord. 471, 1-13-2004)
3-4-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to solicit door to door without first registering
with the city of Spirit Lake, unless exempt by state or federal law. "Door to
door solicitation" shall mean any unsolicited contact by a person with any
person at a residence or dwelling in the city of Spirit Lake for the purpose of
selling any product or service, or soliciting orders for any product or
service.
   A.    Required Information: Persons registering with the police department
must have and shall present current government issued photo identification and
shall fill out a registration application to be provided by the police
department, which shall give the following information:
      1.    Name and permanent home address of the applicant;
      2.    A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold or provided, including a copy of all information to be
presented to the resident;
      3.    Name and address of the person's employer, together with an
explanation of the exact relationship between the person and the employer;
      4.    Length of time for which the door to door solicitation will occur;
      5.    A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of
any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense
and where the offense was committed.
   B.    Term:
      1.    A new registration application shall be filed with the police
department every one hundred twenty (120) days for solicitation of sales of the
same product or service by the same person. A new registration shall be
required when a person who has previously registered within the last one
hundred twenty (120) days desires to sell door to door any products or services
not listed on the original registration application. (Ord. 471, 1-13-2004)
3-4-3: REGISTRATION FEE:
A registration fee in the amount set by the city council by resolution shall be
tendered at the time of submitting a registration application. (Ord. 471, 1-13-
2004)
3-4-4: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
   A.    No person, registered or not, shall solicit business at any home or
business when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that
solicitation or peddling is prohibited as a nuisance.
   B.    No person, registered or not, shall continue with door to door
solicitation at any home or business when requested to leave by the owner,
authorized agent of the owner, or any other person that resides or works on the
premises. (Ord. 471, 1-13-2004)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Phosphorus Laundry Cleaning Product Ban
4-1-1: PHOSPHORUS LAUNDRY CLEANING PRODUCT BAN:
   A.    Purpose: This Section is created under the authority granted by Idaho
Code, section 50-302. Its purpose is to participate and cooperate with other
governmental entities in this area in a regional effort to reduce the nutrients
which enter surface and subsurface bodies of water in the region.
   B.    Definitions:
   LAUNDRY CLEANING PRODUCT: Any product including, but not limited to, soaps,
detergents, laundry bleaches, laundry additives and fabric softeners used for
the purpose of cleaning laundry.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
   PHOSPHORUS: Elemental phosphorus.
   TRACE QUANTITY: Any incidental amount of phosphorus which is not part of the
laundry cleaning product formulation, and is present only as a consequence of
manufacturing, and does not exceed one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the
content of the product by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus.
   C.    Product Labeling; Sales Prohibited:
      1.    All laundry cleaning products sold or distributed within the City
limits shall have affixed thereto labeling which clearly indicates the percent
of phosphorus contained in the product to the nearest one-tenth of one percent
(0.1%) accuracy. Laundry cleaning products which contain only a trace quantity
of phosphorus may be labeled "Contains No Phosphorus", "Contains No
Phosphates", or similar labeling which makes a clear statement that no
prohibited quantity of phosphorus is present in the product.
      2.    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, offer or
expose for sale, whether for domestic or commercial use, and whether at
wholesale or at retail, within the City limits, any laundry cleaning product
which contains phosphorus in excess of a trace quantity.
   D.    Penalty: Each person found to be in violation of any provision of this
Section shall have committed a misdemeanor offense, and each day that each
violation continues shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense. The
penalty for each violation shall be that prescribed by Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 348, 6-16-90; 1995 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Declaration Of Nuisances
4-2-2: Abatement Procedure
4-2-3: Penalty
4-2-1: DECLARATION OF NUISANCES:
   A.    Responsibility:
      1.    No person in charge of or in control of any premises, whether as
owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall maintain a nuisance on the
premises. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "nuisance" is defined to
mean any condition or use of premises which is detrimental to the property of
others or which causes substantial diminution in the value of other property in
the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes, but is not
limited to, the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the
premises of any of the following:
         a.    Junk. Junk shall include, but not be limited to, any glass,
plastic, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, and waste, not to
include known collectibles or antiques of value. Known collectibles or antiques
will be established through a professionally published guide, index or
valuation manual. Further, property owners must be taking appropriate steps to
preserve the value of the collectible or antique to avoid classification as
junk.
         b.    Abandoned, inoperable, discarded or unused objects or equipment
such as, equipment, or machinery and personal property of any kind which is no
longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, furniture,
stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers, electronic equipment.
         c.    Any liquid/semiliquid waste which is of such a nature as to
spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract
rodents, vermin or other disease carrying pests, animals or insects; provided,
that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a
nuisance, nor shall a properly maintained garden compost facility.
         d.    Deleterious or septic material which causes adverse effects upon
the occupancy or use of neighboring lands. Such materials must generally be
retained in containers or vessels which deny access by humans, flies, insects,
rodents and animals.
      2.    All offensive and noxious weeds or plants, within the limits of the
city, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed, cut and
destroyed by the owner or agent of the ground or premises on which the same are
located. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or person having charge of
any property within the city limits where offensive or noxious weeds or plants
are growing to remove, cut and/or destroy the same. (Ord. 520, 8-12-2008)
4-2-2: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.    Notice: Prior to initiating prosecution for violation of this chapter,
city staff shall attempt to provide notice to the owner of the real property
upon which the nuisance is located by mailing written notice to the owner.
Additional notice shall be attempted to the occupant/tenant or agent if one is
known. Said notice shall describe the location of the property as accurately as
possible and shall specify the nature of the nuisance and the time by which the
nuisance must be abated, which shall be at least twenty one (21) days. Said
notice shall be mailed to the owner, agent or person in charge of such
property, if such owner, agent or person in charge can be found. If an owner,
agent or person in charge cannot be found, then notice shall be provided by
posting a notice upon a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of
said notice by certified mail to the owner or agent of the same at such.
Notice for the removal of recreational equipment shall be done in the same
manner as provided in chapter 18, title 49, Idaho Code, and may be removed by
the city if not removed within the time period designated in the notice.
   B.    Immediate Hazard: In the event that any nuisance poses an immediate
hazard to the public the City may take immediate action to correct or eliminate
said nuisance.
   C.    State Law Provisions: The provisions of this chapter shall not
compromise or otherwise adversely affect the applicability of provisions of
State law regarding the designation of nuisances and their abatement or the
removal of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 520, 8-12-2008)
4-2-3: PENALTY:
If the owners, tenants or occupants allow said nuisance to exist or fail to
abate the nuisance, they, and each of them, shall be guilty of an infraction,
punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day that
a violation of this chapter exists may be charged as a separate offense. Three
(3) or more infractions or a failure to pay the infraction penalty shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Criminal prosecution shall not prohibit the City from
any other lawful remedy. At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil
citation may be issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Composition
5-1-2: Lost And Abandoned Property
5-1-3: Chief Of Police
5-1-1: COMPOSITION:
The Police Department is composed of a Chief of Police, two (2) part-time
patrol officers and one secretary. (1995 Code)
5-1-2: LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.    Found Property:
      1.    It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police, or his
designee, to take possession of all found property located within the City
limits.
      2.    All found property will be handled by the Police Department as
stipulated by Idaho Code, section 55-403.
      3.    All found property unclaimed by its rightful owner after a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be disposed of by the Police Department.
   B.    Abandoned Property:
         1. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall have the authority to
impound all abandoned property left within the City limits.
      2.    All abandoned property will be handled by the Police Department as
stipulated by Idaho Code, section 55-403.
      3.    All abandoned property, with the exception of motor vehicles, not
claimed by its rightful owner within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days
shall be disposed of by the Police Department.
   C.    Responsibility Of Police Department; Locate Owner: The Police
Department shall make reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner of lost
or abandoned property.
   D.    Disposal Of Property: Disposal of abandoned and unclaimed property
shall be the responsibility of the Police Department. It shall be the
responsibility of the Chief of Police to order the disposal of property by:
      1.    Conversion of ownership to the City.
      2.    Release to locator of found property.
      3.    Sale, to the highest bidder, at public auction.
      4.    Destruction.
   E.    Abandoned Motor Vehicles: All abandoned vehicles shall be disposed of
under the current provisions of Idaho Code.
   F.    Proceeds From Sale Of Property: Proceeds of sale from any found or
abandoned property shall be disbursed as stipulated by Idaho Code, section 55-
404. (Ord. 379, 3-15-94)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   The position of Chief of Police is recognized as an appointed Officer
of the City of Spirit Lake and is subject to the same statutory provisions for
appointment and/or removal as other Officers, as codified in Idaho Code.
   B.   The Police Department shall be administered by an Officer of the City,
known as the Chief of Police or in the absence or incapacitation of the Chief
of Police, the Mayor. The Chief of Police shall continue to answer and report
to the Mayor. (Ord. 631, 5-9-2023)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Air Guns, BB Guns
5-2-2: Destruction Of Property
5-2-3: Disorderly Conduct
5-2-4: Deposit Of Snow, Ice, Rocks Or Debris
5-2-1: AIR GUNS, BB GUNS:
   A.    Unlawful Act: Air guns or air rifles or BB guns of any kind are hereby
declared to be dangerous weapons, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
use such weapons in the City.
   B.    Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with
section
1-4-1 of this Code. If the offender is a juvenile, such offender shall be dealt
with as the law may provide, and a parent or guardian allowing any juvenile
child in his or her care to violate this section shall be held responsible and
be subject to penalty. (Ord. 162, 9-6-1949; amd. 1995 Code)
      1.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
5-2-2: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY:
   A.    Unlawful Act: It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously
injure or to destroy any real or personal property not his own.
   B.    Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
guilty of committing a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished pursuant to
the laws of the State of Idaho. (Ord. 338, 9-12-1988)
      1.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
5-2-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.    Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.    Public Intoxication: Be drunk or intoxicated or to disturb the
peace of any other person while drunk or intoxicated in any place, building or
conveyance to which the public has, or is permitted to have access.
      2.    Disturbing The Peace: Maliciously and wilfully disturb the peace of
any person, family or neighborhood by, but not limited to, tumultuous or
offensive conduct, threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or
fighting, vulgar, profane, indecent or abusive language, discharging of any
firearm or explosive device, amplified sound or vibrations, musical
instruments, not properly muffled internal combustion engines or motors, or by
allowing prolonged barking or other animal sounds.
      3.    Unlawful Assembly: Fail to immediately disperse from the scene,
where two (2) or more persons have assembled for the purpose of disturbing the
peace or committing an unlawful act, when ordered to do so by any law
enforcement officer.
      4.    Interference With Official Meetings: Intentionally interrupt or
interfere in any way with the orderly conduct of a City Council meeting,
Planning and Zoning Commission, or any other public meeting and/or to refuse to
leave such a meeting when lawfully ordered to do so by that person in charge of
such a meeting.
   5.    Sleeping Or Building Fires On Streets: Sleep or build fires upon any
street, alley or other public right-of-way or to do the same upon any private
property without the consent of the owner of such private property.
   B.    Penalty: Any person found to be guilty of violating this section shall
be guilty of committing a misdemeanor pursuant to the laws of the State of
Idaho. (Ord. 354, 9-16-1991)
      1.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
5-2-4: DEPOSIT OF SNOW, ICE, ROCKS OR DEBRIS:
   A.    Unlawful Act: It is unlawful for any operator of snow removal
equipment or the owner of any land upon which snow removal equipment is
operated to place or otherwise permit, sanction, approve or cause the placement
of any snow onto public property or right-of-way upon its removal from
privately owned land or for any person to deposit, cause to be deposited,
thrown upon or move onto any public property or right-of-way any ice, dirt,
soil, rocks or debris which has accumulated on any private property, that
constitutes a safety hazard or impedance to City workers, and/or the general
public.
   B.    Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 464,
11-12-2002)
      1.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew
5-3-2: Juvenile Runaways
5-3-3: Truancy
5-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.    Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any unemancipated
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to assemble, congregate, loiter, or
be in, on or about any public property within the corporate limits of the City,
during the following times:
      1.    Nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M., Sunday night
through Friday morning.
      2.    Nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M., Friday night
through Sunday morning. (Ord. 596, 6-11-2019)
   B.    Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply in cases
where the minor is:
      1.    Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      2.    On an errand at the written direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop (written direction
must be signed, timed and dated by the parent or guardian and must indicate the
specific errand);
      3.    In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.    Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop;
      5.    Involved in an emergency. For the purposes of this section an
emergency shall be an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, automobile accident, or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life;
      6.    Attending an official school, religious, recreational, or other
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Spirit Lake,
Lakeland School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such
activity, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop; or
      7.    Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the right of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly, or going to or returning from such activity,
without any unauthorized detour, delay, or stop.
   C.    Parental Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of each parent
or guardian responsible for the supervision of an unemancipated person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to ensure that such a person is not at large in
violation of subsection A of this section. Failure of a parent or guardian to
fulfill this responsibility shall be a violation of this section.
   D.    Penalty: Any person found to be guilty of violating this section shall
be guilty of committing a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished pursuant to
the laws of the State of Idaho. (Ord. 480, 12-14-2004)
5-3-2: JUVENILE RUNAWAYS:
   A   . Authority: This section is enacted and adopted pursuant to the
authority granted to the City of Spirit Lake, Idaho, by article 12, section 2,
of the Constitution of the State of Idaho, and Idaho Code, section 50-319.
   B.    Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to leave the City of Spirit Lake residence of a parent,
legal guardian, or adult having the legal care and custody of the child without
the permission of the parent, legal guardian, or adult having the legal care
and custody of said person with the intent of absenting himself from the
residence.
   C.    Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 441, 1-18-2000)
5-3-3: TRUANCY:
   A.    Truancy Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any child between the age
of seven (7) years of age at the time of the commencement of school, but not
the age of sixteen (16) years who is enrolled in a public, private or parochial
school to be absent from school in session without the knowledge and
authorization of a parent, legal guardian or adult having the legal care and
custody of the child.
   B.    Penalties: Each violation of any provision of this section shall be
punishable as provided in Idaho Code, section 20-520. (Ord. 479, 11-9-2004)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Adoption
5-4-2: Authorization
5-4-3: Purpose And Intent
5-4-4: Definitions
5-4-5: Violations
5-4-6: Keeping Of Wild Or Exotic Animals
5-4-7: Keeping Of Domestic Animals; Limits
5-4-8: Limits On Numbers Of Animals On Residential Premises
5-4-9: Caring For Animals
5-4-10: Sanitation
5-4-11: Cruelty To Animals
5-4-12: Restraint And Confinement; Generally
5-4-13: Restraint Of Guard Dogs
5-4-14: Dog Bites; Report Notice
5-4-15: Animal Bite; Quarantine Required
5-4-16: Possession And Disposition Of Infected Animals
5-4-17: Vicious Dog; Complaint (Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-18: Vicious Dog; Appeal (Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-19: Viciousness Guidelines And Standards (Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-20: Vicious Animals; Confinement And Supervision (Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-
2006)
5-4-21: Dangerous Or Nuisance Dogs (Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-22: Subsequent Attack (Rep. by Ord. 507, 6-12-2007)
5-4-23: Property Owners May Impound
5-4-24: Return Of Animal To Owner
5-4-25: Disposition Of Large Animals
5-4-26: Licensing Of Dogs
5-4-27: License Tags; Identification
5-4-28: Impoundment
5-4-29: Notice To Owner And Redemption
5-4-30: Harboring Or Possessing Miniature Potbellied Pig
5-4-31: Certificate Of Health And Qualification From Veterinarian; Prior
Inspection
5-4-32: Enforcement; Interference Prohibited; Authority Granted
5-4-33: Violations And Penalties
5-4-1: ADOPTION:
The Spirit Lake municipal code is hereby amended by the addition of a new
ordinance to be numbered 436 and entitled SPIRIT LAKE ANIMAL ORDINANCE. (Ord.
436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-2: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the general police power and the authority
granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution and Idaho
Code, section 50-319. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the residents of the city of Spirit Lake and to foster the
humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals
within the city. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their
derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any live creature, either domestic or wild, except humans or plants.
Animal includes fowl and reptiles, but shall exclude fish.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of animal diseases and
injuries.
ANIMAL NUISANCE: Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning
of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal or animals.
ANIMAL SAFETY OFFICER: Any employee or agent of the city, designated by the
chief of police to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and
compliance requirements established by this chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated for the temporary care, confinement and
detention of animals and for the humane euthanizing and other disposition of
animals or any facility authorized by the chief of police or his designee to
impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.
AT LARGE ANIMAL: An animal, excluding cats, that is off the premises of its
owner, or if on the premises of its owner or of another, with permission, is
not on a leash or otherwise suitably contained within a fenced enclosure such
that it is under the immediate control of a person physically capable of
restraining the animal.
CRUELTY: Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or
death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper
drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe
living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in a sufficient
quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused,
such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal
veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal
training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane
method reasonably available.
DISPOSITION: Adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or
placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. "Disposition"
includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, pigs
(excluding a miniature potbellied pig), cattle, goats, swine, fowl,
nonpoisonous snakes less than three feet (3') in length, pigeons, ducks, geese,
turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants, and other birds and
animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk,
fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, nonpoisonous snakes more than three
feet (3') in length, members of the feline species other than domestic cat
(Felis domesticus), member of the canine species other than domestic dog (Canis
familiaris) or any other animal that by virtue of strength or inherent
temperament or disposition would require a standard of care and control greater
than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or
domestic farm animals.
GUARD OR ATTACK DOG: A dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons
or property.
IMPOUNDMENT: The taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal
safety officer, or any authorized representative thereof.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or as such term might
otherwise be defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.
MINIATURE POTBELLIED PIG: A miniature Vietnamese or Chinese potbellied pig kept
for the sole purpose of providing human companionship.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong material designed to fasten over the
mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from barking or biting.
OWNER: Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or
having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights
to, any animal covered by this chapter. An animal shall be deemed to be
harbored if it is fed or sheltered by any person or if the person purported to
be harboring claims to have custody or responsibility for the care of any
animal.
SANITARY: A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility
of disease transmission and not producing adverse health or sensory conditions
for adjoining property owners.
UNDER RESTRAINT: That an animal is secured by a leash or lead under the control
of a person physically capable of restraining the animal, or securely enclosed
within the real property limits of the owner's premises.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live, nonhuman primate, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or
any other warm blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The
term "wild animal" does not include: domestic dogs (except hybrids with wolves,
coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays),
farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive bred
species of common cage birds. (Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-5: VIOLATIONS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property
located within the corporate limits of the city when the keeping of such
animal, or the manner thereof, violates the provisions of this chapter, or when
the owner neglects a duty established by this chapter or carries out conduct
which the chapter labels as unlawful, or engages in activities, actions or
behavior which violates a rule of conduct or requirement of this chapter or
which creates a menace to public health or safety so as to create a nuisance to
neighboring property owners or the public at large.
   B.    Behavior and/or conditions which violate this chapter shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
      1.    Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or
health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights
of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property;
      2.    Any animal other than domestic cats found running at large;
      3.    Any animal, other than domestic cats, that damages, soils, defiles
or defecates on any property other than that of its owner;
      4.    Any animal that makes disturbing or grunting noises, including, but
not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other
utterances which cause annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to reasonable
neighbors or reasonable others in close proximity to the premises where the
animal is kept or harbored;
      5.    Any animal, or owner thereof, that causes fouling of the air by
noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the
animal is kept or harbored inclusive of conduct which neglects to maintain,
clean or otherwise eliminate the waste which results from the containment of an
animal;
      6.    Any animal in heat (estrus) that is not confined so as to prevent
attraction or contact with other animals;
      7.    Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that
without provocation, molests, attacks, bites, menaces or otherwise interferes
with the freedom or movement of persons in a public right of way;
      8.    Any animal that chases motor vehicles on a public right of way;
      9.    Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
      10.    Any owner or harborer of animals who causes or allows conditions
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the
number of animals maintained at a single residence or premises or because of
the inadequacy of the facilities. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-6: KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any wild or
exotic animal without the express written authorization of the Spirit Lake city
council. Such authorization may be given only if it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the council that the animal will not constitute a threat to
public health or safety. The city council may conduct a public hearing to
obtain the opinions of adjoining residents and property owners when considering
such requests. The city council may charge an applicant for such authorization
an appropriate fee to recover the authorization processing costs incurred by
the city. Public educational institutions shall be exempt from the foregoing
authorization requirement. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-7: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS; LIMITS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any household to own, harbor, or possess more
domestic animals than authorized by this section or in accordance with
limitations and licensing requirements established by this chapter:
      1.    Dogs and cats, not exceeding the number limitations as set forth in
this chapter.
      2.    Cattle, horses, goats, sheep, may be kept on premises containing a
minimum of three-fourths (3/4) acre of securely fenced, irrigated open space,
exclusive of a home site, and containing at least one acre in total, maintained
in compliance with this chapter. Said fenced area shall be irrigated during the
growing season to sustain vegetation. The number of listed animals allowed on
the original one acre parcel and per acre on each succeeding acre of contiguous
site which is securely fenced and irrigated shall be as follows:
         a.    Cattle: two (2)
         b.    Horses or ponies: two (2)
         c.    Goats and/or sheep: four (4)
         d.    Chickens, ducks and/or geese: ten (10)
   B.    It shall be the duty of all persons owning or harboring such animals
to keep them in secure confinement to prevent them from roaming onto adjacent
lands and to maintain such animals, and the grounds upon, and facilities
within, which they are housed, in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 436, 3-
1-1999)
5-4-8: LIMITS ON NUMBERS OF ANIMALS ON RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any household in a multi-family dwelling
housing unit to keep more than three (3) permitted animals as defined by
subsection
5-4-7A1 of this chapter. Each household in a detached single-family dwelling
shall keep no more than six (6) animals permitted pursuant to subsection
5-4-7A1 of this chapter, but not more than three (3) of any species shall be
allowed within such limitation; except that a litter of pups, kittens or other
young animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five (5) months
from birth. The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to any
commercial establishment where such animals are legally kept for breeding,
sale, sporting purposes, or boarding.
   B.    Kennels shall be permitted only when allowed by the zoning ordinance
of the city, in compliance with all applicable zoning restrictions. (Ord. 436,
3-1-1999)
5-4-9: CARING FOR ANIMALS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to
refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious
food, water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and
treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal to intolerably hot,
stormy, cold or inclement weather without adequate shelter.
   B.    No owner or custodian of any animal shall abandon such animal on any
street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the
care of another responsible person. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-10: SANITATION:
   A.    It shall be unlawful and no owner or custodian of any dog shall allow
the owner/custodian's dog to soil, defile or defecate on any public property,
street, sidewalk, public way, public play area or upon private property other
than that which is exclusively owned by the dog owner, unless such owner or
custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such dog
by the following method:
      1.    Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a
paper or plastic bag or other container; and
      2.    Removal of such bag or container to a waste disposal container
lawfully available to the owner for sanitary disposal of waste as permitted by
law.
   B.    It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring or keeping an
animal within the city shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect
and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of
others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or
offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or upon the
abutting or nearby property of others.
   C.    It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any animal shall cause or allow the existence or maintenance of
unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number
of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the
facilities. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-11: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to strike, beat, abuse, or
intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any
act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such
animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals.
   B.    No person, except a licensed veterinarian, or animal safety officer
(for humanitarian purposes) shall administer poison to any animal, or knowingly
leave any poisonous or harmful substance of any kind or ground glass in any
place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are
not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest
control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to
control insects and/or wild rodents. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-12: RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT; GENERALLY:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such
animal under restraint or permit such animal to run at large upon the streets
and public ways of the city or upon private property without consent of the
owner or present occupant. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section when an animal is found by an animal safety officer or police
officer while it is away from its owner (or responsible person).
   B.    Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, or other public
space, or upon private property without the consent of the owner, shall be
secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the
particular dog and be controlled by a person of sufficient age and strength to
control the animal. This shall not apply to animals prescribed by a doctor for
medical reasons or other properly trained assist dog.
   C.    No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care
and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a private or
public nuisance.
   D.    Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other
enclosed area in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact
with another animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-13: RESTRAINT OF GUARD DOGS:
   A.    Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a
building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be
completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet (6') in height and shall be
topped with an anticlimbing device to prevent the animal from exiting the top
of the enclosure.
   B.    Such areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto
securely closed and locked, and all fences shall be properly maintained and
escape proof. Such premises shall be clearly posted to warn of the presence of
guard dogs.
   C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or
controlled by government law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-14: DOG BITES; REPORT NOTICE:
   A.    Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal that bites any
person, any person bitten by such animal or physician attending such, shall
report the same to the animal safety officer or police officer immediately, but
in no case longer than within eight (8) hours of the time of the bite or of
learning of the bite, giving his/her full name, age, and address, the
circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite, the medical
treatment given and the name and address of the owner or person having custody
or possession of the animal. The owner of the animal in question shall release
to the animal safety officer or police officer upon request, all information
about the animal needed to complete the investigation.
   B.    It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence
of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the
animal safety officer the existence and description of such animal, the place
where sent, the name of the owner or persons having custody of the animal, if
known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-15: ANIMAL BITE; QUARANTINE REQUIRED:
No person owning or having custody or possession of any animal shall fail,
refuse or neglect to isolate and quarantine an animal that has bitten a human
or other animal for at least ten (10) days in such manner as may be specified
by the animal safety officer or a police officer or for such period and in such
manner as may otherwise be required by a public official with lawful authority.
(Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-16: POSSESSION AND DISPOSITION OF INFECTED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to keep such animal if it is
known to have a contagious disease unless the animal is under the current
treatment of a licensed veterinarian. If any animal impounded under the
provisions of this chapter is found to be suffering from rabies or is inflicted
with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease, it shall not
be released. The animal safety officer may order that an incurably contagious
or harmful animal be destroyed, subject to appeal to the city administrator.
(Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-17: VICIOUS DOG; COMPLAINT:
(Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-18: VICIOUS DOG; APPEAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-19: VICIOUSNESS GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-20: VICIOUS ANIMALS; CONFINEMENT AND SUPERVISION:
(Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-21: DANGEROUS OR NUISANCE DOGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 498, 6-13-2006)
5-4-22: SUBSEQUENT ATTACK:
(Rep. by Ord. 507, 6-12-2007)
5-4-23: PROPERTY OWNERS MAY IMPOUND:
Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may remove the same to
any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. Any person doing so
shall inform the shelter operator of the location where the animal was
captured, type of animal, and any other information which may be relevant to
locating the owner or circumstance concerning the animal. If no such shelter is
available, the property owner may humanely hold the animal in his own
possession and immediately notify the animal safety officer. The property owner
shall provide a description of the animal and the name of the owner if known.
(Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-24: RETURN OF ANIMAL TO OWNER:
If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at large is known or
can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal safety officer may attempt
contact with such owner and advise the owner of the location of the animal and
attempt to make arrangements to return the animal. If the animal owner is not
available, the animal safety officer may provide written notice to the
registered owner explaining who the owner must contact to reclaim the animal.
The officer may remove the animal to the nearest shelter that will accept the
animal. The ultimate responsibility for locating an impounded animal is the
owner's. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-25: DISPOSITION OF LARGE ANIMALS:
Any animal safety officer or other designated person on call who removes or
takes custody of a healthy large animal such as a horse, cow, mule or other
animal, which is not acceptable to any animal hospital or shelter, shall be
authorized to call a trucking firm or company which may convey the animal to a
farm or other appropriate facility that will accept such animals. The
disposition of any animal removed to a facility other than an animal hospital
or shelter shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were
confined in an animal hospital or shelter. Any such expenses of shelter or care
shall be the responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-26: LICENSING OF DOGS:
   A.    License Required: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over
the age of six (6) months within the city unless such dog is licensed as
provided in this chapter.
   B.    Application: Application for such license shall be made by the owner
on a form to be provided by the city within ten (10) days after acquiring any
dog over six (6) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes six
(6) months of age; provided that any owner moving to the city for the purposes
of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation,
and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until thirty (30) days
after establishing residence to obtain such license.
   C.    Proof Of Rabies Vaccination Required: All owners applying for a
license must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the
animal for which the license is being obtained has been inoculated against
rabies within the last two (2) years.
   D.    Proof Of Sterilization: Any owner claiming that his dog has been
spayed or neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority
that the operation has been performed.
   E.    Payment Of License Fee: A license fee shall be paid at the time of
making application. The license fee for dogs shall be established by the city
council by resolution. Such fee may be different depending upon the altered
status or other relevant characteristics of the animal.
   F.    Exemption From License Fee: License fees shall not be required for
seeing eye dogs, dogs prescribed by a doctor for medical reasons, government
police dogs or dogs belonging to a nonresident of the city (which are licensed
elsewhere) and kept within the boundaries of the city for not longer than
thirty (30) days; provided that all dogs not subject to payment of the license
fee shall at the time of entry into the city be properly vaccinated against
rabies, and while kept within the city, meet all other requirements of this
chapter. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions has the burden of proving
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog in question is
entitled to such exemption.
   G.    Penalties: Any owner of a dog over the age of six (6) months who fails
to obtain a license within the time period specified in this chapter shall be
subject to a fee set by the city council by resolution and/or shall be subject
to prosecution for violation of this chapter as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-27: LICENSE TAGS; IDENTIFICATION:
   A.    Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the city shall issue a
durable license tag, stamped with an identification number for the animal for
which the license has been obtained. Any license issued for the keeping of a
dog shall take effect on the date of issuance and shall be valid for the period
of time paid for and shown on the receipt issued by the licensing authority.
Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a license must wear a valid
license tag at all times when the animal is off the premises of its owner.
   B.    No person may use a license for any animal other than the animal for
which the license was issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter such
license tag in any manner.
   C.    Any dog license issued in reliance of false or inaccurate information
may be revoked. Anyone who knowingly submits false information to obtain a
license or to obtain a license without paying the appropriate fee shall be
deemed to have violated this chapter and shall be subject to all potential
penalties therefor. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-28: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.    In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal
safety officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to
an animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:
      1.    Any dog without a valid license tag;
      2.    Any animal at large;
      3.    Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to
the public;
      4.    Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order of the panhandle health district, a Spirit Lake animal safety officer or
any standing quarantine or confinement order of any public officer;
      5.    Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care;
      6.    Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected;
      7.    Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
      8.    Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or
dangerous where the city council or animal safety officer determines that there
is a threat to public health and safety; including illegal exotic and wild
animals;
      9.    Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed;
      10.    Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in
situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been evicted
from his regular place of residence;
      11.    Any animal that has been declared vicious and the owner or
harborer fails to adhere the established guidelines set forth in the vicious
dog guidelines as set forth in this chapter.
   B.    An animal safety officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of
impoundment of a dog running at large, issue to the owner a notice of violation
which calls for payment of an animal control fee or, in the alternative, may
issue a uniform citation charging the owner with a criminal violation of this
chapter. Any animal owner issued a notice of violation shall pay any animal
control fee established by resolution to the city of Spirit Lake within thirty
(30) days of the date the notice of violation is issued. Such fee may be paid
at the location noted on the notice of violation. In the event that such fee is
not paid within the time period prescribed, the animal safety or police officer
may issue a uniform citation or refer the matter to the city Prosecutor in
order to initiate misdemeanor criminal proceedings for the underlying violation
of this chapter. Such citation or complaint shall be punishable as a criminal
misdemeanor as otherwise provided by this code. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-29: NOTICE TO OWNER AND REDEMPTION:
   A.    Upon impoundment of an animal, the animal safety officer or police
officer may attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail. If the owner is
unknown or cannot be contacted, the animal safety officer or police officer
shall post written notice for five (5) days at the Spirit Lake city hall and
the Spirit Lake police station, describing the animal and the time and place of
taking. Any notice to the owner may also include the location of the shelter or
hospital where the animal is confined, hours during which the animal can be
reclaimed, and the fees to be charged to the owner. The owner may also be
advised that the failure to claim the animal within five (5) days may result in
the destruction or other disposition of the animal.
   B.    An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay impound fees as
established by resolution of the city council. The rates charged for any
subsequent impoundment may likewise be established by resolution of the city
council.
   C.    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) days shall be
subject to placement for adoption in a suitable home or euthanized in a manner
prescribed by the city. (Ord. 536, 2-9-2010)
5-4-30: HARBORING OR POSSESSING MINIATURE POTBELLIED PIG:
No person shall possess, own, or harbor a "miniature potbellied pig" as defined
in this chapter unless and until obtaining a license from the chief of police
for such animal in accordance with this chapter. Only one miniature potbellied
pig may be maintained or licensed at any single address or premises. Said
license may be issued upon payment of the license fee established by the city
council by resolution and upon proving compliance with the standards
established by this code. Any such potbellied pig shall be subject to the care
and control requirements established for dogs by this chapter. (Ord. 436, 3-1-
1999)
5-4-31: CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH AND QUALIFICATION FROM VETERINARIAN; PRIOR
INSPECTION:
   A.    Each person desiring to license a miniature potbellied pig for keeping
in the city shall first obtain a certificate from a licensed veterinarian
certifying that the animal in question is a miniature potbellied pig, measuring
no more than twenty three inches (23") in height at the shoulders when in a
normal stance, weighing no more than one hundred twenty five (125) pounds and
kept solely for human companionship. Further, said veterinarian shall certify
in writing that the animal in question has been inoculated against and/or been
blood tested, with negative results, for pseudorabies and brucellosis, or any
other disease or animal malady which the USDA or the Idaho department of
agriculture deems necessary to prevent health, safety or general welfare
concerns.
   B.    Prior to issuance of a license to possess a miniature potbellied pig,
the license applicant shall submit plans showing the size and location of the
yard in which the miniature potbellied pig will be allowed to exercise when not
in the home where it lives. Said plans shall include sufficient detail to
indicate that fencing materials and installation methods are sufficient to
protect neighboring land uses from intrusion. No miniature potbellied pig, nor
the maintenance practices affecting care of such animal, shall be allowed to
interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of adjoining land uses by reason of
noise, odor or otherwise. Violation of these requirements shall be deemed a
violation of the requirements of this code.
   C.    Any person seeking to license a miniature potbellied pig shall allow
reasonable opportunity for inspection of the animal and of the premises where
it will be housed, prior to action by the chief of police.
   D.    Any person denied a license by the chief of police may appeal said
denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator setting
forth the basis of the appeal and stating concisely why the appeal should be
granted. The city administrator may investigate the appeal as appropriate,
including meeting with the applicant or any objectors and render a written
decision concerning the requested license denial. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-32: ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY GRANTED:
Animal safety officers and police officers of the city of Spirit Lake shall be
the enforcement officials for this chapter. These officials shall have the
authority to act on behalf of the city in investigating complaints, impounding
and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of
this chapter to interfere with an animal safety officer or other enforcement
official in the performance of his duties. Animal safety officers are hereby
authorized to take such actions as they deem appropriate to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public, whether expressly authorized by this chapter,
or not. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
5-4-33: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.    It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
      1.    Fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, that is, to do
that which is described as unlawful or to violate the requirements established
by this chapter;
      2.    Fail to comply with any lawful order of the animal safety officer
or police officer, unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed.
   B.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment. Should any person be found guilty in
any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the animal involved to
be destroyed by the animal safety officer. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
      1.    At the discretion of the charging officer, a civil citation may be
issued which is punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 580, 3-13-2018)
   C.    The City may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions of this
chapter and/or to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed necessary to
bring about compliance herewith. (Ord. 436, 3-1-1999)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Idaho Motor Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-2: U-Turns
6-1-3: Parking
6-1-4: Speed And Load Limits
6-1-5: Negligent Vehicle Impoundment Fee
6-1-6: Air Compression Brakes
6-1-1: IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.    Adoption Of Title 49, Idaho Motor Vehicle Code: The City hereby adopts
title 49, Idaho Motor Vehicle Code, in its entirety and any future amendments
and revisions of said Code, as its own Municipal ordinance.
   B.    Public Inspection Of Code: A copy of title 49, Idaho Motor Vehicle
Code, will be readily available for public inspection during normal City Hall
business hours. (Ord. 341, 1-17-1989)
6-1-2: U-TURNS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a reverse
or U-turn at any point on Maine Street between Salishan Way and 5th Avenue,
inclusive; and it shall also be unlawful to make any such turn on any
intersecting street within fifty feet (50') of Maine Street.
Violation of this section is an infraction. The monetary penalty shall be the
same as provided by Idaho Code. (Ord. 552, 12-10-2013)
6-1-3: PARKING:
   A.    No Parking Zones: There shall be no parking of any vehicles during
prohibited periods listed in subsection B of this section on Maine Street from
the west City limits to 5th Avenue, inclusive.
   B.    Dates; Hours:
      1.    Prohibited calendar dates shall be from November 1 through March
31.
      2.    Prohibited hours shall be from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. through six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., inclusive.
   C.    Snow Removal; Obstruction Prohibited: It shall be illegal for any
vehicle to be parked in such a manner so as to inhibit snow removal operations
after notification to the owner/operator by a City employee or official.
   D.    Sign Placement: The Police Department is authorized to cause the
placement of the appropriate signs or barricades designating prohibited
parking. (Ord. 506, 1-9-2007)
   E.    Penalty:
      1.    Violations:
         a.    A violation of any of the parking provisions set out in this
Code shall be an infraction unless another penalty is provided by State law,
and, upon being found to have violated a traffic provision of this Code, shall
be penalized as allowed by State law.
         b.    A violation of any of the parking provisions set out in this
Code shall be punishable by a civil penalty in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council as set forth in and enforced pursuant to
subsection E2 of this section.
         c.    Nothing in this subsection E shall limit the ability of the City
to impound vehicles.
      2.    Charges For Violation:
         a.    Any person violating any of the parking provisions set forth in
this Code may be assessed a civil penalty for each violation. The civil
penalties for each violation shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
         b.    Any police officer observing any parking violation may issue a
ticket describing such violation and the charge assessed for the violation to
the person committing the violation. The ticket shall be payable to the City of
Spirit Lake within ten (10) days of the violation. Failure to pay the civil
assessment set forth on the parking ticket shall result in further action being
taken by the City as set forth in subsection E4 of this section.
      3.    Vehicle Ownership As Evidence:
         a.    In any prosecution against the registered owner of a motor
vehicle charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or
parking of a vehicle under any ordinance of the City of Spirit Lake, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of parking, the registered owner of the vehicle,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, the violation occurred. For the purposes of this subsection,
proof that a person is the registered owner of a vehicle is not prima facie
evidence that the registered owner has violated any other provision of law.
Proof of a written lease or of rental agreement for a particular vehicle
described in the complaint on the date and time of the violation, which lease
or rental agreement includes the name and address of the person to whom the
vehicle is leased or rented, shall rebut the prima facie evidence that the
registered owner was the person who parked or placed vehicle at the time and
place where the violations occurred.
         b.    In any prosecution against the lessee or renter of a motor
vehicle charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or
parking of a vehicle under any ordinance of the City of Spirit Lake, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any provision of the ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was, at the time of parking, the lessee or renter of the vehicle,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the lessee or renter of the vehicle
was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, the violation occurred. For the purposes of this subsection,
proof that a person is the lessee or renter of a vehicle is not prima facie
evidence that the lessee or renter has violated any other provision of this
law.
         c.    Any charge under such ordinance shall be dismissed when the
person charged has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle, has
delivered possession thereof to the purchaser, and has complied with the
requirements of chapter 4, title 49 of the Idaho Code prior to the date of the
alleged violation and has advised the court of the name and address of the
purchaser and the date of the sale.
      4.    Failure To Pay Civil Penalty For Parking Violation:
         a.    In the event any person fails or refuses to pay the civil
penalty assessed for a parking violation, the City shall take such action as is
necessary for collection of the civil assessment.
         b.    Collection actions may include, but are not limited to,
initiating collection procedures via a debt collection service, filing a civil
lawsuit for collection of the unpaid penalty(ies) and, subject to subsection
E4c of this section, filing a misdemeanor complaint. Provided, further, the
City shall be entitled to all fees, costs, and attorney fees incurred in the
collection of such fees and, upon entry of judgment, the City shall have each,
every, and all rights of enforcement of a judgment as provided by Idaho Code.
         c.    The failure to pay four (4) or more civil penalties assessed for
a parking violation shall constitute a misdemeanor unless an infraction penalty
is either specifically provided for such violation or necessitated by operation
of law. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this subsection E shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
      5.    Appeal:
         a.    A person wanting to file an appeal for a parking violation shall
file a written notice of appeal, on a form approved by the City Council, within
ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of the civil assessment (parking
ticket).
         b.    The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall review the written
appeal and shall issue a written determination within fifteen (15) days of the
filing of the notice of appeal.
         c.    If the appeal is denied, the parking ticket shall be deemed
valid and a written determination, setting forth the reasons for the denial,
shall be forwarded to the appellant at the address set forth in the notice of
appeal. The appellant shall then be required to pay the civil assessment by the
due date set forth in the written denial of appeal. Failure to pay the
assessment shall subject the appellant to the collection procedures set forth
in subsection E4 of this section.
         d.    If the appeal is granted, the parking civil assessment shall be
voided, and the appellant shall not be required to take further action. (Ord.
577, 1-19-2018)
6-1-4: SPEED AND LOAD LIMITS:
   A.    Speed Limit Established: Except as provided by the Idaho motor vehicle
laws and/or ordinances of the City in all residential neighborhoods located in
urban districts in the City, it is hereby found and declared that the thirty
five (35) miles per hour speed limit established under title 49, Idaho Motor
Vehicle Code, is greater than is reasonable and safe and that a reasonable and
safe maximum speed is fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted.
   B.    Protection Of Roads: Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor or the City
Engineer the operation on any road within the City of vehicles of sizes,
weights and at rates of speed permissible by law will cause damage to the road
by reason of climatic or other conditions, they shall have authority to limit
the permissible sizes, weights or speeds of vehicles operated on such roads
within the City for such periods as may be necessary for the protection of the
road or for public safety.
   C.    Excess Speed Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle on
streets or highways within the City limits in excess of the posted speed limit
or in violation of the weight and size limits.
   D.    Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in title 49, Idaho Motor Vehicle Code. (Ord.
467, 2-11-2003)
6-1-5: NEGLIGENT VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT FEE:
   A.    There is hereby authorized and established a negligent vehicle
impoundment fee to be imposed upon the owner of every motor vehicle impounded
by the City of Spirit Lake Police Department wherein the impoundment is made
necessary by the negligent or otherwise irresponsible acts of the vehicle
owner. Among the causes deemed to be negligent conduct which require the
impoundment of a motor vehicle are:
      1.    Driving with a suspended or expired driver's license,
      2.    Driving with expired vehicle registration,
      3.    Vehicle abandonment or illegal or unsafe parking,
      4.    Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs,
      5.    Any related circumstance during which the operator of a motor
vehicle is arrested.
   B.    Such fees shall be officially established at the rate of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per impoundment (in addition to towing and storage fees) and
such fee shall be paid before an impounded vehicle is released from the care or
custody of the impound yard. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to work
with the City Administrator and other City personnel to assure that methods of
collection of the negligent impound fee are established and applied. By this
section, the Council further authorizes the fee to be modified by subsequent
resolution upon a showing satisfactory to the City Council that the costs of
the administrative processing of impounded vehicles changes such that the
appropriate fee amount should be changed. (Ord. 442, 2-8-2000)
6-1-6: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
   A.    Use Of Air Compression Brakes Prohibited: The use of air compression
brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by vehicles or trucks, as defined in Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 1, within City limits is hereby prohibited and shall be
unlawful, except under emergency circumstances where the use of air compression
brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or property.
   B.    Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be deemed to have committed an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 490, 9-6-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Adoption Of Idaho Code
6-2-2: Speed Limit
6-2-3: Prohibited Areas
6-2-1: ADOPTION OF IDAHO CODE:
The City hereby adopts Idaho Code, sections 67-7101 through 67-7113. (Ord. 357,
1-14-92)
6-2-2: SPEED LIMIT:
The maximum speed limit is fifteen (15) miles per hour within the City limits.
(Ord. 357, 1-14-92)
6-2-3: PROHIBITED AREAS:
The following areas and/or streets are prohibited for use by snowmobiles:
   A.    City parks.
   B.    Cemetery.
   C.    Fifth Avenue.
   D.    Maine Street, west City limits through Sixth Avenue, inclusive.
   E.    Sixth Avenue between Maine Street and New Hampshire Street.
   F.    All sidewalks.
   G.    All private property without prior written permission of the property
owner. (Ord. 357, 1-14-92)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREET AND RIGHT OF WAY IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose; Improvements Required
7-1-2: Permits Required
7-1-3: Application; Requirements; Fees
7-1-4: Construction Inspection
7-1-5: Infrastructure Improvement Policy (Rep. by Ord. 417, 10-25-1996)
7-1-6: Permit Revocation
7-1-7: Penalty
7-1-1: PURPOSE; IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The purpose of this chapter is to require and to regulate the construction and/
or capital maintenance of public facilities or the facilities of private
utilities within the public rights of way by reviewing construction design
drawings, by issuance of construction permits and oversight of inspection of
such facilities in order to assure, to the greatest extent practical, that
utility construction work and/or other construction work within the public
right of way complies with applicable city ordinances and construction
standards adopted by the city.
It is the intent of the city by enactment hereof, and the city hereby does
establish physical improvement standards for land uses to be constructed,
established, materially added to or otherwise developed from an unimproved
state. No building permit shall issue nor shall any development permit issue
until the city council has approved construction plans for public right of way
improvements adjoining any such development site. Further, no certificate of
occupancy, business license or approval to operate any land use shall be
authorized for any owner or occupant of unplatted lands within the city or for
any owner or occupant of any lands platted prior to enactment of the city’s
subdivision ordinance until the site in question has been improved in a manner
equivalent to the standards for public improvements for developments
established by the subdivision ordinance of the city as of the date of the
proposal to establish occupancy or initiate a land use regulated by the zoning
ordinance of the city.
At a minimum, said required site improvements shall include a paved surface on
the fronting street, sidewalk for pedestrian travel, extension of water and
sewer lines and continuation of surface water drainage across the full frontage
of the lands in question. If improvements must be installed in the midst of
lots, tracts or parcels that have been partially improved to comply with
previously adopted standards, the city council may authorize improvements to
standards that will integrate with improvements already in place. In no
instance shall such authority to integrate improvements compromise efforts of
the city to maintain continuity in utility extension, continuity of
pedestrianways and extension of paved street rights of way.
Construction excavation shall not be allowed within City rights-of-ways from
November 1 until March 31. Should extended freezing conditions prevail before
or after those dates, the City may impose additional restrictions for
construction excavation with City rights-of-way. Construction excavation shall
not be allowed within City streets that have received Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA)
surfacing within 5 years of the date of proposed construction excavation,
unless special conditions imposed by the City are met. Those special conditions
could include backfill with Controlled Density Fill (CDF), or other means
through which to minimize settlement and provide a smooth, durable surface
across the excavation area.
In the end, the city engineer shall recommend in writing whether plans for
right of way improvements are consistent with the purposes and requirements
established by this chapter, by the city’s zoning ordinance and by sound
engineering practices. The city engineer shall forward any such recommendation
for final decision to the Spirit Lake city council no more than seven (7) days
after the date of the written recommendation by the city engineer, and after
allowing a reply from the property owner, either on the record during a public
meeting or in writing, shall decide the standards of site improvement that
shall apply to the specific site. The city council shall render its decision as
promptly as practical, but no later than ninety eight (98) days subsequent to
the date of transmission of the written recommendation from the city engineer
unless otherwise approved by the applicant. In extraordinary circumstances
where practical difficulties may be presented, the city engineer or city
council may allow payment of estimated cost equivalents in lieu of installation
of required improvements. (Ord. 508, 7-10-2007; amd. Ord. 626, 12-14-2021)
7-1-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.    Street Improvements: All construction of new street improvements,
including, but not limited to, street base preparation, paving, installation of
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm water facilities, water line construction,
replacement of such facilities, or construction, replacement, or capital
maintenance of any public utility or other facilities desiring to make use of
the public right of way, including facilities providing electrical, telephone,
natural gas, irrigation water, and cable television service shall require a
right of way construction permit issued by the city.
   B.    Public Right Of Way: Any construction work in the public right of way
which will affect the condition of existing public facilities or will result in
the construction of facilities which will be subject to public maintenance
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.    New Subdivisions: A public facility construction permit shall be
required prior to the initiation of construction work on a new subdivision.
Said permits may be issued by the city engineer or his authorized
representatives after review and approval of plans and specifications, and
payment of required fees. No fee shall be charged for construction undertaken
pursuant to direction by the city.
   D.    Stockpiling Of Materials: No temporary stockpiling, storage of
materials, demolition, storage of equipment, or other activities which would
obstruct a public right of way shall be allowed without a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   E.    Improvement Specifications: The mayor and/or council is hereby
authorized to develop construction and improvement specifications for
installations in public rights of way within the city. Said standards shall be
presented to the city council for review and shall be effective upon passage of
a resolution adopting said standards. Such standards may be changed by
subsequent resolution of the city council.
   F.    Mail And Newspaper Receptacles: Placement of mail and newspaper
receptacles shall be required to obtain an encroachment permit prior to the
installation and shall comply with the placement standards adopted by the city
council by resolution. The city shall have the authority to revoke the
encroachment permit and require the removal or relocation of any mail or
newspaper receptacle at any time, without recourse by the permittee. Mail and
newspaper receptacle encroachments shall not be subject to sections
7-1-3 and
7-1-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 512, 12-11-2007)
7-1-3: APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.    Application: Applications for permits required by this chapter shall
be made to the city on forms provided for that purpose. No work subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall be initiated until an application has been
completed and approved according to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.    Requirements: Permit requests shall include site plans, engineering
plans, specifications, and such other information as may be necessary to allow
the city to determine that standards have been complied with.
   C.    Fees: No permit application shall be deemed complete until the fees
required for said application have been paid in full. The fees for permit
issuance and for construction inspection oversight are authorized by this
chapter. Said fees may be set, and changed from time to time, by resolution of
the city council.
   D.    Advance Timing: Applications for permits required by this chapter
shall be made in advance of the date upon which work is scheduled to commence.
Advance timing shall be variable depending upon the scope of the work to be
completed and the degree of prior review which has been conducted. Review
periods may be waived by the city in the event of emergencies. The permit shall
provide a time limit within which the work shall be completed. The permit shall
be void if the work is not commenced and completed within the date specified on
the permit unless an extension of time, for good cause, is granted by the city.
   E.    Insurance Required: Any applicant for a permit authorized by this
chapter shall demonstrate that it has general liability insurance in the amount
of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) which insures said work against
damage to public facilities and against damage to the public in general. No
permit shall issue without proof of such insurance. The city is authorized to
maintain a registration of qualified contractors for purposes of simplifying
administration of this requirement. Any such proof of insurance shall require
at least thirty (30) days' advance notice of cancellation or expiration to the
city.
   F.    Bond: A cash or surety bond in the amount specified by the city is
required prior to issue of a permit. The amount of bond will be determined and
set by the city. Bond will be released upon completion of all right of way work
and as built drawings are approved and accepted by the city and other agencies
as specified.
   G.    Permit Binding On Applicant: Any permit required by this chapter shall
be binding upon the applicant until all obligations established by the terms of
this chapter and by the terms of the specific permit have been complied with in
their entirety. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be
transferable to any other person or entity. The city may require written proof
that the person making application is a bona fide representative of the
identified permit applicant. (Ord. 378, 3-11-1994)
7-1-4: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:
Primary responsibility for construction inspection for new subdivisions shall
rest with the permittee's licensed professional engineer. The permittee's
engineer shall provide the city with documentation of compliance with city
construction standards and attendant construction observation necessary to
verify compliance, as required by the city. The city retains an absolute right
to inspect and to require production of test results to assure compliance with
city standards. If test results are not produced or inspection is impeded, the
permit may be revoked in the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 378, 3-11-1994)
7-1-5: INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT POLICY:
(Rep. by Ord. 417, 10-25-1996)
7-1-6: PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.    Material Noncompliance: Notwithstanding compliance with the
application procedure set forth in this chapter or with resolutions adopted
pursuant to this chapter, any permit issued pursuant to the authority
established by this chapter shall be revocable, for cause, in the sole
discretion of the city. Revocation may occur in summary fashion upon the
happening of any material noncompliance with permit terms, material
noncompliance with terms of this chapter or standards adopted pursuant to it,
or for such other substantial reason as the city might determine, including the
submittal of inaccurate or misleading information on any application.
   B.    Work Cessation: Revocation of any such permit shall require that work
cease unless specifically allowed to continue, by written order of the city, in
order to eliminate a hazard or to preserve the integrity of work in progress.
Issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not convey any ongoing
right to construct in or occupy any public right of way. The permission to
construct authorized by this chapter shall be revocable at will and without
recourse. All such permits are temporary and shall be effective only for the
limited time frame authorized in the permit.
   C.    Remedial Action: The city reserves the right to remedy any condition
associated with construction in a public right of way which it deems to pose an
imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The costs of said
remedial action shall constitute a charge against the permit applicant, which
cost shall be reimbursed to the city prior to restart of construction. (Ord.
378, 3-11-1994)
7-1-7: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. This chapter may
also be enforced by initiation of civil legal action to compel compliance with
the terms of this chapter or to restrain violation thereof. All costs of civil
enforcement shall be borne by the violator. (Ord. 378, 3-11-1994)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Permit Required
7-2-3: Construction Or Repair Specifications
7-2-4: Sidewalk Maintenance
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORIZED WHEELED TRAFFIC: Any wheeled mode of transportation specifically
designed to enhance the mobility of the physically handicapped or of children
not yet capable of walking.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: A strip of land within the platted public right of way, or an
easement adjacent to the right of way, and designated for either pedestrian
travel or as a multimodal pathway. Said sidewalk or multimodal pathway may be
constructed of concrete or asphalt. Sidewalks constructed of concrete are
restricted to use for pedestrian travel and authorized wheeled traffic.
Sidewalks constructed of asphalt for use as a multimodal pathway are restricted
to use for pedestrian travel, authorized wheeled traffic, bicycles and
nonmotorized skateboards. (Ord. 553, 12-10-2013)
7-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to work beginning on any sidewalk removal, replacement, construction or
repair, a permit must first be obtained through the office of the city clerk-
treasurer. (Ord. 321, 4-14-1987)
7-2-3: CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR SPECIFICATIONS:
Before any sidewalk is constructed or repaired upon a public right of way
within the corporate limits of the city, that person who shall perform such
work shall first obtain from the city written specifications to which such work
shall adhere. (Ord. 321, 4-14-1987)
7-2-4: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to maintain any
sidewalk and/or gutter abutting his/her property in a clean, litter/weed and
brush/snow/ice free condition, and to ensure that the surface of said sidewalk
is maintained in a safe and proper physical condition, said physical condition
presenting a flat, unbroken surface upon which foot and authorized wheeled
traffic shall traverse smoothly and unimpeded. This duty of the property owner
shall be continuously in effect whether or not the property owner has received
a notice from the city. If it becomes necessary for the city to clean or repair
the sidewalks abutting any private property, the city may assess the cost
thereof against the private property as provided in Idaho Code 50-1008. (Ord.
553, 12-10-2013)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
committing a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished in accordance with
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 321, 4-14-1987; amd. Ord. 553, 12-10-2013)
CHAPTER 3
ROAD NAMING AND ADDRESSING
SECTION:
7-3-1: General Provisions
7-3-2: Road Designations
7-3-3: Addressing Procedures
7-3-4: Road Naming
7-3-5: Signing
7-3-6: Administrative Procedures
7-3-7: Appeals
7-3-8: Controversial Or Disputed Road Names
7-3-9: Violation; Penalty
7-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.    Title: This chapter shall be known as the ROAD NAMING AND ADDRESSING
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE, IDAHO.
   B.    Authority: This chapter is authorized under the provisions of the
Idaho constitution article 12, section 2, and by Idaho Code title 50, chapter
13 and title 67, chapter 65, as amended and subsequently codified.
   C.    Purpose: This chapter further implements portions of the city's
comprehensive plan and supplements the zoning and subdivision ordinances. Its
purpose is to provide the residents of the city with a uniform and standardized
system of road naming and addressing to:
      1.    Minimize future road name and addressing conflicts.
      2.    Provide a database for city records and enhanced 911 service.
      3.    Expedite property identification by emergency services.
      4.    Comply with the following addressing guidelines: National Emergency
Number Association (NENA), "recommended abbreviations", GTE E911 addressing
guidelines, practice 444-400-015, and U.S. postal service publication 28 –
addressing.
   D.    Jurisdiction: These regulations shall apply to the naming of all
public and common private roads and the addressing of all structures and
parcels within the incorporated territory of the city, or mutually defined by
both city and Kootenai County under the requirements and authority of Idaho
Code section 67-6518, 50-1306 or 67-6526, as amended or subsequently modified.
   E.    Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all property and to all
public and private roads within the city.
   F.    Implementation And Responsibilities:
      1.    The city council shall have the authority to implement, enforce and
maintain the addressing and road naming standards as defined by this chapter.
      2.    In the event that violations of this chapter are not corrected by
the date required herein, the city may perform the work and bill the property
owner for the reasonable costs thereof.
      3.    Property owners are responsible for placing alphanumeric
identification in accordance with subsections
7-3-5 A and B of this chapter, and for erecting private road signs in
accordance with subsection
7-3-5 C of this chapter. Posting of addresses and road names must be done
within four (4) months of issuance of the address and road name.
      4.    The street department is authorized to erect and maintain public
road signs at public road intersections. Private road signs shall be erected as
required by this chapter.
      5.    The individual property owner, or the developer in the case of a
subdivision, is responsible for the designation of the access points on the
public or private roads and installation and maintenance of all required road
signs. These designated access points shall be utilized to determine the
address of the parcel. Except as such access points exist at the time of
adoption of the ordinance codified herein, all future access points shall
comply with this chapter and other ordinances of the city.
      6.    All addresses shall comply with the addressing guidelines outlined
in subsection C4 of this section to the extent that such compliance is
possible. The order of priority shall be NENA, GTE and USPS.
      7.    For the purposes of addressing, the city will hold and maintain all
official data.
      8.    The mayor and all administrative staff subject to the mayor's
supervision are hereby authorized to undertake such administrative steps as may
be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. In taking such steps,
city staff is encouraged to apply common sense and practicality to achieving
the ends intended by this chapter.
   G.    Guidelines Of Interpretation: Words used in the present tense include
the future; words used in singular number include the plural and vice versa.
The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "should" is directory, and the word
"may" indicates the use of discretion. Unless the subject matter clearly
requires otherwise, the words or phrases used shall have the meanings commonly
appropriate to their context and the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 470, 9-9-
2003)
7-3-2: ROAD DESIGNATIONS:
   A.    All named roads that extend from incorporated areas into
unincorporated areas shall retain the same name.
   B.    Roads that have a definite north-south directional course should be
designated as an "avenue". Roads that have a definite east-west directional
course should be designated as a "street".
   C.    Roads that do not have a definite directional course should be
designated as a "road", "drive", "trail", "way", or "lane".
   D.   A dead end road or cul-de-sac less than one thousand feet (1,000') in
length, when not an extension of an existing road or a continuation of a
proposed road, should be called a "court".
   E.   A road that has its ingress and egress on the same road should be
designated a "loop".
   F.    A road that circles back upon itself should be designated as a
"circle".
   G.    Special scenic routes or park drives may be designated "parkway" upon
review and approval by the administrator.
   H.   If a road accesses three (3) or more properties, it shall be assigned a
road name and the parcels shall be addressed in accordance with this chapter.
   I.    The naming of spur roads shall comply with subsection H of this
section.
   J.   Duplicate road names are prohibited. Existing duplicated names shall be
corrected in accordance with this chapter.
   K.    Road names which sound like other road names or which are not readily
capable of easy pronunciation or which would be distasteful to a reasonable
person are prohibited. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-3: ADDRESSING PROCEDURES:
   A.    Kootenai County Addressing Standard Adopted: Addressing along the city
roads shall be based on the address grid established by Kootenai County, which
is:
      Kootenai County shall be divided into four (4) quadrants with the address
origination point located at the southwest corner of Section 13, Township 50
North, Range 4 West, B.M., being approximately the intersection of Northwest
Boulevard and Government Way in the City of Coeur d'Alene as follows:
      A. To the north, from the origination point as defined above, to the
Kootenai County's north boundary.
      B. To the east, from the origination point as defined above, to the
Kootenai County's east boundary.
      C. To the south, from the origination point as defined above, through the
center of Coeur d'Alene Lake to Kootenai County's south boundary.
      D. To the west, from the origination point as defined above, to the
center of the Spokane River, then westerly down the center of the Spokane River
to Kootenai County's west boundary.
      E. From the point of beginning, 1600 address numbers will be added as
each section line is crossed (approximately 1600 units per mile).
   B.    General Procedures:
      1.   Address numbers will run consecutively to the north, south, east and
west from the point of beginning.
      2.    From the point of beginning, 1600 address numbers will be
designated per linear mile.
      3.    All addresses shall be defined with a direction letter (N, S, E, W)
predirectional following the address number, pursuant to the grid defined in
subsection A of this section (address grid) (example: 409 E. Maine).
      4.    Even numbers shall appear on the south and east sides of roads and
odd numbers on the north and west sides.
   C.    Addressing Roads:
      1.   If a building has a number of entrances, each serving a separate
occupant, then the building shall be assigned individual addresses at each
entrance.
      2.    A multi-family dwelling structure with one main entrance shall be
assigned one number, with the owner of the structure responsible for providing
a designated individual numbering of each unit before an address will be
issued.
      3.    Mobile home parks shall be assigned one number for each lot within
the park based on the addressing system coordinates. The owner of the mobile
home park shall be responsible for providing designated individual numbering of
each mobile home space. Roads within the mobile home park shall be signed
according to subsection
7-3-5 C of this chapter. Alphanumeric combinations shall not be used.
      4.    A diagonal or meandering road shall be assigned numbers depending
upon the address baseline that it most favors.
      5.   Circle and loop road direction designations shall be determined by
the road's predominate direction.
         a.   For circle roads, the numbering shall start at the intersection
point of the road closest to the address origination point and shall proceed in
a clockwise direction using a consecutive numerical order with the odd/even
numbers based on the starting point of the circle road as if the road were
straight.
         b.   For loop roads, the beginning of the road is designated by the
closest intersection to the origination point and increases numerically to that
point that is the farthest from the origination point.
      6.    Properties with structures, or bare land parcels, that have a
driveway shall be assigned an address based on a primary access point on a
named road or common driveway.
      7.    Properties that have multiple driveways shall have a designated
primary access point designated by the property owner that will be used for the
address assignment point. If this primary access point is not designated by the
property owner, the director shall make the official determination and
designate a primary access point that will be used for address assignment.
      8.    All public roads, private roads and common driveways shall be
assigned a road name and all adjacent parcels and/or structures with driveways
shall be addressed in accordance with this chapter.
      9.    Parcels accessed by a common right of way or easement where the
rule of three (3) does not apply shall be assigned a primary access point at
the point where the right of way or easement intersects a public road, private
road or common driveway centerline. This primary access point will be used to
assign an official address for each adjacent parcel.
      10.    All plats produced as a result of subdivisions, short plats,
planned unit developments, or other projects that require the establishment of
primary access points from public or private roads for driveways shall have
predesignated primary access points. These points shall be utilized to assign
addresses to the associated parcels. In all cases, the primary access points
shall be verified by the planning and building department prior to the receipt
of a certificate of occupancy for new structures to determine the actual
address. The property owner may be required to pay a fee to cover the costs
incurred to provide this service. If it becomes necessary to provide addresses
for other navigable lakes and water bodies within the city, addresses shall be
established starting at a readily identified point on the water body and the
above addressing convention will be applied. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-4: ROAD NAMING:
   A.    Road Naming Policy: In selecting road names, consideration shall be
given to the following:
      1.    Centerline alignment road name standards should be observed for
noncontinuous roads, unless there is no possibility for extension of the road
to make it a continuous through road.
      2.   There shall be no duplication of existing names. The city shall
assemble, update and maintain an official list of all road names throughout the
city for use by all jurisdictions.
      3.   Names of similar pronunciation and/or spelling shall be prohibited
(example: Briar Lane, Brier Lane).
      4.    Variations of the same name with a different road designation shall
be prohibited within the first word of the two (2) word title or in the road
extension (example: Pine Road, Pine Drive, White Pine Road, White Lilly Lane).
      5.   No road name shall consist of more than two (2) words or contain
more than fourteen (14) letters, excluding the road direction (N, S, E, W) and
extension (street, lane, court, etc.).
      6.    No road shall have more than one name.
      7.   No road name shall contain the words "north", "south", "east" or
"west", or any combination thereof, within the road name.
   B.    Naming Of New Roads Or Existing Unnamed Roads: Any new road to be
established within city, public or private, or any existing unnamed road,
public or private, shall require a road name approved by the city director.
      1.   In the case of plats, approved road names shall be specified on the
final plat map.
      2.    In the case of other new roads or naming of unnamed roads, the
owner or owners and/or contract buyers of properties abutting said road, may
petition, in writing on a form provided by the city, to the city council, to
request an official name for a new road. The council shall give due
consideration to any and all road name petitions, only after all road naming
requirements of this chapter are met. The council shall officially designate
the road name having the greatest percentage of approval in the event a fifty
one percent (51%) approval is not obtained.
   C.    Renaming Of Existing Duplicated Road Names:
      1.    Where duplicate names exist, roads may be immediately renamed by
the council to eliminate the duplication. The council shall decide which roads
shall be renamed using the following criteria:
         a.   When the road was originally named.
         b.    The number of improved properties served by the road.
         c.   Other factors as deemed appropriate by the city council.
      2.   When a road name within the unincorporated area adjacent to the city
is duplicated by a road name within the city, the city shall work with Kootenai
County to decide which road shall be renamed. Roads shall be renamed in
accordance with this chapter and similar ordinance provisions of Kootenai
County. Consistency is the goal.
   D.    Official Designation Of Existing Road Names: With the adoption of this
chapter, all roads named as a result of the Kootenai County mapping and
addressing project for enhanced 911 shall be designated as the official road
names. By resolution, the city council should confirm the approved list of
street and road names. Subsequent adjustments and changes may be made by
further resolutions.
   E.    Renaming Of Other Roads: In cases where property owners request to
change the name of a road which has an existing city approved name, the
property owners may petition the city council for such a change. Property owner
initiated requests under this subsection shall require seventy five percent
(75%) approval of property owners abutting the road and the payment of an
applicable fee. Changes shall only be authorized when determined to be in the
public interest. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-5: SIGNING:
   A.    Address Numbers: Physical address numbers shall be clearly readable
from the roadway, and shall contrast with background color pursuant to the
international fire code. If a structure is more than seventy five feet (75')
from the road, or is otherwise not clearly visible from the road, its address
shall be posted at the intersection of its access road and public or private
road. The address sign shall be no less than four feet (4') or more than six
feet (6') above the ground on a substantial, maintained post or standard. The
view of the address from the road must be unobstructed and maintained. All
primary letters, numbers and symbols shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in
height, with a one-half inch (1/2") stroke, and shall be reflectorized and
contrasting with the background color.
   B.    Signs: Road signs shall be placed between six feet (6') and eight feet
(8') above the roadway, clearly visible at intersections. All primary letters,
numbers and symbols shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in height, with a
one-half inch (1/2") stroke, and shall be reflectorized and contrasting with
the background color of the sign in accordance with the "Manual Of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices". Specifically, public road signs shall be green with
white lettering. Private road signs shall be blue with white letters. All
public and private road signs shall be constructed and installed to the
standards of the street department and shall include the road name and address
number derived from the grid. Private road signs shall be erected consistent
with the construction standards or methods employed by the street department.
   C.    Road Sign Installation Standards: Proper positioning of signs is
essential to obtain maximum safety, efficiency and observance. The "Manual For
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) establishes such standards within the
city. The street department may require compliance with standards for sign
placement applicable to the department. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
The city council may, by resolution, adopt formal administrative procedures;
create fee schedules, etc., to facilitate implementation of the purpose and
intent of this chapter. The mayor is authorized to take such steps as may be
necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-7: APPEALS:
Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter may be
filed by any affected person. Such appeals shall be filed within a reasonable
time of the action being appealed, not to exceed thirty (30) days, by filing
with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal.
The clerk shall transmit to the mayor all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed was taken. The council shall schedule the item for a
hearing to be commenced promptly after filing a completed notice of appeal and
shall give due notice to the parties of interest. The mayor shall decide the
matter as circumstances allow. The decision of the mayor may be appealed to the
city council. Enforcement actions may not be appealed. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-8: CONTROVERSIAL OR DISPUTED ROAD NAMES:
The council shall have the discretion to refer any disputed road name;
addressing issues or controversial road name changes to the mayor for approval
or resolution. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
7-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.    Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Erect or install a street name sign not in accordance with this
chapter;
      2.    Remove, alter, change or deface a street name sign or address
identification erected or installed as provided herein;
      3.    Place or post addresses not approved by this chapter; or
      4.    Fail to place an address visible from the road and/or waterway.
   B.    Penalty: Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as authorized by Idaho Code section 50-
302. (Ord. 470, 9-9-2003)
CHAPTER 4
DOMESTIC WATER ORDINANCE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Ownership And Management Of Water System
7-4-3: Installation, Additions To, Operation And Maintenance Of Water System
7-4-4: Service Connection And Associated Fees
7-4-5: Installation Of Remote Meters; Monthly And Other Service Rates, Fees And
Charges; Abuse Of Flat Monthly Rate
7-4-6: Deposit
7-4-7: Notification Of Charges
7-4-8: Delinquent Account; Shutoff And Liability For Payment
7-4-9: Dwelling Without Water Service Declared A Health Hazard And A Public
Nuisance
7-4-10: Unlawful Act
7-4-11: Penalty For Violation
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BASIC ALLOWANCE: Twelve thousand (12,000) gallons per calendar month.
LATERAL DISTRIBUTION LINE: The section of piping that delivers water from the
main distribution line to the property line of the user, also known as a
service line.
MAIN DISTRIBUTION LINE: Any line owned and maintained by the city that delivers
water to the lateral distribution line.
OTHER BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES: Any building or structures not described in the
definition of Single-Family Residence.
SATISFACTORY WATER ACCOUNT CREDIT RATING: A. A person who has held a water
account, in his/her name, with the city of Spirit Lake for the past six (6)
consecutive months within which the water associated charges for each month
were paid in full on or before the tenth day of the following month, or
   B.   That a person who closed a water account with the city of Spirit Lake
within the past twelve (12) months did, at the time of closing the account,
possess the same good record of paying on time as described in subsection A of
this definition.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: Any building designed to be utilized as a residence
for one family. This definition shall include a single manufactured or mobile
home which is not located on a rented space in a mobile home park. (Ord. 485,
5-17-2005)
7-4-2: OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF WATER SYSTEM:
Through the enactment of ordinances and council resolutions, the city council
shall exercise policy making control over the city's municipal water system.
The mayor shall administer the day to day operation of said system within the
policy guidelines established by the council by ordinance and resolution.
Regardless of who shall have borne the cost of installing any part of the city
water system, that part, once installed and approved by and accepted by the
city engineer and the city council, shall become the property of the city,
subject to any rights of guarantee accompanying such decision. This standard
may be varied only with the express consent of the city council. (Ord. 485, 5-
17-2005)
7-4-3: INSTALLATION, ADDITIONS TO, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER SYSTEM:
   A.    City Maintains And Operates: The city will maintain and operate the
city water system from the source of the water supply up to, and including, the
water meter where one is installed on the individual water service line. If the
water meter is found to have been installed within the property boundary of
landowner, but without a documented easement, any person shall be deemed to
have granted an easement across his/her property to allow the city access to
the water meter. If this implied easement is not satisfactory to the landowner,
it will be the landowner's financial responsibility to have the service
connection and water meter moved by the city, or the city's designee to a
location where the city has documented easement rights to access the water
meter. In addition to such costs, the property owner is responsible for all
costs of meter relocation and of meter connection and the costs of reconnection
of any private water service line made necessary by the relocation of any meter
as provided by this section. If such implied easement is not acknowledged and
accepted by the property owner, or if the property owner refuses to pay for the
relocation of a meter so affected, water service to the premises may be
terminated after notice to the property owner until such permission or water
meter movement has been accomplished. No person shall receive water from the
city water system without providing ready access to the water meter to allow
reading and maintenance thereof.
   B.    Installation Of Laterals (Service Lines): All cost of lateral
installation, including labor, materials and equipment time, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner whose lands are served thereby. The city
shall, in its sole discretion, determine if the city crew shall install any
lateral line. If it is determined that the city will not make installation, the
landowner must retain a licensed and bonded plumbing contractor to make
installation. Such licensed contractor shall make the installation under the
direct supervision of the city's public works staff. It may be determined by
the mayor or public works director that it would be in the city's best
interests to make the installation of any lateral with city forces. If
conditions are such that the city's crew makes the installation of the lateral,
a lateral installation fee as determined by resolution of the city council,
shall be prepaid by the landowner. This lateral installation fee is in addition
to regular water hookup fees which are to be paid at time of obtaining building
permit.
   C.    Liability For Damage: Whenever an agent or person other than the city
work crew, performs any excavation in the public right of way that results in
damage to the city's utility system, the cost of repairing any such damage to
city utilities shall be borne by that agent or person causing such damage, or
by the landowner who employed him/her. No excavation shall begin until response
has been received from the state mandated one call service.
   D.    Property Owner Bears Cost Of Materials: The cost of pipe, meters,
meter boxes, connective joints, shutoff valves, fire hydrants and all other
necessary materials for any given lateral installation and hookup shall be paid
for by the landowner. (Ord. 430, 8-22-1998)
7-4-4: SERVICE CONNECTION AND ASSOCIATED FEES:
   A.   Water Hookup Fee: Prior to connecting to the city water system, users
shall pay a hookup fee for capital maintenance and capacity expansion in the
amount set by resolution of the city council.
   B.    Single-Family Residence: Each standard service connection is a one
inch (1") meter and shall service one residence only. In the event that a
single-family residence has installed a meter that is larger than the standard
service connection, the user fees will be charged at the rates established by
resolution for commercial service of an equivalent meter size.
   C.    Other Buildings Or Structures: Whenever a service connection is to any
building or for any use that is not a permanent family residence, it is
considered a commercial service and shall pay the user fee set for the size of
meter that has been installed, with the minimum fee being the fee for a one
inch (1") meter.
   D.    Service Outside Of City Limits; Special Approval Required: No service
connection to property located outside the corporate limits of the city of
Spirit Lake shall be authorized without express approval by the city council.
   E.   Fees Paid In Full; Building Permit: The hookup fee and a water
construction non-refundable fee shall be paid at the time of the issuance of a
building permit. No building permit shall be issued until such fees are paid in
full.
   F.   Turnoff And Turnon Fees: Any time that the water is either turned on or
shut off at the meter by the city staff due to a request or actions of the
customer, the customer shall pay a turnoff or turnon fee in an amount set by
resolution of the council.
   G.   Multi-Family Structures: Each unit of a multi-family structure shall
have a separate service connection. (Ord. 501, 7-11-2006; amd. Ord. 620, 4-7-
2021)
7-4-5: INSTALLATION OF REMOTE METERS; MONTHLY AND OTHER SERVICE RATES, FEES AND
CHARGES; ABUSE OF FLAT MONTHLY RATE:
   A.    Installation Of Remote Meters: Whenever the city determines that it is
necessary to assure ready access to meter supplied information, a water meter
with a remote, electrically powered readout, shall be installed, said readout
to be placed outside of a structure in a manner and location readily visible to
a meter reader. Whenever such installation shall be required, the costs thereof
shall be borne by the landowner.
   B.    Charges For Service: The charges, rates and fees for the various water
services shall be those established by council resolution, subject to change as
the council deems necessary. Each unit in a building with multiple units shall
be considered a separate service for the purpose of calculating the water
service charges.
   C.    Hauling Of Water: Drawing water from the city water system for the
purpose of hauling or transporting it away shall be done only under the
supervision of an officer or employee of the city, and then only after the
applicable fees and deposits have been paid to the city clerk. Said fee may be
set by resolution of the city.
   D.    Open Account Required Prior To Drawing Water: Whenever a water hookup
service has been installed to provide city water service to a property, no
water shall be drawn through that hookup by an owner, tenant or guest of either
if there is not currently on file with the city clerk an open water account for
that service. The fact that water service may be on at the time an owner,
tenant or guest of either should move onto a property shall not relieve such
person from the requirements of this section. The city may, without further
notice, shut off any service which is used without establishing an account. Any
person using water from the city system without establishing an account shall
be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 485, 5-17-2005)
7-4-6: DEPOSIT:
   A.    Deposit May Be Required: All new customers and any customer who does
not currently possess a satisfactory water credit rating with the city shall,
prior to a water account being established or continued in his/her name, pay a
deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council.
   B.    Deposit May Be Applied To The Account Balance: Any customer having a
water deposit on file with the city shall, upon acquiring a satisfactory water
credit rating, be entitled to have the deposit applied to payment on the
account. However, if a satisfactory water credit rating should subsequently be
lost because of delinquency of an account, another deposit, in accordance with
subsection A of this section shall become due and payable to the city
immediately. If said deposit is not paid within ten (10) days, the account
shall be considered delinquent and shall be processed in accordance with
section
7-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 475, 5-11-2004)
7-4-7: NOTIFICATION OF CHARGES:
It is the policy of the city to mail monthly billing statements to all utility
accounts as a courtesy. Irrespective of whether a billing statement has been
received, all city utility accounts are due the first day of each month. Any
water associated charges accrued during any month shall be deemed past due
after the twentieth day of the succeeding month. (Ord. 430, 8-22-1998)
7-4-8: DELINQUENT ACCOUNT; SHUTOFF AND LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
   A.    Delinquent Account: An account becomes delinquent when it has gone
into the subsequent billing cycle without full payment. Delinquent accounts
shall be assessed a late charge in an amount to be set by resolution of the
city council. Whenever an account becomes delinquent, the city clerk shall
notify any tenant and landowner of the property concerned, by U.S. mail, that,
unless a payment in the amount determined by the most recent bill is received
by the city within five (5) working days after the mailing of said notice,
water service to the property will be discontinued. In determining the amount
due, a cost of preparation mailing charge for such mailed notices, as
prescribed by resolution of the city council, shall first be added to the
account balance.
   B.    Shut Off Delinquent Account: In the event that the notice mailed in
accordance with subsection A of this section does not result in payment of the
bill or the filing of an appeal, then, on the day following the expiration of
the time limit for the city's receipt of such a payment, the city may
disconnect the service.
      1.    Appeal: Appeals shall be heard by the mayor or the mayor's designee
and the decision shall be final.
   C.    Property Owner Ultimately Liable For Bills And Damage:
      1.    All water accounts under this chapter shall be opened and
maintained by the owner of record or contract purchaser of record of the
property to be served. Such owner or purchaser shall agree, as a condition of
opening any water service account, to be liable for any service or other
charges imposed because of such water services, whether such charges are the
consequence of use of water or provision of service by the owner or by tenants
who have agreed to pay utility charges. The record owner of real property is
ultimately responsible for all utility charges which are the obligation of the
property served.
      2.    Unpaid water bills and water associated services shall be the
ultimate obligation of the owner of the property served. Any property receiving
service from the city water system may be disconnected if said services are not
paid for as required herein. An owner may allow a tenant to pay utility charges
while the tenant is in possession of rented premises, but such action shall not
relieve the owner of the ultimate responsibility for the charges accruing to
the account.
      3.    The city's cost of repairing or replacing any meter, shutoff valve
or other related part of the water system having been damaged by any person
other than a city officer or employee shall be the legal and financial
obligation of the owner of the property. Owners are responsible for the acts of
their tenants, contractors or permissive users. (Ord. 475, 5-11-2004)
7-4-9: DWELLING WITHOUT WATER SERVICE DECLARED A HEALTH HAZARD AND A PUBLIC
NUISANCE:
The human habitation of any residence or use of any other building or structure
for purposes other than warehousing or storage of nonperishable goods or
commodities where no workers regularly labor without a ready supply of running
potable water whether from the city system or other authorized source, inside
of such dwelling or other structure shall constitute a health hazard and a
public nuisance. In such circumstances the city may cause proceedings to be
brought for the abatement of the occupancy or use of such a place.
   A.    Habitation Of Dwelling Without Water Service Unlawful: The human
habitation of any residential dwelling or other building or structure without a
required source of running potable water as required by this chapter shall be
unlawful and subject to the penalty described in section
7-4-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 430, 8-22-1998)
7-4-10: UNLAWFUL ACT:
Every part of the city water system up to, and including, any shutoff valve
and/or meter, which may be installed at or near the property line of any lot,
is the property of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to,
interfere or tamper with, turn on or off, permit connection or delivery of
water to third persons for use within a residence or other building not
otherwise provided with water service in accordance with this chapter, or to
operate or introduce any substance into any part of the city water system
unless that person is acting under the direct supervision of a qualified
employee of the city or first obtains express written permission from the
mayor. (Ord. 430, 8-22-1998)
7-4-11: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person found to be guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
committing a misdemeanor offense. Each and every violation and each and every
day or part of a day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The penalty for misdemeanor offenses is that prescribed by the most current
Spirit Lake city ordinance prescribing the penalty for misdemeanor offenses.
(Ord. 430, 8-22-1998)
ARTICLE A.  INDIVIDUAL WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Water And Wastewater Systems
7-4A-1-1:    Applicability And Compliance
7-4A-2: Exceptions
7-4A-3: Procedures (Rep. by Ord. 489, 9-6-2005)
7-4A-4: Violations And Penalties
7-4A-1: WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
7-4A-1-1: APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.    No person shall initiate construction of any dwelling or other
occupiable structure within the corporate limits of the city of Spirit Lake
except in full compliance with the provisions of this article. All proposed
dwellings and other occupiable structures shall henceforth be connected to city
of Spirit Lake municipal water and sewer.
   B.    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the structure is
connected to the city of Spirit Lake municipal water and wastewater services.
(Ord. 489, 9-6-2005)
7-4A-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The limitations set forth in the foregoing section shall not apply to a valid
site specific septic tank drain field permit issued by Panhandle health
district, or an individual established well permitted by the Idaho department
of water resources and tested by Idaho department of environmental quality, and
Panhandle health prior to the effective date hereof. Upon failure of an
existing valid drain field or failure of an existing permitted well, the
property shall be connected to the city of Spirit Lake municipal sewer or water
system by the property owner. (Ord. 489, 9-6-2005)
7-4A-3: PROCEDURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 489, 9-6-2005)
7-4A-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.    Penalty For Violations: Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months,
or both for each violation.
   B.    Violations Of Continuing Nature: For any violation of a continuing
nature, each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall
subject the offender to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section
for each offense.
   C.    Action To Require Compliance: Notwithstanding the imposition of any
penalties hereunder, the city may institute an appropriate civil action or
proceeding to require compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord.
434, 10-31-1998)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Cross-Connections Prohibited
7-5-3: Approved Cross-Connection Control Devices
7-5-4: Inspection; Testing; Discontinued Service
7-5-5: Consumer-Owned Water Shutoff; Water Heater Pressure Relief Valves
Required
7-5-6: City Record Keeping
7-5-7: Separability
7-5-8: Penalty
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BACKFLOW: The flow of nonpotable water, liquids, gasses or other foreign
substance into the pipes of a potable water system from any source or sources.
CITY: The City of Spirit Lake, Kootenai County, Idaho.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement
between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or
system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable
system used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended
potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other
temporary or permanent devices which or because of which "backflow" can or may
occur are cross-connections.
CONSUMER: The owner of any real property served by the Municipal water system
of the City of Spirit Lake.
OPERATIONAL: Correctly installed and capable of performing the function for
which it was designed.
PREMISES: That real property, and all structures and improvements situated upon
it, belonging to a consumer. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88)
7-5-2: CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
The current existence of, the installation of, or the maintenance of any cross-
connection which could result in the introduction of backflow into any part of
the potable water system owned and operated by the City shall be unlawful and
shall be abated immediately by the installation of an approved cross-connection
control device. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88)
7-5-3: APPROVED CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.    That device utilized to prevent or eliminate a cross- connection and,
thus, prevent backflow, shall be of a type prescribed by part 01.8900,09, Table
9, Selection Chart for Idaho Backflow Prevention Devices, of "Idaho Department
of Health and Welfare Rules and Regulations", title 1, chapter 8.
   B.    That type of device selected in conformance with subsection 7-5-3A
shall be of a design approved by Chapter II, "Cross- Connection Devices", and
such a device shall be installed in accordance with Chapter IV, "Recommended
Installation Practice", both contained in the latest edition of the publication
"Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross-connection Control Manual", published
by Pacific Northwest Section, American Water Works Committee. (Ord. 328, 3-8-
88)
7-5-4: INSPECTION; TESTING; DISCONTINUED SERVICE:
   A.    Inspection: Not less than once each year, the City shall inspect all
facilities in Idaho Department of Health and Welfare Rules and Regulations,
section 01.8900,09 to locate cross-connections and determine the required
corrective action. The City shall charge no fee for this service.
   B.    Testing: The consumer shall ensure that each backflow prevention
device is tested upon installation, after repairs to said device, and
thereafter on a yearly basis. The City may remind the consumer when an annual
test is due, but the City's failure to issue a reminder shall not absolve the
consumer of the responsibilities to ensure that such a test is performed. The
full cost of installation, repairs and testing shall be borne by the consumer.
Each installation, repair or test shall be performed by an American Water Works
Association certified inspector. A record of each installation or repair,
accompanied by a copy of a satisfactory final test shall be delivered to the
City by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. of the following working day at City Hall,
and the failure to deliver such records to the City on time shall result in the
discontinuance of water service to the affected premises until said records
have been received by the City. The City shall be in receipt of the
satisfactory test results of a required annual test within five (5) calendar
days after the anniversary date of the last test or water service to the
applicable premises shall be discontinued until such satisfactory test results
have been received by the City. Water turn-ons associated with the receipt by
the City of satisfactory test results shall be made during the normal working
hours of City maintenance personnel.
   C.    Discontinuance Of Service: The City shall discontinue water services
to any facility where an approved, operational backflow prevention device is
not currently installed to protect against each cross-connection.
   D.    Free Access By Inspectors: The City shall ensure that each City cross-
connection control inspector shall possess proper identification. Upon
presentation of said identification, each inspector shall have free access, at
reasonable hours of the day, to all parts of a premises to which the City
supplies potable water. For this purpose, the term reasonable hours of the day
shall mean sometime within a continuous forty eight (48) hour period and during
the City inspector's normal working hours. In the event that free access,
during said reasonable hours of the day, to inspect should be denied or
otherwise not possible, for whatever reason not that of the City, then water
service to such a premises may be discontinued, after giving notice in the
manner provided in subsection 7-4-9B of this Title, until such time that a City
inspector has gained access to said premises and has completed an inspection to
his/her satisfaction. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88; 1995 Code)
7-5-5: CONSUMER-OWNED WATER SHUTOFF; WATER HEATER PRESSURE RELIEF VALVES
REQUIRED:
   A.   Consumer Owned Water Shutoff: In addition to any City-owned and
operated water shut-off valve to a premises, each premises shall have installed
consumer-owned, operational, water shut- off valves of sufficient number and
location to effectively isolate all water outlets on the premises from the City
water supply.
   B.    Water Heater Pressure Relief Valve: Each operational water heater
situated upon a premises shall have installed on it an operational pressure
relief valve.
   C.    Refusal Of Service: The City shall refuse to provide initial water
service to or, in the event that an existing water service has been, for
whatever reason, discontinued or interrupted, to resume water service to any
premises until the shut-off valve(s) prescribed by subsection 7-5-5A and the
pressure relief valve(s) prescribed by subsection 7-5-5B have been installed by
the consumer and are operational. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88)
7-5-6: CITY RECORD KEEPING:
The City shall maintain a permanent cross-connection file folder for each
premises that has been inspected, and said file folder shall contain the
physical location on the premises and the type of cross-connection control
device installed, when that device was installed, a description of the cross-
connection it is protecting, all testing dates and results, any recommended
corrective action, the date that corrective action was inspected, the results
of that inspection, any extraordinary action such as water shut off, legal,
etc., that is taken by the City, and all correspondence and any other
information that may be obtained concerning that cross-connection. (Ord. 328,
3-8-88)
7-5-7: SEPARABILITY:
If, at some future time, any mechanical device required by this Chapter shall
be held by the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare to be unsuitable for use,
then that device deemed suitable and acceptable by that State Department shall
be substituted for the device required by this Chapter. If any part of this
Chapter should for any reason be held invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining parts of this Chapter. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88)
7-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to be guilty of violating this Chapter shall be punished in
accordance with Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 328, 3-8-88)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER USE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
7-6-1: Sewer System And Fees Established
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Hookup Fee
7-6-4: Monthly Fees
7-6-5: Building Sewer Construction
7-6-6: Use Of Public Sewer
7-6-7: Food Waste Disposal Units
7-6-8: Building Connections
7-6-9: Enforcement
7-6-10: Miscellaneous Provisions
7-6-1: SEWER SYSTEM AND FEES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Establishment: It is necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the city inhabitants and to provide equitable fees upon all lots,
lands, property and premises served by the sanitary sewer system. Said system
and facilities consist generally of manholes, sewer mains, interceptors, as
well as the provision for treatment and disposal of sewage. The city council
may define the various types of sewer connections and set all connection fees
and service fees by resolution at a city council meeting.
   B.   Availability: The city will make the service of the system available
within its capacity to all persons in the city’s service area without
discrimination as to race, color, religion or national origin. The city sewer
service area is currently confined to those areas within the city corporate
limits having sewer service available.
   C.   Capacity: Sewer storage capacity shall not exceed eighty percent (80%)
of the maximum calculated equivalent residential units (ERU) user equivalents
as determined by the City Engineer and Sewer Treatment Plant Operator.
   D.   System Fees: That system of fees for the use of the sanitary sewer
collection and treatment system is necessary and that those fees will
differentiate among the different types of users of the system to ensure
equitable fees for the various categories. The fee from each user shall be used
for the operation and maintenance of the system. The user fees shall be
proportional to the estimated or measured flow contribution of each user to the
system. Similar uses shall be treated in a like manner. Fees assessed by the
city shall be reviewed periodically and may be revised as needed to address
operation and maintenance costs and capital facility needs. (Ord. 448, 7-11-
2000; amd. Ord. 605, 10-16-2019)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
APARTMENT HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof which is designed to be
occupied or which is occupied as a home of three (3) or more families living
independently of each other.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under a standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in milligram per
liter.
BASE RATE: The rate charged to cover depreciation, amortization and debt
service of the system.
BUILDING (HOUSE) DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives discharge from other drainage pipes inside the walls of
the building, and conveys it to the building sewer beginning three feet (3')
outside the wall of the building.
BUILDING (HOUSE) SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the main line.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS: Shall include any property, building or
structures used for any business activity, trade, or profession; and shall
include, but not be limited to, garages, service stations, wholesale and retail
stores, laundries, dry cleaners, restaurants, bars, barbershops, beauty shops,
schools, churches, public building, and all other not specifically defined as
residential buildings.
CONDOMINIUM: Any building or complex of buildings which is designed to be owned
and occupied as a home of four (4) or more families living independently of
each other where the condominium complex has a sewer line and is organized as a
condominium regime pursuant to Idaho Code title 55, chapter 15. Each
condominium unit shall be designed with a separate building drain to be
connected to a public sewer.
DUPLEX: A building designed to be or which is occupied by two (2) independent
family units, and shall include a single-family residence in which an apartment
or separate living facility has been provided.
HOOKUP FEE: The hookup fee is a fee made by the city to permit the connection
and discharge of wastewater to the city's sewer system. The basis of a hookup
fee is to compensate for the value of capital facilities used by each user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
MONTHLY SERVICE FEE: A fee made by the city to owners of residential,
commercial, or industrial buildings, for the right to discharge sewage from
said buildings to the public sewer system.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings on the same premises, either detached
or in connected rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units, but without
kitchen facilities in the individual units, and designed for or occupied by
travelers. A motel with kitchen facilities in the individual units will be
considered as an apartment house. A motel with a commercial building on the
same premises, both of which are served through one service connection, will be
considered as a commercial building.
pH: The base-10 logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydronium
ions in grams per liter of solution.
PUBLIC SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, which is controlled by
public authority.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Shall include single-family residences and duplexes for
the purpose of establishing sewer service charges.
SANITARY SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage from developed land uses
to which storm water, surface water, and ground water are not intentionally
admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION: A public sewer, which has been constructed from a public
sewer main for the sole purpose of providing connection for the building sewer.
A service connection is located within the public right of way or easement.
SEWAGE: A combination of water carried waste from residential buildings,
commercial building and industrial building, together with such ground water,
surface water, and storm water as cannot be excluded.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building designed for and used exclusively for
residence purpose by one family. This definition shall include a single trailer
not located in a trailer court.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface or are in a
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtration: reported in milligrams per liter.
TRAILER COURT: Any area or site of land upon which two (2) or more trailers are
placed and maintained for dwelling purposes only, either on a permanent or
semipermanent basis.
USER EQUIVALENT: One residential user equivalent is designated as the service
to a typical single-family dwelling. All other connections are prorated in
relation to residential user equivalents based on the estimated usage of or
benefit derived from the service. The user equivalent shall be based on the
contribution to the system of the flow, BOD and suspended solids from a typical
residential dwelling as given below:
 
Flow                200 gallons per day (6,000 gallons per month)
BOD                 0.51 pounds per day
Suspended solids    0.51 pounds per day
 
   (Ord. 448, 7-11-2000)
7-6-3: HOOKUP FEE:
The hookup fee for all residential, public, commercial and industrial buildings
shall be established as follows:
   A.   Hookup Fee: The hookup fee shall be established by resolution and
subject to adjustments from time to time by the city council. The sewer hookup
fee revenue shall be kept in a reserve account known as the sewer
capitalization and capitalization reinvestment account. The hookup fee revenue
shall be used for the purpose of funding future sewage treatment plant
expansion; material storage facilities as well as sewage collection and
transmission system upgrades to replace that consumed by new connections to the
system.
   B.   Service Connection Line: The service connection line shall be furnished
and installed at the expense of the property owner. The installation must be
done by a state licensed plumber licensed to perform the work. Actual hookup to
the main line must be properly inspected by a city employee who has been
authorized to perform said inspection. Once the service connection line has
been completed and properly inspected to the city's satisfaction, the service
line shall be maintained by the property owner from the building connection up
to and including the connection at the main line. Each residential or duplex
service connection line shall be at least one line at four inches (4")
diameter. Each sewer line tap shall require payment of a hookup fee for each
additional connection (connection requirements for multi-family dwellings).
Each hookup, if approved, shall be prorated according to the additional user
equivalents served by the line and other considerations specific to that
request in accordance with the requirements established by the city.
   C.   Sewer Main Line Extension: A sewer main line extension shall not have
an inside diameter of less than eight inches (8") unless the existing main line
to which it shall be connected is less than eight inches (8") in diameter. The
city shall direct the use of pipe larger than eight inches (8") in diameter
whenever it shall deem it necessary. The property owner requesting a sewer main
line extension shall submit engineered drawings and shall bear the entire cost
of such an extension. The sewer main line extension shall be done by a state
licensed public works contractor and be subject to all laws governing public
works contractors. All public works contractors shall carry all risk liability
insurance with a per occurrence minimum of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). The property owner shall be responsible for the city
engineering fees incurred to review and inspect the sewer line as billed by the
city. No connection shall be allowed unless such fees are paid. (Ord. 448, 7-
11-2000)
7-6-4: MONTHLY FEES:
   A.   The minimum monthly user service fee for all users shall be based on
one residential equivalent connection per residence. This service fee will be
established by resolution and will be subject to periodic change by the city
council. The purpose of the monthly service fee is to pay for system
maintenance and operation, including depreciation of the public sewer system.
All other service connections shall be prorated as to the number of residential
user equivalents assigned to that user by this chapter or as determined by the
city council based on historical metered water usage or other special
circumstances. Sewer service fees as determined by water usage per equivalent
for nonsingle- family residences shall be established by resolution. The
monthly sewer billing will be included in conjunction with the periodic water
bill. Payment shall be due as for water service. The city is hereby authorized
to shut off city supplied water to a delinquent sewer customer, to physically
disconnect the sewer service connection to any property, or to seek such other
legal remedy as may be necessary to discontinue into the sewer system, if the
monthly sewer service fee for that property is delinquent, or if use by the
property is in violation of the Sewer Use Ordinance. The service connection may
be disconnected or otherwise blocked if the delinquent charge or ordinance
violation continues for more than ten (10) days after the City has notified the
property owner of the pending disconnection. The property owner is required to
pay the City all expenses related to disconnecting the service connection
before issuance of a reconnection permit. All back charges and fees shall be
paid in full before reconnection. An applicable fee as set forth by resolution
will be charged in the event the water is turned on after a shutoff for a
delinquent account or for nonpayment of sewer charges. It shall be unlawful to
occupy or use a structure to which sewer service has been disconnected.
   B.    Existing and future nonresidential establishments may be assessed
additional user fees based on water meter reading if water usage exceeds the
established monthly allowance of user equivalents or if other extraordinary
treatment requirements must be met.
   C.    Where a residence, apartment(s), retail store or other commercial
establishment is provided sewer service in conjunction with another
establishment in the same building, the minimum user equivalent rating for that
building shall be determined based on the number of establishments contained
therein. (For example, a retail store with a residence attached would be rated
at a minimum of 2 residential user equivalents. A commercial/office building
with 3 apartments would be rated at 4 user equivalents, minimum.) (Ord. 517, 5-
29-2008)
   D.    The following schedule lists a number of users and the number of user
equivalents assigned to each user. All other users shall require special
appraisal by the Council and will be computed on an individual basis.
SCHEDULE OF USER EQUIVALENTS/CHARGES
Classification Number Of User Equivalents
Classification                                       Number Of User Equivalents
Apartments (see Multiple living unit)                 
Bar (per 40 seats or fraction thereof)               1
Barbershop, per chair (minimum 1.00)                 0.5
Beauty salon, per operator station (minimum 1.00)    1
Boarding house, main unit                            1
 Additional units/rooms                             0.5
Car wash (per bay minimum or based on water usage)   2
Church                                               1
Condominium (see Multiple living unit)                
Doctor or dentist, per practitioner                  1
Duplex (see Multiple living unit)                     
Garage (per 3,000 square feet)                       1
Laundromats:                                          
 Self-service (up to and including 12 washing       5
  machines)
 (Each machine in excess of 12)                     0.40
 Commercial (to be computed on an individual basis)  
Mobile home court/park, per space                    1
Mobile home or trailer house on own premises         1
Motel, hotel, bed and breakfast, etc.:                
 First unit                                         1
 Each additional unit                               0.50
Multiple living unit:                                 
 Each unit                                          1
Office building for each 2,500 square feet of gross  1
floor space or fraction thereof
Recreational vehicle hookup in RV park               0.50
Restaurant, 32 seats or fraction thereof             1
Retail or business establishment for each 3,000
square feet of retail floor space or fraction        1
thereof
Schools, per 6,000 gallons average monthly water
usage (water usage that is in excess of 6,000        0.50
gallons, but not in multiples of 6,000 gallons, will
be calculated on a fractional equivalent)
Service station:                                      
 Gas and restroom service only                      2
Single-family residence                              1
Theater                                              1 per 50 seats
 
(Ord. 517, 5-29-2008; amd. Ord. 598, 6-11-2019)
The above hookup fees are based upon typical monthly sewer usage as
contemplated by standards set forth herein. Such standards shall be subject to
adjustment from time to time by the City Council. An initial hookup fee is only
an estimate based upon reasonable expectations regarding use and discharge.
Increases in discharge amounts as reflected by measured water usage or other
indications may authorize charging additional hookup fees at any time. Any such
change shall be communicated to the sewer user before it is imposed, and such
user shall be provided an opportunity to be heard before the City Council if
said user contests the additional hookup fee. Such additional hookup fees may
be allocated over a twelve (12) month period subject to approval by the Mayor.
   E.    When sewer services are voluntarily discontinued by request of the
owner, the base rate shall apply. Full sewer service fees will resume
immediately upon water service turn on.
   F.    Industrial users or other businesses with industrial waste, and uses
not categorized above or not clearly defined as being within one or more of the
above classifications shall be charged at a rate to be determined by the Mayor,
subject to appeal to the City Council, upon application of the property owner,
after considering all relevant evidence pertaining thereto at a public hearing
held for such purpose. The rate shall be established based upon consideration
of the nature and intensity of the proposed use and total impact of the City
sewer system. The fee shall be directly related to the cost of providing sewage
facilities for such use, and shall be proportionately consistent with the
schedule set forth herein. The rationale for charging any such fee shall be
explained in writing upon request by the user.
   G.    Should any user consider himself to be aggrieved by the foregoing
schedule, or by the determination of the Mayor and City Council, such user may,
at his own expense, install a meter, metering the strength and flow of his
sewage, in which event the charge shall be determined based upon verified
results. Such meter shall be calibrated and monitored to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer or an appointed certified engineer. Reliable technical data
shall support any rate determination. (Ord. 517, 5-29-2008)
7-6-5: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION:
All building sewer construction shall conform to the requirements of the
current edition of plumbing laws, rules and regulations of the State Plumbing
Council of Idaho, and the property owner shall obtain all permits required by
the State of Idaho. The connection point for a building sewer in those cases in
which the present building drain discharges to a septic tank or cesspool shall
be at a point between the building and the septic tank or cesspool prior to
entrance into septic tank or cesspool. All existing septic tanks and cesspools
must be properly abandoned to law. Service to two (2) or more buildings through
one service connection is prohibited. Each unit of a multi-family structure
shall have a separate service connection. All service connections must be made
directly into a collection main. All extensions of the public sewage collection
system shall be approved by the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare in
accordance with Idaho Code, section 39-118, or its successor. Cleanouts in
building sewers shall be provided in accordance with rules of the City, and the
aforementioned plumbing laws. All cleanouts shall be maintained watertight. For
all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be
lifted by pumping or ejection as approved by the City and discharged to the
public sewer at the expense of the building owner. (Ord. 501, 7-11-2006)
7-6-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWER:
In addition to those limitations on the use of sewer set forth in the plumbing
laws, rules and regulations of the State Plumbing Council of Idaho, the
following additional requirements are established:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, heating water, water
from swimming pools, or industrial process water except as hereinafter
provided, to any sanitary sewer.
   B.    Physical barriers against sewer gases must be maintained. "Physical
barriers" are defined as approved sink and toilet traps filled with liquid or
airtight caps on all sewer inlet/outlets except approved vents. If the property
owner does not provide and maintain barriers, the service connection may be
disconnected by the city and the property owner shall be required to pay the
city all expenses related to disconnecting the service connection before
issuance of a reconnection permit.
   C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any liquid or vapor
having a temperature higher than forty degrees centigrade (40°C) (104°F). No
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters or wastes having a
pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 8.5, or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures equipment, and/or personnel
of the sewage treatment works.
   D.    The admission into the public sewers of any waters having average
daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow of
the city. If necessary, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 1)reduce the biochemical oxygen
demand to three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l); and/or 2)reduce the
suspended solids to three hundred fifty milligrams per liter (350 mg/l) by
weight; and/or 3)reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within
the maximum limits provided herein; and/or 4) control the quantities and rates
of discharge of such waters or waste. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the city engineer and no construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing
from the city engineer.
   E.   When required by the city, the owner of any industrial building shall
install at his expense a suitable control manhole or sample port in the
building sewer to enable observations, sampling and measurements of the wastes.
Such manholes or ports, when required shall be accessible at all times.
   F.    Where preliminary treatment facilities are required for any water or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the building owner at his expense.
   G.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water
and waste to which reference is made shall be determined in accordance with
standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, and shall be
determined from samples taken at the control manhole or port. In the event no
special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be that
downstream manhole in the public sewer nearest to the point at which the
building sewer is connected or such other location as the city may determine.
   H.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and the owner of any
industrial building whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the owner of the industrial building of fair user equivalent charge
consistent with the schedule set forth in this chapter and consistent with
federal and state law. It shall be the responsibility of each discharging user
to pay its fair share of the costs of discharge and treatment of its
wastewater. (Ord. 448, 7-11-2000)
7-6-7: FOOD WASTE DISPOSAL UNITS:
It is the declared policy of the city to prevent discharge of food wastes into
the sanitary sewer system when such food wastes could be disposed in a manner
other than discharge in the said sewer system.
   A.   Scope and Purpose: To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages
and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases
into the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments,
particularly food preparation and servinR facilities.
   B.   Definitions:
      1.   Fats, Oils, and Greases: Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/ or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test
procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR
136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein
as “grease” or “greases”.
      2.   Grease Trap: A device for separating and retaining waterborne
greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and
entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are
typically compact under-the-sink units that are near food preparation areas.
      3.   Grease Interceptor: A structure or device designed for the purpose
of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary
sewer collection system. These devices are often below-ground units in outside
areas and are built as two or three chamber baffled tanks.
      4.   Food Service Establishments. Those establishments primarily engaged
in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption by the public such as restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer,
hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care institution.
These establishments use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing,
rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting,
toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing,
and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food
product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
      5.   Minimum Design Capability: The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary
sewer.
      6.   User: Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the City of Spirit Lake, who contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city’s
boundaries, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile
sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
   C.   Food Service Establishment Requirement: All permitted food service
establishments discharging wastewater to the City of Spirit Lake sanitary sewer
collection system are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Grease Interceptor Requirements: All permitted food service
establishments are required to install, operate, and maintain an approved type
and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with
the objectives of this Ordinance. All grease interceptors must meet the
requirements of the City of Spirit Lake and the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
      2.   Implementation: All new food service establishment facilities are
subject to grease interceptor requirements. All such facilities must obtain
prior approval from the Public Works Director/ City Engineer for grease
interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All grease
interceptors shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Existing facilities with planned modification in plumbing
improvements, with a building permit evaluation of ($20,000) or more will be
required to include plans to 1 comply with the grease interceptor requirements.
These facilities must obtain approval from the Public Works Director/ City
Engineer for grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building
permit. All existing food service establishments, determined by the Public
Works Director/ City Engineer, to have a reasonable potential to adversely
impact the City’s sewer system will be notified of their obligation to install
a grease interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification
letter.
      3.   Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements: Grease interceptors
required under this Ordinance shall be installed unless the Public Works
Director/ City Engineer authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap or
other alternative pretreatment technology and determines that the installation
of a grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food service establishment
bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor
is not feasible. The Public Works Director/ City Engineer may authorize the
installation of an indoor grease trap where the installation of a grease
interceptor is not feasible due to space constraints or other considerations.
If an establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is
infeasible, because of documented space constraints, the request for an
alternate grease removal device shall contain the following information:
         a.   Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available
exterior space outside building.
         b.   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for
all services at that site.
Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, devices
that are used to trap, separate, and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it
from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. All
alternative pretreatment technology must be appropriately sized and approved by
the Public Works Director/ City Engineer.
   D.   Wastewater Discharge Limitations:
      1.   No User shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject
grease interceptor, grease trap or alternative pretreatment technology to
exceed 325 milligrams per liter(2), as defined by method EPA test method 1664
or 275 milligrams per liter, as identified by method EPA test method 413.
   E.   Grease Interceptor Requirements:
      1.   Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the
current edition of the (Uniform Plumbing Code or other applicable plumbing code
used by the local agency).
      2.   Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with design
approved by the Public Works Director/ City Engineer and shall have a minimum
of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.
      3.   Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it shall
be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted
grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building
where food is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must meet the
approval of the Public Works Director/ City Engineer.
      4.   All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain Minimum Design
Capability or effective volume. These devices should be inspected at least
monthly. Users who are required to maintain a grease interceptor shall:
         a.   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time in accordance with
the Uniform Plumbing Code (or other applicable plumbing code used by the local
agency).
         b.   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required.
Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as
grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags,
etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective
volume of the device.
      5.   The User shall maintain a written record of inspection and
maintenance for five (5) years. All such records will be made available for on-
site inspection by representative of the City of Spirit Lake during all
operating hours.
      6.   Sanitary wastes are not allowed to be connected to sewer lines
intended for grease interceptor service.
      7.   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this Ordinance, although installation of grease interceptors will
be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
Ordinance for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease
interceptors. If, during this one year period an obstruction of a sewer main(s)
occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the
environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer
collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an
accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the City of Spirit Lake will take
appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the Industrial Pretreatment
Enforcement Plan and Sewer Use Ordinance, against the generator or contributor
of such greases’ Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall
be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access
manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained
to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater
sampling activities.
   F.   Grease Trap Requirements:
      1.   Upon approval by the Public Works Director/ City Engineer, a grease
trap complying with the provisions of this section must be installed in the
waste line leading from sinks, drains, and other fixtures or equipment in food
service establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or
sewage system in quantities that can affect line stoppage or hinder sewage
treatment or private sewage disposal.
      2.   Grease traps sizing and installation shall conform to the (Uniform
Plumbing Code or other applicable plumbing code used by the local agency).
      3.   No grease trap shall be installed which has a stated rate flow of
more than fifty-five (55) gallons per minute, nor less than twenty (20) gallons
per minute, except when specially approved by the Public Works Director/ City
Engineer.
      4.   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions
by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected grease shall
be introduced into any drainage piping, or public or private sewer.
      5.   No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or
discharge into any grease trap.
      6.   Wastewater in excess of one hundred-forty (140) F/ (60 C) shall not
be discharged into a grease trap.
      7.   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this Ordinance, although installation of grease traps will be
required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
Ordinance for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from the facility.
If, during this one year period an obstruction of a sewer main(s) occurs that
causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is
realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection
system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an
accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the City of Spirit Lake will take
appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the Industrial Pretreatment
Enforcement Plan and Sewer Use Ordinance, against the generator or contributor
of such grease. (Ord. 448, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 627, 12-14-2021)
7-6-8: BUILDING CONNECTIONS:
   A.   A property owner desiring to obtain a sewer installation permit shall
file a request with the city. Such request shall be in sufficient detail as to
adequately inform the city as to the proposed location of the desired sewer
installation and the nature of the anticipated discharge. At the time of
approval of the connection request, but before any construction may begin, the
property owner shall also pay to the city all sewer installation permit charges
which shall be established and adjusted from time to time by council
resolution. Current rates shall be kept available for public inspection. The
property owner shall also obtain a date for inspection by the city of the
construction and physical connection to the city's sewer system.
   B.   Under no circumstances may the service connection line constructed for
the sewer connection be physically attached to the sewer facilities without
prior inspection and approval by an authorized employee of the city. Should a
property owner or his duly authorized agent connect service connection lines to
the city system without said inspection and approval, the property owner may be
required, at his sole expense, to excavate the service connection lines
constructed and to disconnect from the city's line. Prior to any reconnection,
the prospective system user shall pay all costs incurred by the city in the
course of resolving the unauthorized connection.
   C.   Construction of the public sewer shall conform to the city's
specifications for sewer construction.
   D.    Any trench excavation, backfill and surface restoration required shall
conform to the requirements of the city of Spirit Lake or the state of Idaho
transportation department as applicable.
   E.   Service connections shall not be constructed within fifty feet (50') of
a "Public" water supply well, in accordance with the "Idaho Regulations for
Public Drinking Water Systems" Idaho department of health and welfare.
   F.   A service connection may be connected to a manhole at an elevation more
than one foot (1') above the top of the manhole base only with the prior
written permission of the city.
   G.   The minimum diameter of a building sewer service line shall be four
inches (4"). The minimum slope of a four inch (4") diameter building sewer
service shall be one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot (1 percent slope).
   H.   All taps to eight inch (8") or larger sewer lines shall be accomplished
using a tapping saddle. Tapping of the city's sewer lines shall be accomplished
so that a neat hole of the required size is cut through the pipe. Tapping shall
be accomplished so that the city's sewer line is not cracked or broken beyond
the limits of the required hole. No portion of the pipe wall, soil or gravel
shall be permitted to remain in the sewer line.
   I.   It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner to maintain the sewer
flow of the entire service connection line to the connection at the main line.
No work shall be done in the city right of way without first obtaining an
encroachment permit. (Ord. 448, 7-11-2000)
7-6-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   No person shall violate the requirements of this chapter. All persons
shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees
done under the provisions of this or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of
the city. Upon being notified by the city of any defect arising in any sewer or
of any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said
work shall immediately cease any violation and correct the same. Violations of
this chapter may be sanctioned by imposition of criminal misdemeanor penalties,
by civil remedy from a court of competent jurisdiction by fees and charges
calculated to recapture inordinate costs prompted by noncompliance and/or by
disconnection from the sewer system. Each and every connection or occupancy in
violation of any provision hereof may be deemed a separate violation and each
and every day or part of a day a violation continues may be deemed a separate
offense hereunder and punishable as such. The mayor or any designated agent of
the city may initiate enforcement action.
   B.    Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any
industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance in addition to being a violation of this
chapter. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the
occupancy of the building or industrial facility at the time of any such
violation. The city may discontinue water service to any user not in compliance
with this chapter.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance, rules or
regulations of the city, shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 448, 7-11-
2000)
7-6-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure; appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the city sewage works. No person shall discharge any
substance into the sewer without first establishing an account. Any person
violating these provisions shall be subject to immediate restraint and the
penalties provided by this chapter.
   B.    The officers and any duly authorized employees or representatives of
the city, establishing his position as an authorized representative of the
city, shall be permitted to enter in and upon any and all building, industrial
facilities and properties for the purpose of inspection, reinspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, testing or otherwise performing such duties
as may be necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and
related rules and regulations of the city.
   C.    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter or the application of such provision
to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 448, 7-11-2000)
CHAPTER 7
CITY PARK
SECTION:
7-7-1: Park Rules And Regulations
7-7-1: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Vandalism: There will be no vandalism or malicious damage to any trees,
buildings, playground equipment, fencing and anything which is considered to be
part of the city park system.
   B.   Camping:
      1.   Overnight Camping: There will be no overnight camping in the city
park.
      2.   Group Meetings; Permission Required: There will be no camping or
special group meetings permitted without prior approval of the mayor and city
council and a permit issued by city hall.
   C.   Animals And Vehicles: There will be no horses or unauthorized vehicles
allowed in the city park.
   D.   Skateboard Park:
      1.   No bicycles, tricycles or motorized bikes shall be in the area
designated as the skatepark.
      2.   No person shall be on the ramps without having a functional
skateboard in their possession.
   E.    Unaccompanied Children: All children under the age of ten (10) years
of age must be accompanied by either their parent, a person over the age of
eighteen (18), or a person engaged by the child's parent(s) for the purpose of
providing care for the child in the absence of the parent(s).
   F.   Posted Regulations: The city of Spirit Lake shall have ultimate
authority to establish and have posted rules and regulations, in addition to
those set forth in this section, at any city park in order to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of residents and citizens. It is unlawful
for any person to violate any posted regulations. For the purpose of this
section, "posted rules and regulations" shall mean any rule or regulation
posted on a sign, in plain view, advising what conduct is expected or
prohibited. It also means any markings on the road or parking lot surface with
instructions as to parking regulations or vehicular traffic.
   G.    Alcoholic Beverage Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to be in
possession of open containers or receptacles of beer, intoxicating liquor or
wine, or to consume such beverages in any city park, without prior approval by
the mayor and city council and a permit issued by city hall.
   H.    Trash: It is unlawful for any person to cause to be deposited on the
premises any glass container, pop top style metal container or the opening tag
off of the containers, or any paper, plastic or other debris or trash, except
in designated trash receptacles.
   I.    Loitering: It is unlawful for a person to loiter in a city park for
the purpose of disrupting the use of the park by others lawfully using the park
system.
   J.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 529, 12-9-2008)
CHAPTER 8
SUBSEQUENT CONNECTION UTILITY FEES 1
(Rep. by Ord. 528, 12-9-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapters 4 and 6 of this title.
CHAPTER 9
STREET LIGHTING
SECTION:
7-9-1: Establishment
7-9-2: Financing; Payment
7-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
Pursuant to authority granted by the Idaho constitution and by statutes of the
state of Idaho, and in order to protect the environment and to advance the
social and economic well being of residents and businesses within the city, the
city of Spirit Lake hereby establishes the Spirit Lake street light utility.
(Ord. 488, 8-30-2005)
7-9-2: FINANCING; PAYMENT:
   A.   The cost of all street lighting within the city shall be financed by
charges assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real property. The
charges assessed shall be included in the general utility billing as a separate
item and as hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that the costs of
lighting to illuminate municipal parks and playfields and municipal buildings
shall be excluded and paid for from the city general fund. "Improved real
property" within the meaning of this chapter, shall include real estate which
has city water or sewer service, is paved, is landscaped, or has erected
thereon any construction for which a building permit would be required.
   B.   Street lighting charges to be paid by the owners and occupants of
improved real property shall be set by the city council by resolution.
   C.   Fees for streetlights shall be on the utility bill and the same shall
be paid with the water bill. The water department is authorized to discontinue
water service to any premises if the entire water and streetlight bill is not
paid, said charges to become delinquent as provided for water charges, and
shall be subject to the same penalties provided for in the case of water
collections. (Ord. 488, 8-30-2005)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY ACCESS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Purpose
7-10-2: Design Standards
7-10-3: Encroachment Permit
7-10-4: Additional Information Required
7-10-5: Denial Of Permit
7-10-6: Appeal
7-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Pursuant to Idaho Code, section 50-314 the city has the authority over
the streets and alleys within the jurisdiction of the city of Spirit Lake and
the right to control access onto those streets and alleys from private
property.
   B.    The purpose of this chapter is to set the requirements for the
construction of approaches from private property to the public rights of way
and to regulate the degree and location of access to public rights of way in
order to extend the life of the roads and highways, increase public safety,
reduce traffic congestion, and improve the aesthetics of the community. (Ord.
514, 12-12-2007)
7-10-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All approaches from private property to access the public rights of way shall
be constructed in conformance with the standards established in the Spirit Lake
transportation manual adopted by the city council. (Ord. 514, 12-12-2007)
7-10-3: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:
   A.    Obtaining Permit: No person shall construct an approach from private
property to the public right of way without first applying for and obtaining an
encroachment permit from the city.
   B.    Application: The application for an encroachment permit shall be on
the form provided by the city clerk and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.    Name and address of the property owner and the applicant, if the
applicant is not the property owner,
      2.    A site plan showing the location on the private property where the
proposed approach will be constructed,
      3.   The location of any other approaches that are within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed approach,
      4.    The location of the approach to the nearest intersection and the
proposed width of the approach,
      5.    Construction plans for the approach.
   C.    Fee: The application shall be accompanied by the encroachment permit
fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 514, 12-12-2007)
7-10-4: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The city has the authority to require additional information or studies that
the public works director or the city engineer deems necessary in order to
evaluate whether the proposed approach would have an adverse impact on vehicle
and/or pedestrian traffic, including, but not limited to, traffic impact
studies. (Ord. 514, 12-12-2007)
7-10-5: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The public works director or the city engineer have the authority to deny the
permit if the proposed approach does not meet the required standards, or to
deny any access onto a particular right of way if the location of the approach
would create a pedestrian vehicle traffic hazard, and the property owner has
alternative access to their property. The denial shall be in writing, stating
the basis of the denial. (Ord. 514, 12-12-2007; amd. Ord. 621, 4-7-2021)
7-10-6: APPEAL:
   A.    If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision
denying the permit to the city council.
   B.    The appeal must be in writing and received by the city clerk no more
than ten (10) calendar days following the date of the denial.
   C.    The city council will hear the appeal at the next available council
meeting. (Ord. 514, 12-12-2007)
CHAPTER 11
TREES AND PLANTS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Tree Committee Established
7-11-2: Duties And Authority Of Committee
7-11-3: Permit Required For Action To Trees; Application
7-11-4: Definitions
7-11-5: Trimming And Pruning Of Trees
7-11-6: Unlawful To Abuse Trees
7-11-7: Hedges And Shrubbery
7-11-8: Penalty
7-11-1: TREE COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a tree committee to be called the Gem tree
committee. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation
and shall serve without compensation.
   A.    Organization And Meetings:
      1.   Meetings of the committee shall be held when duly called by the
chairman upon reasonable prior written or oral notice.
      2.    The committee shall consist of five (5) members, each serving a
three (3) year term. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council.
      3.   A majority of the appointed members of the committee shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting.
      4.   All meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the
open meeting laws, including keeping a written record of the meetings. (Ord.
540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-2: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF COMMITTEE:
The Gem tree committee is an advisory committee and shall have the following
duties and authority:
   A.    At the direction of the mayor, supervise planting, pruning, spraying,
preserving and removing of trees and other work authorized by this chapter.
   B.    Prepare and recommend to the city council rules and regulations
containing guidelines for the pruning of trees.
   C.    Prepare and recommend a tree list consisting of acceptable varieties,
size of trees, property planting and spacing instructions for trees.
   D.    Provide advice to the mayor and city council as to appropriate
practices for the preservation, protection and management of trees subject to
this chapter.
   E.    Assist the city in taking an inventory of all existing trees on all
city properties.
   F.    Assist the city in providing information to the public through
educational campaigns, published material and other opportunities.
   G.   Assist the city in implementing Arbor Day celebrations and activities.
   H.   Encourage and seek other funding for city tree projects.
   I.    Identify and recommend suitable landscaping projects to the city
council for city property.
   J.   Assist the city in the planning and budget process by making
recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding budget issues relating
to city tree projects. (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ACTION TO TREES; APPLICATION:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any person not a city employee or agent to
plant, remove, trim, cut or in any way damage any tree or within real property
owned or controlled by the city without first procuring an encroachment permit
to do so from the city clerk, provided, that no permit shall first be required
in situations where the delay entailed in obtaining a permit would place life,
limb or property in immediate jeopardy or harm.
   B.    Any person desiring a permit to plant, remove, cut or in any way
damage a tree on or within the city properties shall file with the city clerk
an application to do so on forms to be furnished by the city clerk setting
forth therein in detail the work that is contemplated and the location and
address of the same. Upon the filing of such application, the city shall
investigate the contemplated work and if in its judgment it is desirable and
within the parameters of this chapter, shall issue a written permit therefor;
provided that the work authorized in such permit shall be done under the
supervision of the city or the city's designee. (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter whenever the following words are used, the
intent and meanings shall be interpreted as follows:
CITY PROPERTY: Real property dedicated, deeded or leased to the city or
including, but not limited to, public rights of way and city parks.
HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY: Any plant of more than two feet (2') but less than eight
feet (8') in height.
OWNER: The legal owner or owners of the real property adjacent to a public
street in the city of Spirit Lake, Idaho.
PARKWAY: That portion of a street between a roadway and a sidewalk.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
association, corporation, group or combination acting as a unit.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used by the
public for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used by the
public for pedestrian travel.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of a public right of way
dedicated or deeded to the city for use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel, whether or not maintained by the city and whether or not open for
vehicular traffic.
TREES: Any plant which at maturity would exceed a height of more than eight
feet (8'). (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-5: TRIMMING AND PRUNING OF TREES:
   A.    Each owner of property abutting the public right of way shall at all
times keep pruned and trimmed all trees, bushes, branches, leaves and roots of
trees or bushes on any portion of the owner's property which abuts the public
roadway, sidewalk or parkway in order to prevent such tree branches, roots,
leaves or bushes from protruding into an area that is between the surface of
the sidewalk, parkway or roadway and seven feet (7') above the surface in order
to keep a clear space.
   B.    Each owner of property shall also treat or remove any tree or plant so
diseased or insect ridden as to constitute a hazard to trees or plants in
public places. Such trees or plants are hereby declared a nuisance.
   C.   Any tree or bush growing on private property which shall endanger or
damage the usefulness of any street, roadway, sidewalk, parkway or public sewer
or water line, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the property
owner shall be responsible for the pruning and trimming of such branches,
leaves and roots to prevent such trees from damaging or endangering the
usefulness of any street, sidewalk, roadway, parkway, or public sewer or water
line. (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-6: UNLAWFUL TO ABUSE TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse, damage or mutilate any tree, in
any parkway, or in any public place, including, but not limited to, the
following:
   A.    Attach any sign, poster, handbill, advertisement or other thing to or
on such a tree;
   B.    To cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in
contact with such a tree;
   C.    To cause or permit any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which may be
harmful to any such tree to come in contact with the tree. (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-7: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/
or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the city. (Ord.
540, 9-7-2010)
7-11-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or six (6) months in jail, or
both fine and jail, per occurrence. (Ord. 540, 9-7-2010)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
8-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Building Code Adopted: In order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public and to prescribe regulations governing building and other
construction, the City Council hereby adopts the 2018 International Building
Code (IBC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the
State of Idaho through the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any
amendments or revisions to the IBC made by the Idaho Building Code Board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted with the following
exceptions or amendments:
      1.   Section 103.2 is not adopted.
      2.   Section 103.3 is not adopted.
      3.   Section 107.1 is amended to read as follows:
         107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction
documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, structural
observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one (1) paper set and
one (1) PDF of the plan set in an approved electronic format for each
application for a permit. The architectural construction documents shall be
prepared by an architect licensed to practice by the state of Idaho. The
building official shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed
architect may submit construction documents that are proven to strictly adhere
to the IBC provisions of section 2308; Conventional Light-Frame Construction.
The building official shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed
engineer in the appropriate engineering discipline (structural, mechanical,
electrical, civil, geotectonic, acoustical, etc.) of his or her expertise may
submit supplemental construction documents supportive and complementary to the
architect's construction documents. Where special conditions exist, the
building official may authorize a registered professional engineer acting
within the discipline of his or her expertise and at the stipulation of the
building official acting jointly or in association with a licensed architect to
prepare construction documents and require site construction observation for
buildings or shelters not intended, designed or constructed for human
habitation or occupancy.
         Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission
of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional of any architectural or engineering service in
the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair of any building where such
building to be or is used as a single family residence not exceeding three (3)
stories in height and multiple height and multiple family residence of three
adjoining dwelling units not exceeding three (3) stories in height or as a farm
building or for the purpose of out buildings or auxiliary building in
connection with such residence or farm premises or if it is found that the
nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents
is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
         Those individuals who furnish only interior design or decoration or
space planning or space design services within existing structures which do not
involve the construction or adherence to requirements of the international
building code (IBC) including the Americans with disabilities act (ADA),
American national standard accessible and usable building and facilities ICC/
ANSI-A117 will not be required to be a registered design professional. This
exemption only allows the use of moveable partitions, rails, counters,
cabinets, space dividers, furniture and similar types of equipment which do not
exceed a height of five feet, nine inches above floor in the execution of the
plans or design of a particular space or the creation of exits corridors,
stairways and disturbances of existing structural components as defined by the
IBC.
      4.   Section 107.3.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
         107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a
registered architect, the building official shall be authorized to require that
the owner engage and designate on the building permit application a registered
architect who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible
charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute
registered architect or professional engineer in responsible charge who shall
perform the duties required by the building official. The building official
shall be notified in writing by the owner or the architect of record if the
person who is in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to
perform the required duties.
      5.   Section 406.3.2.1 Separation. Replace section 1 with the following:
         The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its
attic area, including supporting members with materials approved for one-hour
fire-resistive construction on the garage side and a self-closing, tight-
fitting solid-wood door 13/8 inches in thickness, or a self-closing, tight-
fitting 20-minute fire-rated door, or solid or honeycomb steel doors not less
than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) thick, or doors in compliance with section 716.5.1
and 716.5.3.1. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
      6.   Section 1809.5 Frost Protection. Delete method 1 and replace with
the following:
         1.   Extending below the frost line of the locality, with a minimum
twenty-four (24) inches from ground surface to the bottom of a footing.
      7.   Add a new section 1905.1.9 Minimum Reinforcement as follows:
         All continuous footings will require a minimum of two (2) continuous
horizontal reinforcing bars. Footings supporting columns and piers shall
contain no less than two (2) #4 rebar installed each way, not to exceed twelve
(12) inches maximum spacing.
         Minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer spacing is
specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not exceed four (4)
feet in height shall be four (4) feet on center for vertical reinforcement and
two (2) feet on center for horizontal reinforcement. One (1) continuous row of
horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6)
inches of top and bottom of wall.
         Foundation walls over four (4) feet in height (unless closer spacing
is specified by design or engineering specification) shall be eighteen (18)
inches minimum on center for horizontal and vertical reinforcement. Reinforcing
bars shall be a minimum size of #4 and may be a minimum grade forty (40). One
continuous row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches
and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall. No less than two (2) #4 rebar
shall be installed around door, window, and similar sized openings.
   B.   Existing Building Code Adopted: The 2018 International Existing
Building Code (IEBC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted and shall be the Existing Building Code of the Municipality with the
following amendments or exemptions:
      1.   Section 103.2 is not adopted.
      2.   Section 103.3 is not adopted.
   C.   Residential Code Adopted: The 2018 International Residential Code
(IRC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the
State of Idaho through the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any
amendments or revisions to the IRC made by the Idaho Building Code Board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted with the following
exceptions or amendments:
      1.   Section R101.2. Delete the exception and add the following sentence
to the end of the section:
         Detached one-and-two-family dwellings and townhouses will be
classified as an R-3 occupancy. All garages, shops, and accessory structures
will be classified as a U occupancy.
      2.   Section R103.2 is not adopted.
      3.   Section R103.3 is not adopted.
      4.   Section R104.10.1. Delete entire section.
      5.   Section R106.1 is amended to read as follows:
         R106.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction
documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, structural
observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one (1) paper set and
one (1) PDF of the plan set in an approved electronic format for each
application for a permit. The architectural construction documents shall be
prepared by an architect licensed to practice by the state of Idaho. The
building official shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed
engineer in the appropriate engineering discipline (structural, mechanical,
electrical, civil, geotectonic, acoustical, etc.) of his or her expertise may
submit supplemental construction documents supportive and complementary to the
architect's construction documents.
         Where special conditions exist, the building official may authorize a
registered professional engineer acting within the discipline of his or her
expertise and at the stipulation of the building official acting jointly or in
association with a licensed architect to prepare construction documents and
require site construction observation for buildings or shelters not intended,
designed or constructed for human habitation or occupancy.
         Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission
of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional of any architectural or engineering service in
the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair of any building where such
building to be or is used as a single family residence not exceeding three (3)
stories in height and multiple height and multiple family residence of three
adjoining dwelling units not exceeding three (3) stories in height or as a farm
building or for the purpose of out buildings or auxiliary building in
connection with such residence or farm premises or if it is found that the
nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents
is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
         Those individuals who furnish only interior design or decoration or
space planning or space design services within existing structures which do not
involve the construction or adherence to requirements of the international
residential code (IRC) including the Americans with disabilities act (ADA)
American national standard accessible and usable building and facilities ICC/
ANSI-A117 will not be required to be a registered design professional. This
exemption only allows the use of moveable partitions, rails, counters,
cabinets, space dividers, furniture and similar types of equipment which do not
exceed a height of five feet, nine inches above floor in the execution of the
plans or design of a particular space or the creation of exits corridors,
stairways and disturbances of existing structural components as defined by the
IRC.
      6.   Section R106.1.4 Delete entire section.
      7.   Section R109.1.3. Delete entire section.
      8.   Section R301.2.3 Snow Loads. Delete section and replace with the
following:
         Wood framed construction, cold-formed steel framed construction and
masonry and concrete construction in regions with ground snow loads 70 psf
(3.35 kN/m2) or less, shall be in accordance with chapters 5, 6 and 8 of the
IBC. Buildings in regions with ground snow loads greater than 70 psf (3.35 kN/
m2) shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The
minimum roof design snow load shall be forty (40) pounds per square foot. A
ground snow load of sixty (60) pounds per square foot shall be used for roof
drifting snow load design. No manufactured home, commercial coach or modular
building shall be placed that has not been constructed to withstand a minimum
forty (40) pound per square foot roof load, or the owner has provided for a
separate roof cover that is constructed to provide the required roof load,
except that manufactured homes that are already installed in a location within
the city limits at the time of the passage of this section may remain without
having to meet the minimum roof load set forth herein. Any manufactured home
allowed to remain under this section may be moved to a different location
within the city limits without having to meet the forty (40) pound roof load
providing that it meets all zoning requirements contained in title 12 of the
city code
      9.   Replace Table R302.6 with the following table:
      TABLE R302.6
 
SEPARATION                              MATERIAL
                                        Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum
From the residence and attics           board or equivalent applied to the
                                        garage side
From habitable rooms above the garage   Not less than 2 layers of 5/8-inch Type
and roof/ceiling assemblies             X gypsum board or equivalent
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling   Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum
assemblies used for separation required board or equivalent
by this section
                                        Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum
Garages located less than 3 feet from a board or equivalent applied to the
dwelling unit on the same lot           interior side of the exterior walls
                                        that are within this area
 
      10.   Section R302.5.3. Delete section and replace with the following:
         Penetrations through the separation required in section R302.6 shall
be protected with approved materials to resist the passage of flame and
products of combustion. The materials filling the penetration annular space
shall meet the requirements of ASTM E 814 or UL 1479.
      11.   Section R302.7. Under Stair Protection. Delete section and replace
with the following:
         Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls, under stair
surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with 5/8-inch type X
gypsum board.
      12.   Section R322 Flood-Resistant Construction is deleted.
      13.   Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Delete method 1 and replace
with the following:
         1.   Extending below the frost line specified in table R301.2(1); with
a minimum twenty-four (24) inches from ground surface to the bottom of a
footing.
      14.   Delete tables R404.1.1(1), R404.1.1(2), and R404.1.1(3).
      15.   Section R404.1.2 Concrete Foundation Walls. Delete section and
replace with the following:
         All continuous footings will require a minimum two (2) continuous
horizontal reinforcing bars.
         Footings supporting columns and piers shall contain no less than two
(2) #4 rebar installed each way, not to exceed twelve (12) inches maximum
spacing.
         Minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer spacing is
specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not exceed four (4)
feet in height shall be four (4) feet on center for vertical reinforcement and
two (2) feet on center for horizontal reinforcement. One continuous row of
horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6)
inches of top and bottom of wall.
         Foundation walls over four (4) feet in height (unless closer spacing
is specified by design or engineering specification) shall be eighteen (18)
inches minimum on center for horizontal and vertical reinforcement. Reinforcing
bars shall be a minimum size of #4 and may be a minimum grade forty (40). One
(1) continuous row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3)
inches and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall. No less than two (2) #4
rebar shall be installed around door, window, and similar sized openings.
      16.   Part V Mechanical is adopted.
      17.   Part VI Fuel Gas is adopted.
      18.   Part VII. Plumbing and part VIII. Electrical are not adopted.
      19.   Appendices are not adopted except for:
         Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures excluding Sections
AJ102.5, AJ301.1.2, AJ301.2, AJ301.3, AJ501.1 exception 2, and AJ501.5.
   D.   Energy Conservation Code Adopted: The 2018 edition of the International
Energy Conservation Code (IECC), prepared by the International Code Council,
Inc., together with any amendments or revisions to the IECC made by the Idaho
Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted and
shall be the Energy Conservation Code of the Municipality.
   E.   Fire Code Adopted: The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, as
prepared and promulgated by the International Code Council and the Western Fire
Chiefs Association, an as it shall be amended, revised, compiled and published
from time to time and as such amendments or revisions shall be adopted by the
Fire Marshal for the State of Idaho, is hereby adopted as the International
Fire Code of the City.
   F.   Mechanical Code Adopted: The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC),
prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted and shall be the
Fuel Gas Code of the Municipality with the following amendments or exemptions:
      1.   Section 103.2 is not adopted.
      2.   Section 103.3 is not adopted.
   G.   Fuel Gas Code Adopted: The 2018 International Mechanical Code (IMC),
prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted and shall be the
Mechanical Code of the Municipality with the following amendments or
exemptions:
      1.   Section 103.2 is not adopted.
      2.   Section 103.3 is not adopted.
   H.   Sign Code Adopted: The Uniform Sign Code 1994, as published by the
International Conference of Building Officials is hereby adopted by the City to
provide standards to safeguard life, health and public welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, quality or materials, construction, location,
electrification and maintenance of all signs and sign structures not located
within any building within the City.
   I.   Building Permits:
      1.   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge or alter, improve or
convert any building or structure, including a garage attached thereto, or any
building used for commercial or industrial purposes, or any public building
which is within the City without first obtaining a separate building permit
from the building official for that purpose. Each such building permit
application shall:
         a.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.
         b.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
legal description.
         c.   State the valuation of the proposed work or provide sufficient
information upon which to assign a proper value. The value determination made
by the building official shall be the basis on which the permit fees will be
determined.
         d.   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
         e.   Give such other information as may be reasonably required by the
City officials to determine compliance with applicable codes and ordinances.
      2.   No building permits shall be issued which would allow activities
which violate the City's zoning or subdivision ordinances.
      3.   No building permit will be effective unless the permit fees have
been paid and the permit has been signed by the building official.
   J.   Building Official: The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate a
building official responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. The building official or any authorized deputy building inspector
shall have the authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and to issue building permits in accordance with the adopted codes.
   K.   Violations; Penalties: A violation of this chapter or the adopted codes
shall be considered a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with title 1,
chapter 4 of the City Code. (Ord. 619, 12-29-2020)
CHAPTER 2
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
8-2-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: General Provisions
8-2-4: Administration
8-2-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
8-2-6: Variance And Appeal Procedures
8-2-7: Penalties For Violation
8-2-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho
Code 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a
floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies floodplains
and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains that are
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
   B.    Findings Of Fact: The flood hazard areas of Spirit Lake are subject to
periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
      1.    These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      2.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
   C.    Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
      3.    Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
      4.    Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
      5.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters.
   D.    Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.    Protect human life, health and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions. (Ord. 537, 4-13-2010,
eff. 5-3-2010)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. An insurable building should not be classified as an accessory or
appurtenant structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one foot (1') to three
feet (3'), and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow
may be evident.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded each year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood
in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on
the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See defini   tion of structure.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of
the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline
utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material
facilities.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
has been the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the Federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and permanent
storage of equipment or materials.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk
and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before May 3, 2010.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 3, 2010.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by
floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration or U.S. department of housing and urban
development, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as zone A. The FHBM usually is the initial flood hazard map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard
and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B.    The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any
increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, one foot (1') of
freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN 1
: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by
floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The
riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge
and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY: A facility that cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The
term does not include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG related to
building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.    Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register.
   B.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
   C.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
   D.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1.    By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following
categories:
   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR):A formal review and comment by
FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum national flood
insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or
revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps,
or flood insurance studies.
   Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA):A revision based on technical data showing
that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard
area. An LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
   Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR):A revision based on technical data showing,
usually due to manmade changes, changes to flood zones, flood elevations,
floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type
of LOMR, an LOMR-F, is a determination that a structure or parcel has been
elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from the
special flood hazard area.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for LAG related
to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating,
or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could
be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space. An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
structure's lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinant for the flood
insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced
after May 3, 2010, and includes subsequent improvements to the structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after May 3, 2010.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.    Built on a single chassis,
   B.    Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost where the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, V.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value
of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b)
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term
does not include either:
   A.   A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications, which have
been identified by the local Code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Governing Body from a requirement of this
chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter is a violation. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR section 60.3
(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 537, 4-
13-2010, eff. 5-3-2010; amd. Ord. 582, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 46-1021.
8-2-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.    Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of Spirit Lake. Nothing in
this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise
prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
   B.    Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for Spirit Lake, dated May 3, 2010, with accompanying flood
insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and
other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this
chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the Office of the Spirit Lake City
Clerk.
   C.    Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special
flood hazard areas established in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.    Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.    Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
      3.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
   E.    Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of Spirit Lake or by any officer
or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter
or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 537, 4-13-2010,
eff. 5-3-2010)
   F.    Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 582, 4-10-2018)
8-2-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.    Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The building
official is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator who is responsible
for administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   B.    Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the
Administrator or the Administrator's designee prior to starting development
activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.    Application Stage:
         a. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project
area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage
facilities.
         b.    Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or
highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawl spaces or
basement, of all proposed structures.
         c.    Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed.
         d.   Design certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 8-2-5G2 of this chapter.
         e.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
      2.    Construction Stage:
         a.    For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
permit holder shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator an as built
certification of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate
FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor
or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for
nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same.
         b.   Certificate deficiencies identified by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the
corrections shall be cause for the Floodplain Administrator to issue a stop
work order for the project.
      3.    Technical Review:
         a.    If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the
technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for
an independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the
letter of map revision process. The applicant will pay the costs of an
independent technical review.
      4.    Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
         a.    All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and thereafter is pursued to completion.
   C.    Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator: Duties of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.    Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.    Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have
been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the Endangered Species Act of
1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and State of Idaho stream channel alteration permits,
Idaho Code 42 chapter 38 require that copies of such permits be provided and
maintained on file.
      3.    When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available,
then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
      4.    When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are
not available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood
hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      5.    Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the
vertical datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest
floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially
improved structures.
      6.    Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the
vertical datum on the effective FIRM to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      7.    When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
      8.    Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.
      9.    All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk or the clerk's designee and shall be
open for public inspection. (Ord. 537, 4-13-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
8-2-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.    Subdivision Standards:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      2.    All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include
the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
      3.    Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for
subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres, whichever is less.
      4.    All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
      5.    All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   B.    Construction Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the
following provisions are required:
      1.    New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure.
      2.    New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage.
      3.    New construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
      4.    All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure that includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor
formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this
requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet the following minimum criteria:
         a.    Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with a total net area of
not less:
            (1)    Than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
            (2)    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately
below the opening;
            (3)    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
         b.    To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of
vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
         c.    The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         d.    For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the
guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance,
specifically:
            (1)    Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet (5') per second;
            (2)    Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be
more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
            (3)    Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
lowest interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point;
            (4)    Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space.
      5.    All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all
electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/
or elevated to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
      6.    New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      7.    New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      8.    On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      9.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
that is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken
only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety
standards.
   C.    Manufactured Home Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard
where the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for
manufactured homes and recreational vehicles that are an allowed use under the
zoning ordinance shall apply:
      1.    Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
         a.   On individual lots or parcels.
         b.    In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions.
         c.    In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a
flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood
protection elevation.
      2.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:
         a.    The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the
flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher.
         b.    The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by
reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent
grade.
      3.    Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard
shall be in addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.
      4.    Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the
flood vent requirements in subsection B4 of this section.
   D.    Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than two
hundred (200) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:
      1.    It shall not be used for human habitation;
      2.    It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      3.    It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      4.    It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      5.    Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated
or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
      6.    It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection B4 of this
section.
   E.    Recreational Vehicle Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard,
recreational vehicles, that are an allowed use or structure under the zoning
ordinance, must either:
      1.    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
      3.   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new
construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   F.    Floodway Standards: The following provisions shall apply in a
floodway:
      1.    A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment
review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must
include:
         a.    Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or
construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an
increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;
         b.    Determination and documentation that grading, excavation,
channel improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an
obstruction, do not cause increases in downstream flood flows;
         c.    Certification and documentation by a licensed professional
engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;
         d.    The administrator may make the encroachment determination for
minor projects.
      2.    An encroachment in the floodway or floodplain that will cause an
increase in the base flood elevation in excess of the allowable level must have
a conditional letter of map revision granted by FEMA before it will be
permitted.
   G.    Standards For Zones With Base Flood Elevations: In special flood
hazard areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following
provisions are required:
      1.    New Construction And Substantial Improvements:
         a.    Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction
or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the community's flood
protection elevation. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
      2.    Nonresidential Construction:
         a.    New construction or the substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed
if the new construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to
the flood protection elevation or to one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed
professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
these provisions, and shall provide certification to the administrator.
      3.    CLOMR Submittal: Where the floodway has not been determined,
applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot (1') are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain
administrator, a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
      4.    Flood Hazard Map Changes: Postconstruction, the applicant must
apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map
proposed in the CLOMR.
      5.    Drainage Paths: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide floodwater around and away from proposed and existing structures.
   H.   Standards For Zones Without Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A
Zones): These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist
but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A zones), or where base
flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.
      1.    When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified
by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data
are not available from any source, only then subsections H2 and H3 of this
section shall apply.
         a.    Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood
elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot (1') shall obtain a conditional letter of map
revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
      2.    No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located
within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever
is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by
a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
      3.    In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data,
new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl
space) elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade at
the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
   I.    Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Shallow flooding
areas designated AO zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base
flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with no clearly defined channel. The
following provisions apply:
      1.    All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number
specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood depth
number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at
least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the construction standards in subsection B4 of this section.
      2.    New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the
specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest adjacent
grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these
provisions, and shall provide certification to the Floodplain Administrator.
      3.    Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and
away from all proposed and existing structures.
   J.    Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when
any change occurs within its banks.
      1.    The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
      2.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Idaho
Department of Water Resources Stream Channel Alteration Program must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
notification must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      3.    The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
      4.    The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in subsections K1 and K2 of this section when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.
   K.    Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
      1.    For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         a.    Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         b.    Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         c.    Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts;
         d.    Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring
establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection A3 of this
section.
      2.    It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data
prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for
these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 537, 4-
13-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
   L.    Anchoring:
      1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.    All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. (Ord. 582, 4-
10-2018)
8-2-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.    Variance:
      1.    An application for a variance must be submitted to the City Clerk
on the form provided by the City and include at a minimum the same information
required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the
variance request.
      2.    Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the
variance request will be set for public hearing at the next City Council
meeting in which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.    Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be
published in the official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice
shall be provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.    The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   B.    Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      2.    Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.    Variances may be issued upon:
         a.    A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
         b.    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
      5.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
      6.    Variances should be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances.
   C.    Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.    Appeals: The City Council shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the Administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14)
days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the Administrator.
Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the
administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
Administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the
appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
      2.    Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled
for the next available City Council meeting to be heard. The City Council shall
consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.    All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
            (1)    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)    The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)    The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location,
where applicable;
            (6)    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)    The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and Floodplain Management Program for that area;
            (9)    The safety of access to the property in times of flooding
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            (11)    The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   E.    Decision: The City Council decision on appeal shall be in writing and
set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision.
(Ord. 537, 4-13-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
8-2-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered
unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking
such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 537, 4-13-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
CHAPTER 3
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Purpose
8-3-3: Applicability
8-3-4: General Requirements
8-3-5: Performance Standards
8-3-6: Guarantee Of Installation
8-3-7: Adoption Of Supporting Documentation
8-3-8: Prohibited Conduct
8-3-9: Variance
8-3-10: Penalties
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS: Design plans which have been revised to reflect all changes
to the plans which occurred during construction.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): Physical, structural and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water.
BOND: A surety bond, cash deposit or escrow account, assignment of savings, or
other means acceptable to or required by the permit authority to guarantee that
work is completed in compliance with all local government requirements.
CLEARING: The destruction and removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical or
chemical methods.
CONVEYANCE: A mechanism for transporting water from one point to another,
including pipes, ditches and channels.
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: The drainage facilities, both natural and man-made, which
collect, contain, and provide for the flow of surface and storm water from the
highest points on the land down to a receiving water. The natural elements of
the conveyance system include swales and small drainage courses, streams,
rivers, lakes and wetlands. The human-made elements of the conveyance system
include gutters, ditches, pipes, channels and most retention/detention
facilities.
DESIGN STORM: A rainfall event of specific return frequency and duration that
is used to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to
control the peak discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of
pollutants.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice or
other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep. Also,
detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or
gravity.
EROSION/ SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Any temporary or permanent measures taken to
reduce erosion; control siltation and sedimentation; and insure that sediment-
laden water does not leave the site.
GROUND WATER: Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or
a surface water body.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A hard surface area which either prevents or retards the
entry of water into the soil mantel as under natural conditions prior to
development, and/or a hard surface area which causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow
present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways, patios,
driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel
roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which
similarly impede the natural filtration of storm water. Open, uncovered
retention/detention facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces.
INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.
The infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches/hour.
INTERMITTENT STREAM: A stream or portion of a stream that flows only in direct
response to precipitation. It receives little or no water from springs and no
long continued supply from melting snow or other sources. It is dry for a large
part of the year, ordinarily more than three (3) months.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity that results in a change in the existing
soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil
topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to
demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling and excavation.
NUTRIENTS: Essential chemicals needed by plants or animals for growth.
Excessive amounts of nutrients can lead to degradation of water quality and
algal blooms. Some nutrients can be toxic at high concentrations.
QUALIFIED, LICENSED PROFESSIONALS: Licensed engineer, landscape architect, soil
scientist or other individual who has demonstrated a professional ability to
design storm water systems and certify their effectiveness with a registered
stamp.
RECONSTRUCTION: Road reconstruction shall be considered any modification of the
cross-section or subgrade. Paving or repaving shall not be considered
reconstruction.
RETENTION: The holding of runoff in a basin without release except means of
evaporation, infiltration or emergency bypass.
RUNOFF: Water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that is found
in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, and
wetlands, as well as shallow ground water.
SEDIMENT: Fragmented material that originates from weathering and erosion of
rocks or unconsolidated deposits, and is transported by, suspended in, or
deposited by water.
SEDIMENTATION: The deposition of sediment on ground surfaces and in
watercourses.
STORM FREQUENCY: The time interval between major storms of predetermined
intensity and volumes of runoff for which storm sewers and other structures are
designed and constructed to handle hydraulically without surcharging and
backflooding, e.g., a 2-year, 25-year or 100-year storm.
STORM WATER: That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate
into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels
or pipes into a defined surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration
facility.
SWALE: A shallow drainage conveyance or infiltration area with relatively
gentle side slopes, generally with flow depths less than one-half foot (1/2').
TREATMENT BMP: A BMP that is intended to remove pollutants from storm water. A
few examples of treatment BMPs are detention ponds, oil/water separators,
biofiltration swales and constructed wetlands.
UNIQUE SITE CHARACTERISTICS: Soil, slope or depth to bedrock conditions that
will not accommodate on-site treatment through infiltration to the standards
specified in the ordinance. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter shall be to require implementation of surface water
management techniques which rely upon natural on-site treatment and recycling
of storm water as opposed to collection and conveyance of untreated storm water
into ground water sources or into surface bodies of water. The underlying
purposes to be achieved by implementation of such regulations are the
protection of ground water quality through pretreatment of storm water prior to
infiltration and protection of surface water resources from the effects of
contaminants, sedimentation and erosion. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-3: APPLICABILITY:
The achievement of standards, employment of methods, and techniques required by
this Chapter shall be applicable in the following circumstances:
   A.    New Development: Development of every new subdivision of land within
the jurisdiction of Spirit Lake.
   B.    Commercial; Industrial Sites: All commercial and industrial site
development for which grading, site development, construction, or building
permits may be required pursuant to the land use regulations of Spirit Lake.
   C.    Public Projects: All public projects within the jurisdiction of Spirit
Lake including, but not limited to, street construction or reconstruction
(modification of the cross-section, not to include resurfacing), park
development, building development, or other public works construction or
development. Except as necessary to maintain the continuity of existing storm
water handling systems, all new construction as outlined in this subsection
shall employ the methods for storm water management required by this Chapter
and shall otherwise be designed to minimize adverse impacts upon surface and
ground water quality.
   D.    Slope: Every building or land development permit where land-disturbing
activity is to occur on any part of sites with a slope greater than fifteen
percent (15%) or on sites less than five hundred feet (500') distant
horizontally from, and located vertically above, any surface water in the form
of a perennial or intermittent stream, river, pond, lake, wetland, or similar
surface feature which can be determined from USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle
topographic maps. Storm water management plans may not be necessary for
individual building sites if runoff from the site has been accommodated by an
approved storm water management plan for the subdivision in which the site is
located. However, detailed erosion control plans may still be required. The
Administrator of this Chapter may allow a building permit to be issued for
minor additions to existing improvements without the preparation of a storm
water management plan if, in using their professional judgment, the
requirements of this Chapter can be met by existing site conditions. (Ord. 380,
5-2-94)
8-3-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise lawfully excused from compliance with the standards set forth
in this Chapter, all development to which this Chapter is applicable shall
comply with the following requirements and methods for storm water management
control:
   A.    Storm Water: Storm water, in accordance with the performance standards
set forth herein, shall be directed by nonerosive means to grass infiltration
areas when appropriate. Expected contaminant removals are as follows:
Total suspended solids 95%
Total dissolved solids 50%
Nutrients:
Nitrate                20%-50%
Total nitrogen         80%
Phosphorus             90%
Metals                 80%+
Organic chemicals      60%+
Bacteria               99%
 
If the proposed development exceeds site limitations as defined in Appendix D
of the "Storm Water Management Plan Criteria and Engineering Standards", for
grass infiltration methods, then an acceptable alternative storm water
collection, treatment, and disposal system shall be implemented in accordance
with an approved storm water management plan, subject to review by the City.
Said grass infiltration areas or other approved alternative on-site storm water
collection and treatment systems may be approved in either nodal or dispersed
form, subject to specific approval by the City during the development review
process.
   B.    Storm Water Runoff: All development subject to this Chapter shall be
carried out such that the runoff of storm or other surface waters shall not be
accelerated, concentrated, or otherwise conveyed beyond the exterior property
lines or project boundaries of the project in question except in compliance
with the provisions of BMPs adopted pursuant to this Chapter or as allowed
through joint management of storm water with adjoining property owners pursuant
to agreement approved by the City. The quality of surface runoff shall be
protected by strict compliance with the design standards and BMPs adopted
pursuant to this Chapter or by implementation of measures shown by a qualified,
licensed professional, as defined in Section
8-3-1, to have an effective design capability which exceeds the BMPs adopted
hereby.
   C.    Storm Water Management Plan: Each landowner developing real property
subject to the terms of this Chapter shall develop a comprehensive storm water
management plan which addresses and complies with the requirements and
standards established by this Chapter and the plan criteria, design standards
and BMPs adopted by resolution pursuant to this Chapter. Each plan for storm
water management shall be approved by a qualified, licensed professional, who
shall submit both construction- quality design drawings and supporting
calculations for review by the City prior to start of construction. Each storm
water management plan shall also identify necessary maintenance requirements.
   D.    Funding: Each developer who proposes and implements a storm water
management system for collection or treatment of storm water in accordance with
this Chapter shall also establish, including assurance of adequate funding, the
necessary maintenance system including an acceptable plan for sustained
functioning of the collection and treatment system, and, when requested, grant
the necessary easements, to the local government which may choose to provide
continued maintenance of the system by public authorities or may require the
owner to accomplish same. The City is hereby authorized to establish a
department of City government to perform maintenance service for storm water
management system components or to contract for such maintenance in order that
drainage system components can be maintained. Such services shall be financed
by charging fees to owners and/or occupants of real property benefitted by such
service.
For purposes of application of the design standards and other related documents
and standards, Spirit Lake shall be designated as the permit authority. (Ord.
380, 5-2-94)
8-3-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards shall be applicable to all design,
construction, implementation, and maintenance of storm water management systems
pursuant to the jurisdiction exercised through this Chapter.
   A.    Runoff Rate: There shall be no increase in the peak rate of runoff
from this site when compared with the dissipation of storm water in the
undeveloped state for a 25-year storm. Within project boundaries, sufficient
retention capacity shall be constructed to detain surface flow to meet the
performance standard established by this Section. For purposes of this Chapter,
"undeveloped state" shall mean the natural soils and vegetation in place prior
to the start of any construction or clearing activity on a site.
   B.   Storm Water Collection: No storm water shall be collected or
concentrated except within a channel protected against erosion and containing
energy dissipation measures to prevent further erosion on adjoining lands.
Existing unprotected channels shall be protected against further erosion in the
course of site development. Any site development or construction shall preserve
installed components of a storm water management plan. All disturbed soils
shall be protected during the course of construction to prevent exposure to
storm water and to contain eroded materials should contact be made.
   C.   Grass Infiltration Areas: Any and all collected storm water shall be
directed to grass infiltration areas which shall be established with grass and
other approved plant materials or to an acceptable alternative storm water
management design. Grass infiltration areas or their acceptable alternatives
shall be sized to hold and treat the first one-half inch (1/2") of storm water
runoff from all impervious surfaces. The overall storm water disposal system
shall have a capacity to handle a 25-year storm based upon the appropriate
Idaho Transportation Department IDF curve, without damage to the storm water
management system or adjacent land and improvements. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-6: GUARANTEE OF INSTALLATION:
No final plat shall be recorded until the storm water management facilities are
in place and functioning as designed or until a guarantee of financial surety
is provided to and accepted by the City. No certificate of occupancy will be
issued until the storm water management system has been installed and is
functioning as designed. If, in the judgment of the storm water ordinance
administrator, as appointed by the City Council, project occupancy can be
achieved without harm to the environment or potential occupants, occupancy may
proceed upon receipt of an acceptable guarantee of financial surety to complete
installation when weather conditions or other variables allow. In no case shall
such guarantee be allowed if the incomplete improvements would result in
increased erosion, sedimentation, or other damage to the development, public
improvements, subsurface or surface waters, or the proposed storm water
management system. At any time, the City is authorized to stop work on the
installation of subdivision improvements, to embargo further issuance of
building permits on a development, to stop work on any individual building or
development of any individual building site, or to otherwise take steps
necessary to protect the waters of the City from damage as a result of
development. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-7: ADOPTION OF SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION:
The City may adopt, by resolution, design standards, definitions of
terminology, administrative procedures, etc., intended to implement the general
requirements and performance standards set forth in this Chapter. Changes in
the design standards may be accomplished by subsequently adopted resolutions.
Such design standards may be complied with in alternative ways that will
contribute to rational achievement of the general requirements and performance
standards set forth in this Chapter; provided, that any such changes must be
proposed by a qualified, licensed professional, subject to review and approval
by the City. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-8: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
No person shall damage, harm, fail to install or complete or otherwise impair
the grass infiltration areas, approved methods of transmission of storm water
to grass infiltration areas or any portion of a storm water management system
installed pursuant to this Chapter. Unless other provisions are made in the
process of development review and approval, responsibility for maintenance of
storm water system elements remains with the property owner and violation of
these maintenance requirements shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-9: VARIANCE:
A variance from the requirements of this Chapter or from the design standards
adopted pursuant to this Chapter granting a variance due to unique site
characteristics may only be granted in such circumstances if the approval of
the variance would not otherwise impair achievements of the standards of
purpose of this Chapter, would not impose additional burden upon adjoining or
downstream lands or landowners, or otherwise disrupt the scheme of storm water
management in the community. It shall be incumbent upon anyone requesting a
variance to provide data showing that alternative methods of storm water
handling proposed will produce comparable efficacy of the storm water
management measures required by this Chapter. No variance shall be issued
unless all elements of this Section are met. Any request for variance from the
terms of this Chapter shall be first submitted to the Storm Water Ordinance
administrator, who shall conduct a hearing in accord with provisions of Idaho
Code, section 67-6516 and forward a recommendation to the City Council, who
shall make the final decision concerning the variance. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94)
8-3-10: PENALTIES:
Provision of this Chapter may be enforced in the following manner:
   A.    Violation of the terms of this Chapter may be considered a criminal
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.    May be enforced by civil action, compel performance and completion of,
or maintenance of, facilities installed pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.    May have building permits or certificates of occupancy denied or
revoked as the case may be. Occupancy of a dwelling or building without an
approved certificate of occupancy shall constitute a violation of this Chapter
in addition to any building or zoning ordinance from which the occupancy
requirement derives. (Ord. 380, 5-2-94; 1995 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: HUD 3280 Adopted
8-4-3: NFPA 501A Adopted
8-4-4: Manufactured Homes Permitted
8-4-5: Substandard Transportable Dwelling
8-4-6: Physical Requirements For Manufactured Homes
8-4-7: Building Permit Required
8-4-8: Minimum Acreage For Manufactured Home Park/Area
8-4-9: Responsibilities Of The Developer
8-4-10: Park Requirements
8-4-11: Inspection Of Parks
8-4-12: Refuse Handling; Insect And Rodent Control In Parks
8-4-13: Responsibilities Of Park Management And Park Occupants
8-4-14: Penalty For Violation
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official building inspector of the city of Spirit Lake.
CITY: The city of Spirit Lake, Idaho.
DEVELOPER: Any individual person, firm, trust, partnership, or private
association or corporation undertaking the venture of improving and/or building
a structure upon a lot.
HUD 3280: The code of federal regulations, housing and urban development part
3280, manufactured home construction and safety standard.
LOT: For the purpose of this chapter, a "Lot" is a parcel of land at least
sufficient in size to meet the minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage,
and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as herein required.
Such lots shall have frontage on an improved street or thoroughfare and may
consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record.
   B.   A portion of a lot of record.
   C.   A combination of complete contiguous lots of record, and portions of
lots of record, and/or of contiguous portions of lots of record under one
owner.
   D.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed since June 15, 1976, that bears the
seal of the U.S. department of housing and urban development (HUD) indicating
it has met the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the U.S.
department of housing and urban development or the uniform building code and
when erected on site is seven hundred (700) or more square feet of exterior
measurement and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with a permanent foundation, or "pit set" with tongue and axles
removed when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained within.
MANUFACTURED HOME AREA: An area of definite dimensions which has been planned
and improved for the placement of manufactured homes exclusively, and within
which the individual lots which comprise it are offered for sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any lot or tract of land or contiguous lots under
single ownership, upon which two (2) or more manufactured home habitations are
parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes; including any roadway,
building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used as part of the facilities of
such park.
NFPA 501A: The publication, Installation of Manufactured Homes Including
Manufactured Home Park Requirements, (which will be applied to manufactured
home parks for the purpose of this chapter) NFPA 501A 1977, or the most current
edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and the
Manufactured Housing Institute (MHI) and excluding this publications's
definitions of a manufactured home, manufactured home park.
PERSON: An individual, firm, trust, partnership, or public or private
association or corporation.
SITE AREA: Shall apply to the applicable zone.
SUBSTANDARD TRANSPORTABLE DWELLING: Any motor home, travel trailer, camping
trailer, recreational vehicle or any other factory built transportable dwelling
unit which is not constructed in conformance with HUD 3280, and/or which has an
exterior measurement of less than four hundred (400) square feet. (Ord. 428, 7-
30-1998; amd. Ord. 588, 2-27-2019; Ord. 592, 2-27-2019)
8-4-2: HUD 3280 ADOPTED:
The publication, Code of Federal Regulations, Housing and Urban Development
part 3280, published April 1, 1988, or the most recent edition thereof is
herewith adopted by reference. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-3: NFPA 501A ADOPTED:
The publication, NFPA 501A is herewith adopted by reference. (Ord. 428, 7-30-
1998)
8-4-4: MANUFACTURED HOMES PERMITTED:
Manufactured homes as defined in this chapter shall be permitted with an
approved building permit. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-5: SUBSTANDARD TRANSPORTABLE DWELLING:
   A.   Not To Be Occupied As A Dwelling: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, a substandard transportable dwelling shall not be occupied for
dwelling purposes. The vehicle shall not be utilized as a temporary residence
for more than thirty (30) continuous calendar days unless the RV is parked in
an approved campground/RV park. Such occupancy shall not be allowed after
October 31 through March 31.
   B.   Connections Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
substandard transportable dwelling shall not be connected in any way to
external sources of electricity, or water, nor shall it be connected in any
manner to an external septic or other sewage storage or disposal system, nor
shall waste solids or liquids of any type be allowed to drain from such a
dwelling into or onto the ground. All park spaces shall be connected to an
approved sewage disposal facility.
   C.   Exceptions: A person desiring to occupy a substandard transportable
dwelling on a temporary basis while constructing an on site built home or
installing an approved manufactured home, may apply to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for a special permit to do so. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may, at its discretion, issue such a permit, subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Such a special permit shall be issued only concurrently with a
regular building permit to construct or install an approved type, permanent
dwelling on the same site. Such special permit shall expire one hundred twenty
(120) days from its date of issuance.
      2.   There shall be an administrative fee of five dollars ($5.00) charged
for such a special permit, which shall be credited to the City's General Fund.
      3.   As a condition of occupancy, the temporary, substandard dwelling
shall be connected to electric, water and sewage disposal systems during
occupancy, and shall be disconnected from such systems upon the expiration of
the special permit. It shall then be removed from the premises or situated upon
the premises in compliance with the provisions of the Spirit Lake Planning and
Zoning Ordinance. A civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day shall be
assessed against the property owner for each occupant/RV/substandard
transportable dwelling violating this section.
   D.   Space In Parks And Connections: (Rep. by Ord. 588, 2-27-2019)
   E.   Within City; Months Prohibited: A substandard transportable dwelling
may be occupied and connected for a maximum of thirty (30) days, to suitable
water, electric and sewage disposal systems when such a dwelling is situated
within a City approved campground providing such facilities. Such occupancy
shall not be allowed after October 31 through March 31.
   F.   Accessory Or Outbuilding: A substandard transportable dwelling may be
utilized as an accessory or outbuilding to a main, approved dwelling on that
same property, however, cooking, laundering, or bathing shall not be performed
within such a substandard dwelling, nor shall it be connected in any manner to
an outside water supply or sewage storage or disposal system, nor shall it be
situated upon a property in a manner not in accordance with the provisions of
Spirit Lake Planning and Zoning Ordinance, nor shall it be situated upon any
public right-of-way or other City property.
   G.   Residential Visitor/Guest Connections: A visitor/guest desiring to
occupy a self-contained substandard transportable dwelling while visiting a
resident may connect to electricity and water, but may not connect septic or
other sewage disposal system, they must use a legal dump site. The substandard
dwelling shall not be stationed upon any public right-of-way or other City
owned property.
      1.   As a condition of occupancy, the homeowner/resident must notify City
Hall. After seven (7) days a permit must be obtained from City Hall.
      2.   Such a permit shall be issued to a residence for eight (8) days to
fifteen (15) days maximum per year and shall have an administrative fee of
seven dollars ($7.00) per week charge, which is nonrefundable. Issuance of the
permit may be denied if the proposed occupancy is objected to or found to be
unreasonably intrusive upon the privacy of adjacent lot owners. The permit will
have the substandard transportable dwelling's license number and legal
description. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998; amd. Ord. 588, 2-27-2019; Ord. 592, 2-27-
2019; Ord. 594, 4-18-2019; Ord. 622, 6-8-2021)
8-4-6: PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes, wherever they may be situated, shall require a City permit
prior to installation on site and they shall not be occupied for dwelling
purposes if they do not meet the following requirements:
   A.    Are provided with, and connected to, water, electric, and sanitary
sewage disposal services at least equal to those required of conventional on
site constructed dwellings.
   B.    Are sited upon their lots in accordance with all applicable City
regulations.
   C.   Have permanent foundations or are "pit set" to conform with the
appearance of neighboring homes, with the exception of flood prone areas. All
manufactured homes in these areas shall be set per FEMA requirements. The
lowest floor level shall be at the base flood elevation and anchored per
standards 1
. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
   D.    Those manufactured homes, which occupy space in manufactured home
parks, shall have permanent skirting installed of a material and color that
blends harmoniously with the rest of the exterior of the dwelling, to enclose
all areas between the lower edge of the outside walls and the finished grade.
Such skirting shall be installed within sixty (60) days of installation of the
dwelling on site. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998; amd. Ord. 588, 2-27-2019)
   E.    Shall have a minimum twenty four inch (24") crawlspace under the
entire unit. Such crawlspace shall be ventilated and shall have access doors in
accordance with NFPA 501A.
   F.    Shall have permanent steps affixed to all exits.
   G.    Shall have the tongue removed except in floodplain areas, in which
case the tongue may be left in place, but shall be camouflaged to the extent
that it is not recognizable.
   H.    The minimum snow load requirement for manufactured homes set within
the City of Spirit Lake shall be forty (40) pounds. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2 of this title.
8-4-7: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any
manufactured home park within the limits of the City unless he holds a valid
permit issued by the City in the name of such person for the specific
construction or extension proposed.
   B.   All applications for permits shall be made to the city and shall
contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Interest of the applicant in the manufactured home park/area.
      3.   Location and legal description of the manufactured home park/area.
      4.   Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park
showing the following:
         a.    The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
         b.    The number, location and size of all manufactured home lots.
         c.    The location and width of roadways and walkways.
         d.    The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures.
         e.    The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
         f.    Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and
sewage disposal facilities.
         g.    Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be
constructed within the manufactured home park/area.
         h.    The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.
   C.    Each application for a building permit shall be reviewed by the
building inspector, planning and zoning commission and the city council and
shall be approved by each before it shall become valid.
   D.    Should a building permit be revoked for fraud or any other reason,
which is the fault of the property owner, or contractor, the application
process must be reinitiated and the previously paid fee is forfeited. (Ord.
428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-8: MINIMUM ACREAGE FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK/AREA:
A manufactured home park or manufactured home area shall have a total area of
not less than three (3) acres. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-9: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEVELOPER:
   A.    The developer of each manufactured home park or manufactured home area
shall be responsible for accomplishing any and all of the following which may
be required in the development of a manufactured home park or area: opening and
extending streets, alleys, drainage culverts, purchase of all materials,
extending water and sewer mains including any required engineering, labor,
pipes, manholes, cleanouts, shutoff valves, fire hydrants, sewage lift
stations, meters and any other required materials or services, and extending
electrical, gas, telephone, cable television or any other services to and into
the manufactured home park or area.
   B.   The developer shall provide water, sewer and electric stubs to the
property line of each lot within a manufactured home area. Such water and sewer
stubs shall be connected to active city water and sewer mains.
   C.    All costs whatsoever incurred in the development of a manufactured
home park or manufactured home area shall be borne entirely by the developer of
such a project and the city shall be responsible for none of such costs unless
the city council shall, by a majority roll call vote of the full council,
direct that the city shall participate to some, specific given extent in
sharing certain costs with the developer.
   D.    The developer shall be responsible for installation of a permanent
sight obscuring fence around the manufactured home park, and suitable
landscaping outside of that fence. See section 5, parts 5.4 and 5.5, Spirit
Lake planning and zoning ordinance 317.
   E.    The developer shall provide for playground area within the development
boundaries if the manufactured home park is intended for use by families with
children under the age of fifteen (15). This is to preclude the necessity of
small children crossing roads to gain access to play areas. (Ord. 428, 7-30-
1998)
8-4-10: PARK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.    Manufactured home park shall be constructed and operated in accordance
with this and any other applicable Spirit Lake ordinance, and with parts 2
through 10, (excluding the definitions of "manufactured home" and "manufactured
home park") and with appendix figure A-2, of the publication NFPA 501A.
   B.    Each individual homesite must provide for parking to accommodate at
least one vehicle off the street, drive roadway or walkways. (Ord. 428, 7-30-
1998)
8-4-11: INSPECTION OF PARKS:
   A.    The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
   B.    The building inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter and
regulation issued hereunder.
   C.    The building inspector shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all residents of the manufactured home park.
   D.    It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of the manufactured
home parks, and manufactured homes contained therein, or of the person in
charge thereof to give the building inspector free access to such premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
   E.    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park to
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
manufactured home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repair or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this chapter and regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-12: REFUSE HANDLING; INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL IN PARKS:
   A.    The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured
home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent
harboring, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
   B.    All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent proof
containers, which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any manufactured home lot.
   C.    Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse.
   D.    Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate
cleaning around them.
   E.   All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once weekly.
Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private
agencies, the manufactured home park operator shall provide this service. All
refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered
containers.
   F.   Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the
manufactured home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting it
to a disposal site approved by the health authority.
   G.   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harboring and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures
to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the
health authority.
   H.   Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris that may
provide rodent harboring or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests.
   I.    Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harboring;
lumber, pipe, and other building material shall be stored at least one foot
(1') above the ground.
   J.    Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior opening in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
   K.   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harboring of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so
maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas
shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (Ord. 428, 7-
30-1998)
8-4-13: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARK MANAGEMENT AND PARK OCCUPANTS:
   A.   Park Management:
      1.    Shall ensure that the manufactured home park is operated in
compliance with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain
the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
      2.    Shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this
chapter and inform them to their duties and responsibilities under this
chapter.
      3.    Shall supervise the placement of each manufactured home on its
manufactured home pad or stand, which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
      4.    Shall maintain a register containing the names of all park
occupants. Such a register shall be available to any law enforcement officer
and to any authorized city employee or inspector.
      5.    Shall be liable for charges for calls for law enforcement
assistance in excess of two (2) per month per each residence. Fee schedules to
be set by the city council. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
8-4-14: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Each person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall have committed
a misdemeanor offense, and each day that each violation continues shall
constitute a separate misdemeanor offense. The penalty for each violation shall
be that prescribed by that Spirit Lake ordinance establishing the penalty for
misdemeanor offenses. (Ord. 428, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 5
SIGNS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Intent And Purpose
8-5-2: Applicability
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Permit
8-5-5: Location
8-5-6: General Exemption; Signs Permitted Without Permit
8-5-7: Generally Prohibited Signs
8-5-8: Permitted Signs In Residential Zoning Districts
8-5-9: Permitted Signs In Commercial And Industrial Zoning Districts
8-5-10: Nonconforming Signs; Removal Of Signs In Violation
8-5-11: Maintenance And Repair Of Nonconforming Signs
8-5-12: Installation, Maintenance And Repair Of Signs
8-5-13: Violation
8-5-14: Authority Of Administrator
8-5-15: Exceptions
8-5-16: Penalty
8-5-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to promote the health, welfare and
safety of the residents and visitors of the city while maintaining a visual
appeal and to prevent overly intrusive signage through business corridors and
within neighborhoods. Further, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter to
provide a reasonable balance between the community's visual character and the
sustainability of economic growth; to improve, maintain and enhance pedestrian
and traffic safety; and to ensure that signs themselves are safe and consistent
with building regulations; to minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on
nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent
enforcement of sign regulations. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to and regulate all signs within the city. (Ord. 516,
3-11-2008)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
AWNING: A shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building, that
is constructed of canvas or other cloth type material stretched over a frame.
AWNING SIGN: A sign which is attached to or part of an awning.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Off Premises Sign.
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which is limited to providing the name of
the on site building it is identifying, the address and date of establishment
of the building and other similar information which does not advertise for or
identify any particular business or activity operating in the building.
CANOPY: A shelter or roof like cover supported by either a building and/or
poles from the ground.
CANOPY SIGN: A sign that is part of or attached to the face of a canopy with
the face of the sign in a plane parallel to the canopy.
COMMUNITY SIGN: A sign located at the entrance of the city listing community
organizations, such as fraternal organizations, service organizations and
churches.
ENTITY: A business industry, profession, person, institution, organization,
enterprise, commodity, service assemblage, place, subdivision, solicitation, or
request for aid.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported primarily by uprights, braces or poles in
or upon the ground.
INSTITUTION SIGN: A sign which advertises an on site service or function having
primarily governmental, social, educational, or religious purposes.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof like structure attached to and extending beyond the
wall of a building to attract attention to and provide shelter for the main
entry (or entries) of a building.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign which is attached to or part of a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN: A sign mounted on top of a ground base, such that there is
direct contact or not more than twenty four inches (24") between the bottom of
the sign face and the base of the sign for at least one-half (1/2) the length
of the base.
MURAL: Any artistic display painted directly onto a wall which does not
otherwise qualify as a sign.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign that advertises goods, products or services not
sold or located on the property where the sign is located.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not attached to the ground or other permanent structure
or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs
designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frames, or
T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs, umbrellas used
for advertising; and signs attached to or printed on vehicles parked or visible
from the public right of way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to
day operations of the business.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which projects by length or width (not thickness) from,
and is supported entirely by, a wall, canopy, eave, parapet, or marquee.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or over the top of a roof. A roof sign shall not
include a sign located on a mansard roof if the sign is integrated with the
roof design. For the purpose of this chapter a sign that is architecturally
integrated into a mansard roof shall be classified as a wall sign.
SIGN: A presentation, display, or representation using words or letters, or
using a figure, design, picture, painting, color pattern, logo, emblem, symbol,
trademark or other representation so as to give notice, advertise, call
attention to, or identify any entity or event.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign hanging down or projecting downward from a canopy, eave,
awning, or other similar projection.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign requiring no structural ground or building support, and
displayed solely for temporary and short term announcement, message, or
advertisement or for land or building sale, rent, or lease.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to, erected or painted on the wall of a building
or structure, and which projects not more than eighteen inches (18") from such
wall. Wall signs shall include awning signs, canopy signs and marquee signs.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign painted on a window or door or located completely within
an enclosed building and visible from the exterior and that does not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the gross window or door area. (Ord. 516, 3-11-
2008)
8-5-4: PERMIT:
All persons desiring to erect, construct or paint a new sign, except those
exempt, shall make application to and obtain a permit therefor from the office
of the city clerk and shall pay a fee as established by resolution of the city
council for such permit. At the time such application is sought, applicant
shall furnish the following minimum information to the administrator or his
designee:
   A.    A drawing of the proposed sign;
   B.    Exact dimensions of the proposed sign;
   C.    A site plan showing the location and setbacks of the sign support
relative to property lines and any projection of the signage into the rights of
way or over public ingress/egress travelways;
   D.    Footing and structural plans that demonstrate "stability" as defined
in the uniform building code. Plans for signs over eight feet (8') in height
must be prepared and stamped by an Idaho licensed engineer;
   E.    Such other information as may be required by the city clerk for the
clerk's determination of compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord.
516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-5: LOCATION:
All nonexempt signs shall be located within the property lines of property
owned by or licensed or leased to the applicant. Placement of signs at
intersections shall conform to visibility regulations adopted by any
governmental entity having jurisdiction. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-6: GENERAL EXEMPTION; SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT PERMIT:
The following signs shall be permitted anywhere within the city and shall not
require a permit:
   A.    Construction signs which identify the architects, engineers,
contractors and other individuals or firms with the construction, but not
including any advertisement of any product. One sign, such sign not to exceed
thirty two (32) square feet each, shall be confined to the premises upon which
construction occurs during the construction period. Such signs shall be removed
within sixty (60) days of the beginning of occupancy.
   B.    Street banners advertising a public event may be erected as approved
by the city clerk or the clerk's designee. The banners shall be removed within
five (5) days after the termination of the event.
   C.    Window signs.
   D.    Directional, warning, street, building identification, traffic
control, informational, utility location identification or temporary special
event sign which is displayed by or on behalf of federal, state, county, or
city government.
   E.    Public utility signs identifying location of underground utilities or
warning of hazardous utilities.
   F.    Parking lot entry, exit traffic directional or parking sign which does
not contain any form of advertisement for or identification of entity.
   G.    City owned entrance, welcome and identification signs.
   H.    Property for sale or lease signs:
      1.    Residential zoning districts: One sign per street frontage, not to
exceed six (6) square feet in size.
      2.    Commercial and industrial zoning district: One sign per street
frontage, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size.
   I.    Community signs. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-7: GENERALLY PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.    No off premises signs are permitted, except temporary signs as defined
in section
8-5-3 of this chapter.
   B.    Roof signs are prohibited. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-8: PERMITTED SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.    Multi-Family Residences And Rooming Houses: A single identification
sign not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet indicating only the name and
address of the building/project and the name of the management thereof.
   B.   Home Occupations 1
: One sign identifying the home occupation mounted on the building and not
exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
   C.    Institutional, Public Service Or Utility Facilities: Public and
semipublic pole sign or monument sign identifying a permitted institutional,
public service or utility facility use on the lot shall be limited to the
following: One sign not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. No such
sign shall project higher than ten feet (10') above curb level. The sign may be
externally illuminated only. No strobe lights, flashing lights, rotary lights,
or beacons shall be permitted and the source of illumination shall not be
visible from any joining street or property.
   D.   Entrances To Subdivisions: One monument sign at each entrance to a
subdivision. The sign may be externally lighted. No strobe lights, flashing
lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted and the source of
illumination shall not be visible from any joining street or property. (Ord.
516, 3-11-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 12-9-8D of this code.
8-5-9: PERMITTED SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.    Freestanding pole signs, wall signs, projecting signs, awning signs,
canopy signs, marquee signs, monument signs, suspended signs, and portable
signs are allowed in commercial and industrial zoning districts, subject to the
limitations set forth this section.
   B.   Sign size shall be limited to a maximum of two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of total sign area per lot.
   C.    Freestanding or monument signs shall be limited to either one
freestanding or one monument sign on each lot street frontage. Freestanding
signs may not project over the property lines.
   D.   Projecting and suspended signs shall be limited to one projecting sign
and one suspended sign per business, profession, institution, organization or
enterprise on each lot street frontage.
   E.    No projection sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in size, nor
shall it exceed a height of thirty inches (30") above the building.
   F.   No suspended sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in size.
   G.   Projecting signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8')
to the ground below and fourteen feet (14') if over a driveway.
   H.    The total area of wall signs on a building wall shall not exceed three
(3) square feet times the length in feet of the wall, each wall calculated
separately.
   I.    Signs may be internally or externally illuminated, however, no strobe
lights, flashing lights, rotary lights, or beacons shall be permitted and the
source of illumination shall not be visible from any adjoining street or
property.
   J.    Portable signs shall be permitted on the public sidewalk only within
the commercial zone and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      1.    Number: Maximum number permitted shall be one sign per each one
hundred feet (100') of building frontage, except one sidewalk sign may be
permitted for each building if the building frontage is less than the one
hundred feet (100').
      2.    Size: Maximum size shall be four feet (4') in height and three feet
(3') in width.
      3.    Materials: Materials shall be solid and durable, and there shall be
no lighting.
      4.    Location:
         a.    Signs Serving Businesses: Signs shall be directly in front of
the business they serve.
         b.    Minimum Clear Width: A minimum clear width of at least six feet
(6') shall be maintained on the sidewalk for safe movement of pedestrians on
the sidewalk, and the location shall be subject to the approval of the city
council and engineer.
         c.    Anchoring: Signs shall be suitably anchored as determined by the
city, and must be removed from the sidewalk at the end of each business day.
         d.    Hold Harmless Agreement: Any person or business placing a
portable sign upon or adjacent to the public sidewalk in conformance with this
subsection shall execute an agreement by which the person or business placing
such sign accepts any and all liability for damages of any nature suffered by
anyone as a result of the placement or maintaining of such portable sign and
further shall agree to hold the city harmless from and indemnify the city for
any claims for damages. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS; REMOVAL OF SIGNS IN VIOLATION:
No sign or billboard shall hereafter be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or
relocated, except in conformity with the provisions of this section. The
changing of movable parts of signs that are designed to be changed or the
repainting of display matter in conformity herewith and maintenance and repair
shall not be deemed to be alterations within the meaning of this section. (Ord.
516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-11: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this code
regarding safety, maintenance and repair. However, if the sign suffers more
than seventy five percent (75%) appraised damage or deterioration, it must be
brought into conformance with this code or removed. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-12: INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIGNS:
All permitted signs shall be installed, maintained and repaired in conformance
with the adopted building codes of the city. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-13: VIOLATION:
Signs which are established in violation of this chapter or which are left in
place after removal was required may be removed by the city and impounded after
seven (7) days' written notice to the property owner. The fees for removal and
impounding shall be set by the city council by resolution. Signs erected or
placed within the public right of way may be removed by the city without
notice. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-14: AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the mayor
or the mayor's designee may enter at reasonable times any building or structure
or upon any premises to exercise authority granted to him by this chapter.
All signs may be inspected or reinspected at the discretion of the mayor or the
mayor's designee. The inspection may include footings, structural components,
and fire resistance.
If the mayor or the mayor's designee finds that a sign is in violation of this
section and that the sign, by reasons of its condition, presents an immediate
hazard to the public, the mayor, without prior written notice, may order its
removal or repair within a period of time the mayor may specify. If, within a
reasonable time as determined by the nature of the hazard and the immediacy of
the threatened harm to persons or property, the person responsible for the sign
cannot be found, then sign may be removed by the city, at the owner's expense,
or minimum repairs made that are necessary to bring the sign into compliance
and remove the hazard. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-15: EXCEPTIONS:
Exceptions to this chapter shall be heard by the planning and zoning commission
and processed in accordance with the zoning ordinance following the variance
procedures of the city of Spirit Lake. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
8-5-16: PENALTY:
Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner,
tenant, subdivider, builder, or any other person, who commits, participates in,
assists in or maintains such violation may be found guilty of any such
violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such
lawful action as may be necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 516, 3-11-2008)
TITLE 9
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
CHAPTER 1
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Geographic Areas Of City Impact Established And Defined
9-1-3: Comprehensive Plan
9-1-4: Subdivision Ordinance
9-1-5: Other Ordinances
9-1-6: Code And Ordinance Administration And Enforcement
9-1-7: Renegotiation
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of establishing the Spirit Lake area of City impact is to identify
an urban fringe area adjoining the City. The urban fringe area is realizing, or
will realize, growth and development pressures that must be planned and managed
in an orderly fashion. The area of City impact recognizes trade area,
geographic factors and the potential delivery of public services as being
associated with the City and comprised of areas that may reasonably be annexed
to the City in the near and distant future. (Ord. 396, 4-3-95)
9-1-2: GEOGRAPHIC AREAS OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED AND DEFINED:
The officially-adopted and agreed upon "Area of City Impact for Spirit Lake,
Idaho" is established by City Ordinance 396 and Kootenai County Ordinance 395,
and is set forth therein on the map entitled Spirit Lake Area of City Impact on
file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public inspection. The
area of City impact shall be known as Area 1. The map also defines the Spirit
Lake Watershed Notification Area, which shall be known as Area 2. (Ord. 396, 4-
3-95)
9-1-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The Comprehensive Plan and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted
by the County of Kootenai, Idaho shall apply to the area of City impact, Area 1
and Area 2, within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County, Idaho. The City
shall amend its Comprehensive Plan to be consistent with the Kootenai County
Comprehensive Plan, if in conflict. (Ord. 396, 4-3-95)
9-1-4: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
The Subdivision Ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto as officially
adopted by the County of Kootenai, Idaho shall apply to Area 1 and Area 2
within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County, Idaho. The Subdivision
Ordinance of the County shall also prevail over any City ordinances pertaining
to the division of original parcels of record, plat amendments, lot line
adjustments, minor subdivisions, short plats, or administrative lot splits.
(Ord. 396, 4-3-95)
9-1-5: OTHER ORDINANCES:
The Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map, other County ordinances and subsequent
amendments thereto, as officially adopted by the County shall apply to Area 1
and Area 2 within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County, Idaho. (Ord. 396,
4-3-95)
9-1-6: CODE AND ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.    Kootenai County shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the Plan and ordinances listed in Sections
9-1-3,
9-1-4 and
9-1-5 of this Chapter and shall receive all permit fees for inspections
performed to recapture direct costs of inspections, administration, legal
publications, or other costs arising from fulfilling the terms of each
ordinance or regulation.
   B.    Amendments to the Kootenai County Comprehensive Plan, requests for
preliminary and final plats or the vacation thereof, requests for zone changes
or any other type of development applications, involving property located in
Area 1 or Area 2 within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County being
proposed shall be reviewed by the City in accordance with title 67 and title
50, Idaho Code, who will give comments and/or a recommendation to the County
for approval, denial or the placement of special conditions.
   C.   Upon application to the County for a land use request, the County shall
provide written notice and a copy of the application to the City. The City
shall have thirty (30) days to comment after receipt of the notice, prior to
any public hearing on said request. The City agrees to return a response even
if they have no comment on the application to acknowledge receipt of the
application. If the City does not respond within the time period, it shall be
presumed that they approve the application. The Kootenai County Planning
Department shall notify the City, in writing, of the County's recommendations
and actions on said applications within the Spirit Lake area of City impact
within thirty (30) days following a recommendation or action on such matter.
   D.    The City agrees not to annex any property outside of Area 1 of their
established area of City impact, even if a petition from such property owner
has been received, but reserves the right to renegotiate the area of City
impact, Area 1 And Area 2 boundaries in the future.
   E.    Upon receiving a request for annexation within the area of City
impact, the City agrees to notify the County and allow the County thirty (30)
days to comment on such request prior to any public hearing on the request.
   F.    The City shall appoint a member on its Planning and Zoning Commission
to represent the area of City impact. This representative shall reside within
Area 1 of the area of City impact and shall be reappointed, upon any vacancy,
by citizens also residing within Area 1 of the area of City impact. (Ord. 396,
4-3-95)
9-1-7: RENEGOTIATION:
In accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526(d), the City or Kootenai County may
request in writing to renegotiate any provision of this agreement at any time.
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such request by either party, a meeting
between the two (2) jurisdictions shall occur. While renegotiation is
occurring, all provisions of the adopted area of City impact ordinance shall
remain in effect until said adopted ordinance is amended or a substitute
ordinance is adopted by the City and Kootenai County, in accordance with the
notice and hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code or
until a declaratory judgment from the District Court is final. Provided,
however, that the adopted ordinance or stipulated portions thereof shall be of
no further force and effect if both jurisdictions so agree in writing. (Ord.
396, 4-3-95)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Definitions
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or phrases appear in this title, they shall be
given the meanings attributed to them by this section. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word
"shall" is always mandatory; and the words "may" or "should" indicate a use of
discretion in making a decision.
ACCESS MANAGEMENT: The process that provides or manages traffic access to and
within land development while still preserving the flow of traffic on the
surrounding road system in terms of function, movement, safety, and capacity
needs.
ADMINISTRATOR: The mayor or designated person of the city of Spirit Lake.
ALLEY: A strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and
pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a
public road.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well defined and fixed
boundaries described by a recorded plat.
CAD DIGITAL DRAWING: A three and one-half inch (31/2") IBM compatible computer
diskette, providing the subject maps or drawing on AutoCAD Release 12, or more
current updates.
COMMISSION: The Spirit Lake planning and zoning commission.
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN: The current land use plan of Spirit Lake adopted
by the council pursuant to the Idaho Code.
COUNCIL: The legislative authority of the city of Spirit Lake.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street closed at one end by a circular area of sufficient size
for turning of emergency vehicles.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general
and public uses, reserving to himself no enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by
the owner presentment for filing of a final plat showing the dedication
thereon. The acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of
such plat for filing by the city.
DIRECTOR: The mayor or designated person's duly authorized agent.
DIVISION OF LAND: For the purposes of this title any transaction or action, not
otherwise exempt or provided for under the provisions of this title, which
alters or affects the shape, size or legal description of any part of an
owner's "land" as defined herein. Rental or lease of a building, facility, or
structure which does not alter or affect the legal description of an owner's
"land" shall not constitute a division of land.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to a specific person or public entity for
specific use or uses.
FINAL PLAT: The final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for
filing for record with the county recorder and containing all elements and
requirements set forth in the Idaho Code and in this title adopted pursuant
thereto.
IMPACT STUDY: A required study compiled by the applicant pertaining to the
effect of any proposed development in city services, including police, fire,
schools, public works (i.e., water, sewer, streets) and other anticipated
impacts to areas affected by applicant's proposal.
LAND: A legally created lot, tract, parcel, site or division which is shown on
an officially recorded plat, or is specifically described as a separate unit of
property on a deed executed prior to the effective date hereof.
LOT: A fractional part of subdivided lands having fixed boundaries, being of
sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and
area. The term shall be considered contiguous land under single ownership,
unless legally platted. Property bisected by a dedicated public road shall not
be deemed contiguous.
PLAT: A map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of
a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, roads and alleys or other
divisions and dedications.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision
showing the proposed general layout of roads and alleys, lots, blocks, and
restrictive covenants to be applicable to the subdivision, and other elements
of a plat or subdivision which shall furnish a basis for the approval or
disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.
SHORT PLAT: A document consisting of a map of a short subdivision, together
with written certificates and date, showing thereon the division of a tract of
land into lots.
SHORT PLAT PROCEDURE: Every division of land for the sale, lease or transfer
into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels within the incorporated areas of
the city of Spirit Lake where no new dedication, water line dedication, sewer,
or roadway construction is required.
SHORT SUBDIVISION: Every division of land for the purpose of sale, lease, or
transfer into two (2), three (3), or four (4) lots, plots, sites, parcels, or
tracts, within the incorporated area of Spirit Lake where no new dedications or
public utilities are required.
STREET: An improved and maintained public right of way which provides vehicular
circulation or principal means of access to abutting properties, and which may
also include provisions for public utilities, pedestrian walkways, public open
spaces, grassy swales and recreation area, cut and fill slopes, and drainage.
Streets may be classified as:
   A.    Minor: A street usually of limited continuity, which serves primarily
to provide the principal means of access to abutting property only.
   B.    Major: A street which serves primarily to provide through, heavy, or
fast traffic to accommodate general traffic circulation throughout the
community.
   C.    Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic
from minor streets to other collector streets or major streets.
SUBDIVIDER: A person, including a corporate person, who undertakes to create or
expand a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land for the purpose of sale, lease, transfer, or
building development into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels, within the
incorporated area of Spirit Lake.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMISSION: A committee established by the administration to
review the application for a preliminary plat.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance adopted by the council pursuant to the
Idaho Code. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 2
SHORT PLATS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Applicability
10-2-2: Procedures
10-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
Every division of land for the purpose of sale, lease, transfer, or building
development into not more than four (4) lots, tracts, or parcels within the
incorporated area of Spirit Lake shall proceed in compliance with this title.
The provisions of this title shall not apply to the following:
   A.    Any division of land for the purpose of adjusting the boundary line,
or the transfer of land between two (2) adjacent property owners, which does
not result in the creation of any additional building site.
   B.    Any division of land made by testamentary provision, the laws for
descent, or upon court order.
   C.    Any division of land made by cemetery or burial plots while used for
that purpose.
   D.    Any acquisition or division of land by a public agency for public
right of way purposes.
   E.    Any dedication or new public utility requirement, excluding right of
way or existing road.
   F.    Any division of land made by short plat and recorded within the past
five (5) years. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-2-2: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application Of Fees: Any person who undertakes a "short subdivision",
as defined in section
10-1-1 of this title, shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a
completed application form and checklist provided by the administrator or
person designated by council, accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an
amount to be established by resolution of the city council.
The applicant shall further be responsible for development, filing, and
engineer review fees and costs to cover costs incurred during the platting of
any development or subdivision, said fees to be established by resolution of
the city of Spirit Lake.
   B.    Plats And Plans Required: The drawing, map, and accompanying material
submitted with an application for short subdivision approval shall include, at
a minimum, the following information:
      1.    The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant or
corporate entities and all property owners, if different than the applicant.
All corporations shall furnish a copy of the last annual corporation report as
filed with the secretary of state.
      2.    A legal description of the entire area being subdivided, proof of
ownership, and a legal description for each of the proposed lots.
      3.    The size of each lot indicated by square footage computation,
sufficiently accurate to determine that each lot meets the minimum established
lot size requirements.
      4.    A copy of any existing or proposed restrictions or covenants.
      5.    A record of survey conforming to the requirements of Idaho Code,
sections 55-1901 through 55-1910 shall be prepared and contain the following
additional information:
         a.    All existing buildings and structural improvements and public
facilities.
         b.    Space for approval by the mayor and city engineer.
         c.    A tie to two (2) city of Spirit Lake survey monuments.
   C.    Distribution Of Plats And Plans: Upon receipt of a completed
application for short subdivision approval, the applicant shall forward copies
of the proposal to the following agencies for review:
      1.   Appropriate school district;
      2.    Panhandle health district;
      3.    Appropriate fire protection official; and
      4.    Other appropriate agencies as recommended by the city.
The application shall not be complete until written responses are received by
the administrator, or person designated by city council.
   D.    Planning And Zoning Commission Decisions: After receipt of a complete
application, the planning and zoning commission shall consult the city engineer
and then shall recommend that the city council approve or disapprove the
proposed short subdivision and shall immediately notify the city council, in
writing, of such decision. If an application is recommended to be disapproved,
the planning and zoning commission shall cite the specific reasons for such
recommendation.
   E.    Factors To Be Considered: The planning and zoning commission shall
recommend approval of a short subdivision when all of the following conditions
exist:
      1.    The proposed lots meet all established lot size and width
requirements;
      2.   Public water supply and sewage disposal are available;
      3.    All proposed lots abut an existing and maintained public street;
      4.    The decision to approve a short subdivision will not be contrary to
the public interest, health and welfare.
Upon receipt of the planning and zoning commission recommendation, the city
council shall consider such recommendation and all other relevant evidence to
determine that the conditions detailed in this subsection E exist. The city
council shall then approve or disapprove the proposed short subdivision
accordingly and within seven (7) days notify the applicant, in writing, of such
decision. If an application is disapproved, the city council shall cite the
specific reasons for disapproval.
   F.    Filing And Recording: Upon approval of short subdivision, the
applicant shall transmit a copy of the approved application and map to the
county recorder for filing. The applicant shall pay all recording costs
required by the county recorder. The applicant shall forward one reproduced
mylar original, one CAD digital drawing may be required, four (4) print copies,
and one copy of the recorded short subdivision to the city clerk for permanent
files at the city clerk's office, three (3) copies for administration and
planning and zoning.
   G.    Appeals: Any decision of the city council may be appealed to the city
council by the applicant or any interested party within thirty (30) days
following the issuance of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be on a form
provided by the city clerk and shall be filed with the city clerk.
   H.    City Council Action: The city council shall, at the next regularly
scheduled meeting following the receipt of an appeal, consider all matters
pertaining to the contested decision, together with all other evidence deemed
appropriate and shall affirm or reverse the original decision or shall remand
the matter to the planning and zoning commission for further investigation. If
the matter is remanded to the planning and zoning commission, the commission
shall act on it at the next regularly scheduled meeting, and shall forward
their recommendations to the city council for action.
   I.    Time Limit: Land within a short subdivision, the short plat of which
has been approved within five (5) years immediately preceding, may not be
further divided unless the application complies with the long plat procedures.
   J.    Enforcement: No person shall build on, sell, lease, or transfer any
land subject to the requirements of this title until a short subdivision has
been approved and filed. Violation of any of the provisions of this title or
failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The
landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official, or any other person
who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may be
found guilty of a separate offense and be liable for damages against the city
of Spirit Lake, including attorney fees. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city council or any other public official or private citizen from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to restrain any violation of this title or
the Idaho Code, or to prevent the same.
Further, no short subdivision required by this title shall be recorded by the
county recorder until such short subdivision has received approval by the
planning and zoning commission and city council. No public board, agency,
commission, official or other authority shall authorize any improvements on any
land in violation of this title.
   K.    Additions Or Deletions: The commission may make additions or deletions
to the short plat application and checklist in accordance with city standards.
(Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 3
LONG PLATS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Preliminary Plats
10-3-2: Preliminary Plat Standards
10-3-3: Final Plats
10-3-4: Final Plat Standards
10-3-5: Design Standards
10-3-6: Improvement Standards
10-3-1: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Applicability: Every division of land for the purpose of sale, lease,
or transfer, or building development into five (5) or more lots, tracts, or
parcels, within the incorporated limits of the city of Spirit Lake shall
proceed in compliance with this chapter. All exemptions as set out in
subsections 10-2-1A through D of this title, shall be applicable to all long
plats as set out herein.
   B.    Preapplication Procedure: After submission of a completed application
for preliminary plat approval, a subdivider shall meet with the administrator
to discuss the scope and objectives of the proposal. This discussion shall
focus on design possibilities and the standards and development criteria that
will be imposed by the city and the development impact on the city.
   C.    Application And Fees: Any person who undertakes a "subdivision" as
defined by section
10-1-1 of this title shall submit to the administrator a completed application
and checklist for preliminary plat approval on a form provided by the
administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee and
a deposit to cover projected publication and mailing costs in amounts to be
established by resolution of the city council.
The applicant shall be responsible for fees to cover costs incurred during the
platting of any development or subdivision; said fees shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
Each applicant shall further be liable for fees incurred for time spent by the
city engineer and/or public works director for supervision, inspections of
work, or plan review completed during the design and construction phases,
including preliminary and final platting, of any development or subdivision
project. The amount of fees assessed shall be established by resolution of the
city of Spirit Lake.
Each application shall also be accompanied by a title report from a title
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho, showing
ownership of the land sought to be subdivided and the interest of the
subdivider therein.
   D.   Plats And Plans Required: Subdividers shall submit a completed
application, to include checklists, along with eighteen (18) copies of any
proposed preliminary plat. In addition to showing the proposed general layout
of roads, alleys, lots, blocks and other elements of the subdivision, and
restrictive covenants applicable thereto, said preliminary plat shall show the
proposed location and size of water and sewer lines, including adjoining water
and sewer lines. It being understood that detailed plans and specifications
will be required for city review and approval at the time of the submission of
the final plat, or prior to construction of the improvements, whichever occurs
first. A preconstruction meeting will be required with the administrator and
city engineer.
   E.    Adequacy Of Plats And Plans: Following submission of an application
for preliminary plat approval, the administrator, and/or engineer shall review
the application and the required plats and plans to determine that the
preliminary plat meets the standards set forth in this title and contains
sufficient information to furnish a basis for approval or disapproval. If the
administrator determines that the application and checklist are complete and
sufficient, a file number and date of acceptance shall be placed on the
application. The commission shall then establish a date and time for a public
hearing on the accepted proposal application at the next regular planning and
zoning meeting. The public hearing shall be held not less than twenty (20) days
from date of acceptance thereof and shall coincide with a regular meeting of
the planning and zoning commission. If the information submitted is
insufficient, the commission shall return the application and materials to the
applicant with written comments outlining any deficiencies that must be
corrected.
   F.    Distribution Of Plats And Plans: Upon the acceptance of the
application, the applicant shall forward copies of the application and plat to
the following parties for comments:
      1.    Power, telephone and cable agencies;
      2.    Panhandle health district;
      3.    Appropriate fire protection official;
      4.    Superintendent of the school district;
      5.    Spirit Lake ambulance;
      6.    Other appropriate agencies, as deemed appropriate by the
administrator and/or city engineer;
      7.   Eighteen (18) copies shall be presented to the administrator for
distribution to the following agencies:
         a.    Planning and zoning commission, eight (8);
         b.    City engineer, one;
         c.    City council, five (5);
         d.    City hall, four (4).
   G.   Notice Of Hearing: Prior to the commission hearing, notice thereof
shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be also sent by U.S. mail,
postmarked at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, to all property owners
and purchasers of record whose property is within or adjacent to the area
bounded by lines three hundred feet (300') from the external boundary of the
proposed area and any additional area that may be substantially impacted as
determined by the commission. Notice shall also be posted on the subject
property not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
All hearing notices shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing as
well as a summary of the proposal, including the legal description of the
property and its general location. It shall be the responsibility of the
administrator to prepare the notices of public hearing and publish, mail and
post the same. The subdivider shall bear the actual cost of publication and
mailing.
   H.   Commission Action: Following the public hearing, the commission shall
consider all relevant evidence and comments and determine whether to recommend
that the council approve or disapprove the preliminary plat or return the
preliminary plat to the subdivider for modification. The commission may only
recommend contingencies to the council on preliminary plats that are beyond
their scope and power. In its review, the commission shall determine if the
proposed subdivision conforms to the general purpose of the comprehensive land
use plan, and whether the proposal includes appropriate provisions for streets,
drainage, alleys, and other public ways, open space, water supplies, sewer
disposal, fire protection, and other appropriate public and private
improvements.
Any hearing by the commission may be continued to the next regular meeting of
the commission at the discretion of the commission.
If the preliminary plat has not been returned to the subdivider for
modification, the commission shall transmit its written report to the council
as soon as possible after closure of the hearing. The report shall include the
recommendation of the commission and the facts that provide a basis for the
decision.
   I.    Council Action: At the next regular meeting, following receipt of the
commission report, the council shall review the commission report and all other
relevant evidence and take action to approve, reject the recommendation of the
commission, or return the plat to the commission for modification.
   J.    Approval And Authorization: Council approval of a preliminary plat
shall constitute authorization for the subdivider to develop detailed plans and
specifications for the improvements and facilities of the subdivision and to
prepare the final plat in strict accordance with the standards set forth by
this title and the conditions, if any, imposed by the council.
   K.   Expiration Of Approval: Failure to file a completed final plat
application with the administrator within six (6) months after approval of the
preliminary plat by the council, or by planning and zoning accordingly, or if
phased final plat approval is proposed and approved, then in accordance with
the phasing schedule approved by the council, shall cause the approval of said
preliminary plat to be null and void, unless an extension of time is applied
for by the subdivider and granted by the council, or planning and zoning
accordingly. A subdivider may apply for and receive only one extension of time,
not to exceed six (6) months, before expiration date.
   L.   Additions And Deletions: The commission may make additions or deletions
to the preliminary plat application and checklist in accordance with city
standards. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT STANDARDS:
   A.   Every preliminary plat application shall include one or more maps, the
horizontal scale of which shall not be less than fifty feet (50') to one inch
(1") or more than one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1"), together with
written data in such form that when the maps and written data are considered
together they shall fully and clearly disclose the following information:
      1.    The name of the proposed subdivision.
      2.    The legal description of the land contained within the subdivision.
      3.    The names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons,
firms, and corporations holding interests in said lands. All corporations shall
furnish a copy of the last annual corporate report, as filed with the secretary
of state.
      4.    A title report from a licensed Idaho title company showing the
names and mailing addresses of all property owners whose property is within or
adjacent to an area bounded by the lines three hundred feet (300') from the
external boundary of the entire proposal, excluding right of way, and two (2)
sets of addressed mailing labels.
      5.    The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the engineer,
surveyor, or other person that prepared the plat.
      6.    The location of the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision in
relation to section, quarter section, and quarter-quarter section lines and any
adjacent corporate boundaries of the city which are part of the legal
description of the property.
      7.    The scale of the plat and an indication of the north direction.
      8.    The boundaries and approximate dimensions of all blocks and lots
within the proposed subdivision together with numbers proposed to be assigned
each block and lot.
      9.    The number of lots, the smallest, largest, and average lot area
within the proposal site, and the total acreage of the entire proposal area.
      10.   The location, names, and width of all existing and proposed
streets, roads, and easements within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision,
with proposed location of streetlights and traffic control devices.
      11.    The developer's signed statements of proposed provision for
domestic water supply, sewage disposal and storm water management, together
with the proposed location of fire hydrants, the location and size of water and
sewer lines, including all operational materials needed to complete the system.
      12.    A sketch of the general vicinity in which the land proposed for
subdivision lies, showing the boundaries of lots, parcels, roads and street
rights of way that border the proposed subdivision.
      13.    Contours at two (2) or five foot (5') intervals, depending upon
existing topography, referenced to city elevation monuments, to show the
general topography, significant topographical features, wetlands, environmental
sensitive areas; the location of floodways, and 100-year flood boundaries as
determined by the federal emergency management agency and natural drainage
pattern of the area proposed for subdivision.
      14.    A copy of all existing and proposed restrictive covenants that
are, or will be, imposed upon the land.
      15.    The developer's signed statement of proposed provisions for gas,
electricity and telephone together with the proposed location of gas, electric
and telephone lines.
      16.    The location and identification of each and every variance from
the provisions of this title or the zoning ordinance requested by the
subdivider.
      17.    "Impact studies" as defined herein, as deemed appropriate by the
planning and zoning commission or administrator.
      18.    Identification of existing and adjoining zoning classification of
the affected property.
      19.    A written statement by applicant identifying proposed phasing and
completion schedule. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-3-3: FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Filing Period: At any time prior to expiration and following council
approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision to be
surveyed and a final plat prepared. Eighteen (18) copies of the final plat
shall be presented to the city and commission for review.
   B.   Commission Review: Within forty five (45) days following submission of
a completed application and checklist for final plat approval accompanied by
the materials required by this title, the commission shall review the final
plat to determine:
      1.   That the final plat meets all standards established by Idaho Code
and this title relating to final plats, which can be modified by the council.
      2.    That the final plat is essentially the same as the preliminary plat
and that the conditions imposed when the preliminary plat was approved have
been met. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the city engineer,
public works director or city council may recommend modification of the
preliminary plat up to the time of council approval of the final plat.
      3.    That the final plat bears the certificates and statements of
approval required by this title.
      4.    That the applicant has submitted a title report from a title
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho, confirms
that title of the land in the proposed subdivision is vested in the name of the
owner whose signature appears on the plat certificate.
      5.    That the facilities and improvements required to be provided by the
subdivider have been completed, and that the costs incurred by the city and
fees have been paid by the subdivider, or that the subdivider has provided an
irrevocable letter of credit or other suitable guarantee acceptable to the
city, in an amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost as
approved by the city engineer and with responsible sureties commensurate with
improvements remaining to be done, and costs to be paid, securing to the city
the construction and installation of the improvements and payment of the costs
which will be or have been incurred by the city within the fixed time period
established by the council.
      6.    That the subdivider has provided a standard written warranty that
the required water and sewer improvements and facilities will be free from
defects in material and workmanship for a period of one year from the date of
acceptance of the improvements by the city, secured by a performance bond in
the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the actual construction cost of the
warranted improvements and facilities. That the subdivider has provided a
warranty that the required street improvements will be free from defects in
material and workmanship for a period of two (2) years from the date of
acceptance of the improvements by the city, secured by a performance bond at
the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the actual construction cost of the
warranted improvements for the second year.
   C.    Commission Action: Following its review, the commission shall
determine whether to return the final plat to the subdivider for modification
or recommend approval or disapproval to the council. As soon as possible after
its review, the commission shall forward its written findings and
recommendations to the council.
   D.    Additions And Deletions: The commission may make additions and
deletions to final plat application checklists in accordance with city
standards.
   E.    Council Action: As soon as possible following receipt of the
commission's recommendation, the council shall review the final plat and
accompanying material. After its review, the council shall thereupon approve,
reject, or return the final plat to the commission for further action and
notify the applicant of such action in writing. Upon approval of a final plat
and filing or posting with the city the irrevocable letter of credit or other
guarantee for completion of required improvements and facilities, the applicant
shall forward the original to the county recorder for filing one recorded copy
to the county assessor; one reproducible mylar original, and if requested, one
CAD digital drawing, four (4) print copies of the recorded final plat and one
recorded copy to the city clerk to be placed in the clerk's permanent files;
one recorded copy to the planning and zoning commission; and one recorded copy
to the city engineer. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-3-4: FINAL PLAT STANDARDS:
   A.    Every final plat required by this title shall be prepared in
accordance to Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 13 as it now exists or is
subsequently amended or codified. The plat scale shall not be less than fifty
feet (50') to one inch (1") or more than one hundred feet (100') to one inch
(1"). The final plat together with written data shall be in such form that when
considered together they shall fully and clearly contain the following
information:
      1.    The name and legal description of the proposed subdivision.
      2.    The plat scale and north direction.
      3.    All section, township, municipal, county lines lying within or
adjacent to the subdivision.
      4.    The location of all monuments or other evidence used as ties to
establish the boundaries of the subdivision including a tie between a
subdivision corner and two (2) established city of Spirit Lake survey control
monuments.
      5.    The location of all permanent control monuments found and
established within the subdivision.
      6.    The boundary of the subdivision with complete bearings and lineal
dimensions.
      7.    The length and bearings of all straight lines; the radial, arcs,
semitangents of all curves.
      8.    The length and bearings of each lot line together with other data
necessary for the location of any lot in the field.
      9.    The location, width, center line, and name or numbers of all
streets, within and adjoining the subdivision.
      10.    The location, width, and description of all easements.
      11.    Numbers or letters assigned to all blocks and lots within the
subdivision.
      12.    The house and/or building number assigned to each lot within the
subdivision in accordance with the city plan.
      13.    Names of adjacent subdivisions.
      14.    The surveyor's certificate seal, and signature in substantially
the following form:
I,                        , registered land surveyor, hereby certify that this
plat is based on an actual survey of the land described herein conducted by me
or under my supervision, during the period of               , 20        through
           , 20      ; that the distance, courses, and angles are shown thereon
correctly; and that the monuments have been set and lot corners staked on the
ground as depicted on the plat.
      15.    A written statement of approval signed by the city engineer and/or
person designated by council, as to survey data; layout of streets, alleys, and
easements; street names and numbers; the design and construction of
improvements.
      16.    A written statement of sanitary restrictions and conditions as
approved by the panhandle health district and required by Idaho Code, section
50-1326 et seq.
      17.    A certificate bearing the names of all persons who have an
interest in the subdivided land, signed by said persons and acknowledged by
them before a notary public, showing that said persons consent to the
subdivision of the said land reciting a dedication by them of all lands shown
on the plat to be dedicated for public uses. Said persons shall sign a waiver
of all claims for damages against any governmental authority which may be
occasioned to the land by the established construction, drainage, and
maintenance of public roads.
      18.    All streets entering or within the development and/or subdivision
shall conform to good access management.
      19.    Signature blocks for approval by the mayor and city engineer,
planning and zoning chairperson, city clerk and/or person designated by
council. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-3-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.    Streets: The alignment of major streets shall conform with the adopted
comprehensive land use plan of Spirit Lake. The layout of streets shall provide
for the continuation of streets existing in adjoining subdivisions. The layout
of streets shall also provide for the future projection of streets into areas
which are not presently subdivided. Generally, private streets in new
developments shall be prohibited. Street design shall be governed by the city
standards for streets and storm water specifications.
      1.    Streets designed to be permanently closed at one end, (if approved
by commission and council), shall be in the form of a cul-de-sac and shall be
no longer than five hundred feet (500') with a turnaround radius of at least
fifty feet (50').
      2.    Right of way widths shall be as follows:
         a.    Minor Street: Sixty feet (60').
         b.    Major Street: Sixty feet (60').
      3.    Street names or numbers shall be approved by the city.
      4.    Alleys shall be required at the rear of all lots used for
commercial or industrial use unless adequate provisions are made for service
access, loading, parking, and utility easements. Alley right of way shall not
be less than eighteen feet (18').
      5.    Street widths and rights of way may be determined by the
administrator/city engineer and/or person designated by council, according to
accepted design standards.
   B.   Blocks: In general, blocks shall be as long as practical, consistent
with topography, access, circulation, and safety provided that the length of a
block shall not be less than three hundred feet (300').
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow for two (2) tiers of lots, provided that
the entire block width shall not be less than two hundred feet (200').
   C.   Lots: Lots shall be designed in conformance with the Spirit Lake zoning
ordinance and other adopted standards regulating lot area, width and length.
Reverse, frontage lots shall be prohibited. All lots shall be designed so that
they abut on a dedicated and maintained public street.
   D.   Cul-de-sac Snow Design: Cul-de-sacs shall be designed to accommodate
snow storage. A snow storage easement shall be provided in all Cul-de-sacs in a
location approved by the City engineer, Planning and Zoning Commission, and
City Council. The easement shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet wide and
fifteen (15) deep from the right of way. A curb cut shall be provided for with
the full width of the snow removal easement. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998; amd. Ord.
603, 10-16-2019)
10-3-6: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.    It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed
subdivision to have prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of
construction plans, including profiles, cross section, specifications and other
supporting data, for all required public streets and alleys, storm water
management, utilities and other facilities, including gas, electric, telephone
and/or cable TV, in accordance with ordinance 371 or in accordance with city
ordinances. Such construction plans and specifications shall be based on
preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat.
Construction plans and specifications shall be prepared for approval by the
administrator, city engineer and/or person designated by council, prior to the
commencement of any construction of required improvements and facilities, or
prior to approval of the final plat, whichever occurs first. All costs of
construction, including improvements for the subdivision and extension of
public utilities, if necessary, shall be at the sole expense of the subdivider.
Construction plans may also be subject to approval by the responsible public
agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
city's or public agencies' standards or specifications, and required
improvements and facilities shall be installed in conformance with the
following conditions and specifications:
      1.    Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code, section 50-
1301 et seq., as amended from time to time.
      2.    All streets shall be constructed in accordance with city of Spirit
Lake street standards and specifications and supplemental standards adopted by
the city council. Water and sewer line construction shall be governed by city
of Spirit Lake standards and specifications.
      3.    Surface drainage from streets and other areas shall be in
accordance with city of Spirit Lake standards and specifications.
      4.    Available public water supply shall be provided in conformance with
standards adopted by the council and the Idaho department of health and
welfare.
      5.    Adequate provisions for fire protection shall be made in accordance
to fire district standards and the uniform fire code.
      6.    Street signs corresponding in design to those adopted as standard
for the city shall be installed at each intersection for convenient
identification of streets. Streetlights and traffic control devices shall be
installed and paid for by the developer, as required by the city or
governmental agencies.
      7.    Curbs (if required) and sidewalks on both sides of all streets and
streetlights shall be installed by developers of any subdivision prior to the
issuance of any building permit except developments of R1 lots with one acre or
larger which will not require curbs or sidewalks.
      8.    Underground utilities shall be provided for all residential lots.
      9.    Inspection by the subdivider's engineer of the construction of
sewer, water and other underground facilities to be dedicated to the city shall
be required. Street construction inspection, by the subdivider's engineer,
shall be required by the city of Spirit Lake standards. All as built drawings,
tests and field conditions, including those for gas, electric, telephone and
cable TV facilities, shall be reviewed by the city administrator and/or city
engineer, or person designated by council, prior to the final approval.
      10.    All costs incurred by the city for plan, specification or drawing
review or approval of construction inspection shall be paid by the subdivider.
      11.    An irrevocable letter of credit, or other suitable guarantee
required to be posted by the subdivider, shall be in an amount equal to one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the actual contract cost for construction of
the required facilities and improvements or projected construction costs as
verified by the administrator and/or city engineer, and/or person designated by
council, as the case may be, for all improvements which have not been
constructed and approved at the time of final plat approval.
      12.    At the time of final approval, the subdivider or its contractor
shall provide to the city a warranty that the required water and sewer
improvements and facilities are free from defects and workmanship for a period
of one year from the acceptance of the improvements by the city. This warranty
shall be secured by a performance bond in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of
the actual construction cost of the warranted facilities and improvements.
      13.    At the time of final plat approval, the subdivider or its
contractor shall provide to the city a warranty that the required street
improvements are free from all defects in materials and workmanship for a
period of two (2) years from the acceptance of the improvements by the city.
This warranty shall be secured by a performance bond in the amount of fifty
percent (50%) of the actual paid construction invoices for the first year and
may be reduced to an amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the actual
construction cost of the warranted improvements for the second year. An
extended warranty may be required upon recommendation of the administrator,
city engineer, and/or person designated by council. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL LAND DONATION
SECTION:
10-4-1: Application
10-4-2: Land Required
10-4-3: Amount Of Land To Be Donated
10-4-4: Use Of Land And Fees
10-4-5: Payment Of Fees
10-4-1: APPLICATION:
   A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions located
in the city of Spirit Lake as defined in this title.
   B.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any division of
property creating four (4) or fewer lots. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-4-2: LAND REQUIRED:
It is hereby determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare,
and safety require that 0.018 acres of property per dwelling unit or equivalent
residence as defined in the Spirit Lake sewer ordinance be donated for
municipal use, as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-4-3: AMOUNT OF LAND TO BE DONATED:
The amount of land required to be donated shall be based on the net area
included in the subdivision, mobile home park, or commercial development. The
net area will be computed by calculating from the plat the land area exclusive
of proposed or existing public streets and other public lands. (Ord. 427, 7-30-
1998)
10-4-4: USE OF LAND AND FEES:
The land and/or fees received under this chapter shall be without restriction
of limitation of any kind. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
10-4-5: PAYMENT OF FEES:
The full amount of fees shall be paid at the time of final approval sign off of
the commercial site plan or subdivision by the city, or in phased developments.
The fee shall be based upon each separate phase of the development and shall be
paid as each phase receives final plat sign off. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 5
VARIANCES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Variances
10-5-1: VARIANCES:
The commission may recommend to the council, as a result of unique
circumstances such as topographic physical limitations or a planned unit
development, a variance from the provisions of this title on a finding that
undue hardship results from the strict compliance with specific provisions or
requirements of this title, or that application of such provision or
requirement is impracticable.
No variance shall be favorably acted upon by the council unless there is a
finding upon recommendation by the commission, as a result of a public hearing,
that all of the following exists:
   A.    That there are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of this title would
clearly be impracticable or unreasonable; in such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provisions or requirement
involved;
   B.    That strict compliance with the requirements of this title would
result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual
topography, other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not
self-inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the
achievement of the objectives of this title;
   C.    That the granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the
property is situated;
   D.    That such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code;
   E.    That such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this title, planning and zoning ordinance and the comprehensive
land use plan. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Violations And Enforcement
10-6-2: Violations; Penalties
10-6-1: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.    Final Plat Approval Required: No person shall build on, sell, lease,
or transfer, or offer for sale, lease or transfer, any land subject to the
requirements of this title until a final plat has been approved by the council,
signed by the mayor, and filed with the county recorder.
   B.   Trade Waste: Construction and demolition debris: Builders, Contractors,
or Developers must follow the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality
Guidelines on Burning Waste and Materials. Builders, Contractors, or Developers
are prohibited from transporting trade waste or discarded materials generally
considered to be non-hazardous in nature, including but not limited to, metal,
glass, brick, concrete, asphalt, pipe, wallboard, lumber from construction and/
or landscaping, including rocks, soil, trees, stumps, brush and other
vegetative matter from one building site to another building site.
   C.   Violation Prohibited: No building permit or other development permit
shall be issued for any lot, tract, or parcel of land divided in violation of
this title. Further, no public board, agency, commission, official, or other
authorities shall proceed with the construction of, or authorize the
construction of, any of the improvements required by this title until a final
plat has been approved by the council, signed by the mayor, and filed. The city
attorney may in addition to taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary,
take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this title.
   D.   Penalty: Violation of any of the provisions of this title, or the Idaho
Code, or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official, or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the council or any other public official(s) or private
citizen(s) from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of this title or the Idaho Code.
   E.   Appeal: The director shall issue notice to the landowner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official, or any other person providing fifteen
(15) days in which to appeal such violation. If an appeal is made, the appeal
shall be heard at the next regular city council meeting following filing of the
appeal. The city council shall issue its decision on the appeal within five (5)
working days of the regular city council meeting at which the appeal was heard.
The city council’s determination of the appeal shall, if payment is required,
set forth the date and amount of payment due in order to satisfy such
violation. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998; amd. Ord. 603, 10-16-2019)
10-6-2: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.    Sale Or Exchange Of Lots Or Parcels:
      1.    It is unlawful for any subdivider to sell, trade, or otherwise
convey or offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land
in a subdivision unless he has fully complied with this title.
      2.    It is unlawful for any subdivider to sell, trade, or otherwise
convey any lot or parcel of land as part of, or in conformity with, any map,
plat, replat, or plan of any subdivision unless and until the map, plat,
replat, or plan has been first recorded in the office of the county recorder
under the provisions of this title.
   B.    Unlawful Representations Of Plats And Subdivisions: It is unlawful for
any subdivider, firm, or corporation owning a plat or subdivision of land
within the city to represent that any improvement upon any of the streets,
alleys, or other public ways of the plat or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and/or
administrator and/or person designated by council, or has been supervised and
inspected by the city engineer, and/or administrator, and/or person designated
by council, when such improvement has not been so constructed, supervised, or
inspected.
   C.    Penalty For Violations: Every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this title shall be punished by a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both for each violation.
   D.    Violations Of Continuing Nature: For any violation of a continuing
nature, each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall
subject the offender to the penalties provided in subsection C of this section
for each offense.
   E.    Action To Require Compliance: Notwithstanding the imposition of any
penalties hereunder, the city may institute an appropriate action or proceeding
to require compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 427, 7-30-1998)
TITLE 11
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Grant Of Authority
11-1-4: Police Power
11-1-5: Line Extensions
11-1-6: Indemnification
11-1-7: Complaint Procedure
11-1-8: Service Standards
11-1-9: Construction And Maintenance
11-1-10: Applicable Rules
11-1-11: Franchise Fee
11-1-12: Rates
11-1-13: Public Service Connection
11-1-14: Franchise Term
11-1-15: Forfeiture
11-1-16: Renewal Procedure
11-1-17: Receiver Sales Prohibited
11-1-18: Right Of Acquisition By The City
11-1-19: Acceptance
11-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the CITY OF SPIRIT LAKE CABLE TELEVISION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and when not inconsistent with the context,
words used herein in the present tense include the future; words in the plural
include the singular, and vice versa. The word "shall" is mandatory. The
captions for each section are for convenience only. Said captions have no force
of law and are not part of the sections. The following terms and phrases, as
used herein, shall be given the meaning set forth below:
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Spirit Lake or its designated
representative.
CITY OR FRANCHISOR: The city of Spirit Lake, Kootenai County, Idaho.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: The present federal agency of that
name as constituted by the communications act of 1934, or any successor agency
created by the United States congress.
FRANCHISE: The rights, privileges and obligations granted to the franchisee by
the terms of this chapter.
GRANTEE OR FRANCHISEE: USA Media Group, LLC.
GROSS REVENUES: The annual revenues received by grantee from all sources of
operations of the system within the city including, but not limited to, basic
service and cable programming monthly fees, pay television fees, advertising
carried on the system, payments received for cable television related services
under agreements, and installation and reconnection fees, less refunds. This
term shall include noncash items received in exchange for services; such
services shall be valued at fair market value. This term does not include
revenues derived solely from cable television service to areas outside the
city, from other operations conducted solely outside of the city or from the
operation of video products such as commercials, training films and video
programming that will not be shown on cable television, nor any sales tax,
excise tax or other taxes collected from the subscriber by grantee on behalf of
the state, city, or other governmental unit. Any revenues from city received by
the system as a whole or any parent system for the benefit of the system, (such
as, but not limited to, revenues from advertising carried on the system) shall
be prorated to grantee's revenues for Spirit Lake in proportion to the Spirit
Lake subscriber base. This term shall not include sales of real property or
rental of real or personal property for purposes other than those related to
cable television.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
SUBSTRUCTURE WORK: Trenching and installation of conduit, pull boxes and
pedestals done in order to construct underground CATV facilities, as well as
the conduit, pull boxes and pedestals themselves. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-3: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
There is hereby granted by the city of Spirit Lake to grantees the right,
franchise and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon,
along, across, above, over or under the streets, alleys, easements, and public
ways now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto
in the city, all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city
of a cable television system for the transmission of television and other
signals either separately or upon or in conjunction with any public utility
maintaining the same in the city with all of the necessary and desirable
appliances and appurtenances pertaining thereto. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, this franchise and grant shall and does hereby
include the right in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and
easements in the city to install, erect, all lines and equipment necessary to a
cable television system and the right to make connections to subscribers and
the right to repair, replace, enlarge, and extend said lines, equipment and
connections. The rights herein granted for the purposes herein set forth shall
not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of
said streets, alleys, and easements to any person at any time during the period
of this franchise; provided that nothing contained therein shall be deemed to
require the granting of additional CATV franchises if, in the opinion of the
city council, it is in the public interest to restrict such franchise to one or
more. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-4: POLICE POWER:
Grantee shall at all times during the term of this franchise be subject to all
lawful exercise of the police power of the city. The right is hereby reserved
by the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and any
other existing applicable ordinances, policies or practices, such additional
applicable ordinances, policies or practices as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power, provided that such additional ordinances shall be
reasonable, shall not conflict with or alter in any manner the rights granted
herein, and shall not conflict with the laws of the state of Idaho, the laws of
the United States of America, or the rules of the federal communications
commission. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-5: LINE EXTENSIONS:
   A.    Cable television services shall be installed or extended to all newly
annexed areas within the city when either of the following conditions are met:
      1.    Density per contiguous mile from existing cable facilities has
achieved a density of at least seventy five (75) living units per mile of cable
plant, or
      2.    Twenty five (25) living units per contiguous mile of cable
facilities have requested cable service.
   B.    Extensions into new subdivisions shall be at partial expense of the
developer. As of the effective date hereof, and notwithstanding the provisions
of any other section of this franchise, the minimum improvements which a
developer shall make or agree to make, at its sole cost, shall include
provision for a cable television service available to each separate lot within
the subdivision. The developer may engage the franchised cable television
operator within the city to perform the foregoing construction, or may engage
an independent contractor of its choice to do so. If an independent contractor
is engaged, construction shall be subject to final approval of the franchised
cable television operator within the city.
The city council shall have authority to promulgate such policy or policies as
it deems are required to effect the implementation of this section. (Ord. 468,
6-10-2003)
11-1-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
Grantee shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city, and
defend the city at its expense on account of any suit, judgment, execution,
claim or demand whatsoever against the city resulting from negligence on the
part of the grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its cable
television system in the city; and for this purpose grantee shall carry
property damage and personal injury insurance with some responsible insurance
company or companies qualified to do business in the state of Idaho. The
amounts of insurance to be carried for liability due to property damage shall
be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) as to any one person and three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one occurrence. A current
certificate of said insurance bearing the expiration date thereof shall be
filed with the city clerk. The grantee shall instruct its insurance agent in
writing that the city shall be listed as a "required notice party" with
reference to any notice or cancellation or any notice of the need to renew the
above described insurance coverage. In the event that the city should receive
such a notice, the city clerk shall provide the grantee with a written notice
of demand to correct the situation described by the insurance carrier within
the time limits provided for by the insurance carrier. Failure to provide said
certificate shall be grounds for revocation of this franchise.
The city shall notify grantee in writing ten (10) days after the presentation
of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on
account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the grantee. Where any
such claim or demand against the city is made by suit or other legal action,
written notice thereof shall be given by the city to grantee not less than five
(5) days prior to the date upon which an answer to such legal action is due or
within ten (10) days after the claim or demand is made upon the city, whichever
method yields grantee the larger amount of time within which to prepare an
answer. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-7: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
Grantee shall maintain a toll free telephone number that may be answered by
mechanical device, with the understanding that an employee or agent of the
grantee shall personally return the call of the customer within no more than
twenty four (24) hours of the initial call, and that the grantee shall respond
to the complaint or service problem within no more than five (5) days from the
initial call. The grantee shall keep and maintain a complaint log reflecting
the name of the caller, the time of the initial call, the nature of the
complaint or service problem, the date and time of the personal telephone
response, and the date of the corrective action taken. This log shall upon
reasonable notice be open for inspection by the city. In the event that the
city clerk receives a written complaint about the service of the grantee, the
city clerk shall provide the grantee with written notice of the complaint. The
grantee shall provide all new customers with a written notice of the above
described procedure and the telephone number or numbers, and shall annually, as
part of the grantee's billing procedure, readvise the customers concerning the
procedure and any changes that may have occurred. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-8: SERVICE STANDARDS:
The grantee agrees to provide one-way feed of color TV and FM radio broadcast
signals, with a capability of thirty six (36) channel capacity, with
improvements to signal quality as they become standard in the industry, to all
customers. The grantee shall maintain and operate its system and render
efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are, or may
be, set forth by the council as provided for in section
11-1-10 of this chapter. Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt
service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the
grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of
inconvenience to its customers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and
immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to its
customers. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-9: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   No transmission or distribution structures, lines and equipment shall
be installed or erected by the grantee within the city until the plans and
specifications therefore have been prepared, submitted to and approved by the
city council. The grantee shall periodically supply to the city of Spirit Lake,
revisions to the map of the grantee's system, with the understanding that the
exact location of an underground line will by necessity have to be determined
by an actual "locate" request before excavation should be authorized.
   B.   All structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the
city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use
of streets, alleys, easements and other public ways and places and to cause
minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners, and grantee shall comply with all reasonable, proper and lawful
policies, practices and ordinances of the city now or hereafter in force.
Existing poles, posts, conduits and other such structures of any electric power
system, telephone company, public utility, or other cable television system
located in the city shall be made available to grantee by mutual agreement for
leasing or licensing upon reasonable terms and rates and shall be used to the
extent practicable in order to minimize interference with travel and avoid
unnecessary duplication of facilities. Grantee shall make all arrangements and
bear the costs for agreements, leasing or licensing directed in this
subsection.
   C.   In case of any disturbance by grantee of roads, pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in
a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all roadways, paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in as good a condition as before
said work was commenced.
   D.    In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise the
city shall lawfully elect to alter or change any street, alley, easement,
sewer, drain, water line or other public way requiring the relocation of
grantee's facilities, then in such event, grantee, upon reasonable notice by
the city, shall remove, relay and relocate the same at its own expense.
   E.    Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit, issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the
moving of the building. The expense of such temporary removal shall be paid by
the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require
such payment in advance.
   F.    Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
all streets, alleys, easements, sidewalks and public places of the city so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with grantee's
facilities. Any debris resulting from subject trimming shall be removed by and
at the expense of the grantee. All tree trimming allowed under this chapter
shall be under the supervision of a certified arborist.
   G.    All poles, lines, structures and other facilities of grantee in, on,
over and under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public grounds or
places of the city, shall be kept by grantee at all times in a safe condition.
   H.    Grantee shall provide a minimum service level of ten (10) channels, at
least nine (9) of which shall be included in the basic service. Additionally,
the system installed by grantee shall have the capacity for at least thirty six
(36) channels. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-10: APPLICABLE RULES:
This franchise is governed by and subject to all applicable rules and
regulations of the federal communications commission, specifically including
part 76, and the laws of the state of Idaho and the ordinances of the city of
Spirit Lake. Should there be any modifications of the provisions of section
76.31 of the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission
which must be incorporated into this franchise, the city and grantee agree that
such incorporation shall be accomplished within one year after the effective
date of the FCC's adoption of the modification or upon renewal of this
franchise, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-11: FRANCHISE FEE:
In consideration of the terms of this franchise, grantee agrees to pay the city
a sum of money equal to three percent (3%) of grantee's "gross revenues" per
year as defined. Such sum shall be payable quarterly on or before the last day
of the month next succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the
revenues are properly earned or accrued: January 31, April 30, July 31, and
October 31.
During the term of this franchise, grantee shall keep on file with the city
clerk of the city of Spirit Lake, the number of subscribers and a schedule of
current rates and charges. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-12: RATES:
Rates charged by the grantee for service hereunder shall be charged in
accordance with any FCC regulations currently existing or as may hereafter be
adopted. The city reserves the right to regulate rates and charges in
accordance to such FCC regulations. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-13: PUBLIC SERVICE CONNECTION:
The grantee shall provide, without charge, one service outlet to each fire
station, school and police station within the city, and to such other
municipally owned buildings, city hall, civic center, hospitals, emergency
medical services and libraries, as may be designated by the grantor; provided,
however, that if it is necessary to extend grantee's trunk or feeder lines more
than five hundred feet (500') solely to provide service to any such school or
public building, that school or institution shall have the option of paying the
grantee's direct costs for such extension in excess of five hundred feet
(500'). If this option is not exercised, the grantee shall be released from the
obligation to provide service to such buildings. Further, grantee shall be
permitted to recover from any public or private building owner entitled to free
service, the direct cost of installing more than one outlet, or concealed
inside wiring, or a service outlet requiring more than two hundred fifty feet
(250') of drop cable.
The grantee shall provide access to the city to all channels in the event of an
emergency. The city shall be the sole determiner of what constitutes an
emergency under this section.
In accordance with applicable FCC regulations, franchisee shall make available
its facilities for carriage of "educational access" and "local government
access" programming and will exercise due diligence and its best efforts to
accommodate reasonable demands from educational interests within the city as
well as the city of Spirit Lake to such requests concerning the aforementioned
access programming. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-14: FRANCHISE TERM:
This franchise shall take effect and be in full force from and after acceptance
by grantee as provided in section
11-1-19 of this chapter, and the same shall continue in full force and effect
for a term of ten (10) years from the date of such acceptance. (Ord. 468, 6-10-
2003)
11-1-15: FORFEITURE:
   A.    Revocation: The grantor reserves the right to revoke this franchise
and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:
      1.    The grantee violates any provision of this franchise, except where
such violation is immaterial, without fault, or through excusable neglect;
      2.    The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt; or
      3.    The grantee intentionally evades any of the material provisions of
this franchise, or is found to have practiced any fraud or deceit upon the
grantor. Prior to any revocation proceedings under this section, the grantee
shall be given ninety (90) days notice in writing, which notice shall state
with particularity the grounds upon which the grantor relies.
   B.    Foreclosure: Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a
substantial part of the system, or upon the termination of any lease covering
all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the grantor
of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a
change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the
section of this franchise entitled "receivership" shall apply.
   C.    Receivership: The grantor shall have the right to revoke this
franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver, or
trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days or unless:
      1.    Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      2.    Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty (120)
days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having
jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and
agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this franchise. (Ord. 468, 6-
10-2003)
11-1-16: RENEWAL PROCEDURE:
Grantee shall have the option to request renewal of this franchise for an
additional period not to exceed ten (10) years. Should grantee desire to
exercise this option, it shall so notify the city in writing, not less than
three (3) months prior to expiration of this franchise. Upon exercise of this
option by grantee, the city shall conduct a full, open, and public renewal
proceeding upon prior notice and opportunity of all interested parties to be
heard. The renewal proceeding shall be held for the purpose of considering
grantee's performance under this franchise in order to determine whether to
renew this franchise. Renewal shall not be unreasonably denied and shall be
granted unless grantee is found to be unqualified, or has not performed
pursuant to this chapter or the city's policies or practices, to continue
operation of this cable television system. If this franchise is renewed by the
city, all of the terms and provisions contained herein shall be controlling
during the renewal period, except to the extent that said terms and provisions
are modified by the city, or unless this franchise is superseded by a new
franchise. Should the city, for any reason, be unable to complete the renewal
proceeding prior to expiration of this franchise, such denial shall be
accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason for the denial.
Grantee shall have the right to request review of any such denial by any court
of competent jurisdiction. Furthermore, in the event that the city denies
renewal, grantee shall be afforded a period of six (6) months following denial
within which to sell, transfer, or convey this cable television system to a
qualified purchaser at fair market value. During the six (6) month period,
which shall run from the effective date of the final order or decision denying
renewal, including any appeal, grantee shall have the right to operate this
cable television system pursuant to the terms of this franchise. (Ord. 468, 6-
10-2003)
11-1-17: RECEIVER SALES PROHIBITED:
As a condition of this franchise, grantee agrees that it shall not engage in
the business of sales or repair of television receivers owned by its
subscribers; nor shall it be responsible for the operating condition of said
receivers; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to converters,
decoders, home interactive terminals and other such devices as may be used in
furnishing any programming or service via grantee's cable television system.
(Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
11-1-18: RIGHT OF ACQUISITION BY THE CITY:
At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted, or upon
revocation of the franchise, the city, at its election, and upon payment of an
amount agreed upon between the parties or in the absence of agreement an amount
determined by arbitration pursuant to Idaho Code title 7, chapter 9, shall have
the right to purchase and take over the property of the franchisee to that
effect, the franchisee shall immediately execute such deeds or instruments of
conveyance to the city as shall be required to convey to the city title to the
property, free from any and all liens and encumbrances. The franchisee shall
make it a condition of each contract entered into by it with reference to
operations under this franchise that the contract shall be subject to the
exercise of this option by the city and that the city shall have the right to
succeed to all privileges and the obligations thereof at its option. (Ord. 468,
6-10-2003)
11-1-19: ACCEPTANCE:
The ordinance codified herein shall become effective when accepted by grantee
and shall then be and become a valid and binding contract between the city and
grantee; provided that the ordinance codified herein shall be void unless
grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after the final passage of the ordinance
codified herein, file with the city clerk of the city a written acceptance of
the ordinance codified herein and the franchise herein granted, agreeing that
it will comply with all of the provisions and conditions thereof and that it
will refrain from doing all of the things prohibited by the ordinance codified
herein. (Ord. 468, 6-10-2003)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Grant Of Franchise
11-2-2: Purpose Of Franchise
11-2-3: Conduct Of Grantee's Business
11-2-4: Vacation Of Properties By Grantor
11-2-5: Relocation Of Facilities
11-2-6: Preservation Of Grantor's Rights To Control
11-2-7: Indemnity
11-2-8: Forfeiture
11-2-9: Franchise Dispute Resolution
11-2-10: Franchise Fees
11-2-11: Prior Franchises Superseded
11-2-12: Assignment Of Franchise
11-2-13: Acceptance Of Franchise
11-2-1: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
Avista Corporation, its successors and assigns, is hereby granted a franchise
for the purposes identified below, subject to the following terms and
conditions.
   A.    Term: The rights, privileges and franchise are hereby granted to, and
conferred upon the grantee, as the grantee has made a long term investment in
constructing, maintaining and operating the electric utility system in and upon
the streets, alleys, and public rights of way of the grantor, as necessary to
provide electric service to the citizens of the grantor. Use of other public
lands of grantor may be permitted without additional charge in the sole
discretion of the discretion of the city upon determination that such
facilities can be installed and operated without impairment of the public value
of the lands in question. This franchise shall, unless it is sooner terminated,
as herein provided, extend for a term of twenty five (25) years.
   B.    Nonexclusive Franchise: This franchise is not, and shall not be deemed
to be, an exclusive franchise. This franchise shall not in any manner prohibit
the grantor from granting other and further franchises over, upon, and along
the franchised area that do not interfere with grantee's rights under this
franchise. This franchise shall not prohibit or prevent the grantor from using
the franchised area or affect the jurisdiction of the grantor over the same or
any part thereof.
   C.    Franchise As Contract: This franchise shall have the effect of and
shall be a contract between grantor and grantee and shall be the measure of the
rights and liabilities of the grantor as well as of grantee. Both grantor and
grantee shall have input and discussion prior to the final passage of this
franchise.
   D.    Effect Of Invalidity: The franchise is granted pursuant to the laws of
the state of grantor relating to the granting of such rights and privileges by
grantor. If any article, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise
is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity
shall not affect the validity of the franchise or any of the remaining
portions. The invalidity of any portion of this franchise shall not abate,
reduce, or otherwise affect any obligation required of grantee. (Ord. 505, 9-
12-2006)
11-2-2: PURPOSE OF FRANCHISE:
Grantor hereby grants to grantee, its successors and assigns, the right, power,
privilege and authority to enter upon all roads, rights of way, streets,
alleys, and highways lying within the boundaries of grantor and owned or
maintained by grantor now or in the future ("franchised area"), to locate,
construct, operate and maintain poles, wires, underground cables and all
necessary or desirable appurtenances ("facilities") for the purpose of
transmitting and distributing electricity. This franchise shall allow for the
placement of such facilities as may be necessary to provide service within the
city.
   A.    Trimming/Removal Of Trees: The right of grantee to maintain its lines,
facilities and appurtenances shall include the right, as exercised in grantee's
sole discretion, to utilize an integrated vegetation management program.
Grantee or grantee's contractor may prune all trees and vegetation which
overhang a public right of way, property or place, whether such trees or
vegetation originate within or outside said right of way, property or place, in
such a manner and to such an extent as will prevent the branches or limbs or
other parts of such trees or vegetation from growing to interfere with
grantee's facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the American national
standard for tree care operation (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the
direction of an arborist certified with the International Society of
Arboriculture or equivalent professional organization. Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent grantee, when necessary and with the approval of the
owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and
removing any trees which overhang streets.
   B.    Right Of Excavation: For the purpose of carrying into effect the
privileges granted hereunder, grantee is authorized at any time to make all
necessary excavations in the streets, alleys, roads, and rights of way within
the franchised area, but such excavation shall be carried out with reasonable
dispatch and with as little interference with or inconvenience to the rights of
the public as may be feasible. Grantee shall restore all streets, alleys,
roads, rights of way and public grounds to a standard as agreed upon for
conditions of safety and use after excavation. Except in cases of emergency,
such excavations shall require prior city approval. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-3: CONDUCT OF GRANTEE'S BUSINESS:
The grantor shall have the right to make and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations pertaining to the conduct of the grantee's business. Service shall
be supplied to the grantor and its inhabitants in accordance with the grantee's
rules and regulations and tariffs filed or hereafter filed with the appropriate
regulatory body of this state having jurisdiction over the grantee. This
franchise is subject to the provisions of any applicable tariff on file with
this state's public utilities commission or its successor. In the event of any
conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this franchise and such
tariff, the provisions of such tariff shall control.
   A.    Noninterference With Existing Facilities: All construction,
installation, repair or relocation of lines and appurtenances performed by
grantee along or under the roads, rights of way or properties subject to this
franchise shall be done in such a manner as not to interfere with the
construction and maintenance of other utilities, public or private, drains,
drainage ditches and structures, irrigation ditches and structures located
therein, nor with the grading or improvement of such roads, rights of way or
other public property subject to this franchise.
Grantee shall provide the grantor, upon the grantor's reasonable request,
copies of available drawings in use by grantee showing the location of its
facilities at specific locations within the franchised area. As to any such
drawings so provided, grantee does not warrant the accuracy thereof and, to the
extent the location of facilities are shown, such facilities are shown in their
approximate location. With respect to any excavations within the franchised
area undertaken by or on behalf of grantee or the grantor, nothing herein is
intended (nor shall be construed) to relieve either party of their respective
obligations arising under applicable law with respect to determining the
location of utility facilities.
   B.   Necessary Construction/Maintenance By Grantor: The laying,
construction, operation and maintenance of grantee's facilities authorized by
this franchise shall not preclude the grantor, its agents or its contractors,
from blasting, grading, excavating, or doing other necessary road work
contiguous to the said facilities of grantee, provided that grantee shall be
given reasonable notice of said blasting or other work. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-4: VACATION OF PROPERTIES BY GRANTOR:
If, at any time, the grantor shall vacate any road, right of way or other
public property which is subject to rights granted by this franchise, such
vacation shall be subject to the reservation of a perpetual easement to the
grantee for the purpose of operating and maintaining the existing facilities of
the grantee and other public utilities. The grantor shall, in its vacation
procedure, reserve and grant said easement to the grantee for grantee's
facilities and shall also expressly prohibit any use of the vacated properties,
which will interfere with grantee's full enjoyment and use of said easement,
provided that the grantor has notified the grantee of such pending vacation and
the grantee has notified grantor of the presence of its facilities or needs.
(Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-5: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Upon request of the grantor, the grantee shall relocate its facilities as
necessary within the present and future streets, alleys, highways and other
public places owned by the grantor. The grantor shall have no responsibility
for the costs of such relocations. The grantee shall bear the cost of
relocating its facilities at the grantor's request, unless the facilities are
to be relocated for the benefit of a third party, in which case the third party
shall pay the costs of relocation. Grantee agrees to defend and hold grantor
harmless when any third party is required to move grantee's facilities pursuant
to this franchise.
   A.    Public Right Of Way Improvement: Whenever the grantor causes a public
right of way improvement to be undertaken within the franchised area, and such
public right of way improvement requires the relocation of grantee's then
existing facilities within the franchised area (for purposes other than those
described in subsection B of this section), the grantor shall:
      1.    Provide grantee, within a reasonable time prior to the commencement
of such public right of way improvement, written notice requesting such
relocation; and
      2.    Provide grantee with reasonable plans and specifications for such
public right of way improvement.
   B.   Public Or Private Development: Whenever any public or private
development within the franchised area, other than a public right of way
improvement, requires the relocation of grantee's facilities within the
franchised area to accommodate such development; or the grantor requires the
relocation of grantee's facilities within the franchised area for the benefit
of any person or entity other than the grantor, then in such event, grantee
shall have the right as a condition of such relocation, to require such
developer, person or entity to make payment to grantee, at a time and upon
terms acceptable to grantee, for any and all costs and expenses incurred by
grantee in the relocation of grantee's facilities.
It is understood that the person or persons benefiting from a relocation of
facilities should bear the expense of such relocation. Grantee agrees to defend
and hold grantor harmless when any third party is required to move grantee's
facilities pursuant to this franchise.
   C.    Required Relocation: Any condition or requirement imposed by the
grantor upon any person or entity, other than grantee, that requires the
relocation of grantee's facilities shall be a required relocation for purposes
of subsection B of this section.
   D.    Costs: Nothing in this section shall require grantee to bear any cost
or expense in connection with the location or relocation of any facilities then
existing pursuant to easement or such other rights not derived from this
franchise. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-6: PRESERVATION OF GRANTOR'S RIGHTS TO CONTROL:
The grantor, in granting this franchise, does not waive any rights which it may
now have or may hereafter acquire with respect to road rights of way or other
property of grantor under this franchise, and this franchise shall not be
construed to deprive the grantor of any such powers, rights or privileges which
it now has or may hereafter acquire to regulate the use of and to control the
grantor's roads or rights of way covered by this franchise.
   A.    Expansion Of Grantee's Facilities: Any facilities and appurtenances in
streets, alleys, rights of way and public places, incidental to the franchise
system, that have been, or are at any future time acquired, leased, or utilized
in any manner by grantee are thereupon to be deemed authorized by and shall be
subject to all provisions of this franchise.
   B.   Change Of Boundaries Of Grantor: Any subsequent additions or
modifications of the boundaries of the grantor, whether by annexation,
consolidation or otherwise, shall be subject to the provisions of this
franchise as to all such areas. Grantor shall endeavor to notify grantee of any
change of boundaries promptly upon such change becoming effective.
   C.    Pole Contact Agreement: Grantor shall be permitted, upon reasonable
notice to grantee and without charge therefor, to attach its traffic control,
fire alarm and police signal wires to the poles of grantee in said grantor's
city, but at the grantor's own risk and only in accordance with standard safety
practices and codes. If there is not sufficient space available thereon for
said purposes, grantee's structures may be so changed, altered, or rearranged
at the expense of the grantor so as to provide proper clearance and capacity
for such wires. Such facilities shall be subject to interference by grantee
only when to the extent necessary for the proper construction, maintenance,
operation or repair of grantee's electric utility property and facilities.
(Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-7: INDEMNITY:
Grantee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantor, its
appointed and elected officers and employees, from any and all liabilities,
claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses, including costs and
reasonable attorney fees, that the grantor may sustain, incur, become liable
for, or be required to pay, as a consequence of or arising from the
construction, installation, maintenance, condition or operation of the
grantee's equipment or facilities, or appurtenances thereto, connected with
this franchise, that now or may hereafter be upon, under, over, in, across or
along, the highways, roads, alleys, bridges or other public ways or places of
the grantor; provided, however, that this indemnification provision shall not
apply to the extent that said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and so forth
were caused by or result from the negligence of the grantor.
Grantor agrees, to the extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the grantee, its officers and employees, from any and all liabilities,
claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses, including costs and
reasonable attorney fees, that the grantee may sustain, incur, become liable
for, or be required to pay, as a consequence of or arising from the negligent
acts or omissions of the grantor, its officers, employees or agents; provided,
however, that this indemnification provision shall not apply to the extent that
said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and so forth were caused by or result
from the negligence of the grantee. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-8: FORFEITURE:
If grantee shall wilfully violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this franchise through wilful and unreasonable neglect or wilful and
unreasonable failure to heed or comply with any notice given grantee under the
provisions of this grant, then grantee shall forfeit all rights conferred
hereunder and this franchise may be revoked or annulled by the grantor;
provided, however, the grantor shall give ninety (90) days' written notice of
its intention to revoke or annul the franchise during which period grantee
shall have the opportunity to remedy any breach. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-9: FRANCHISE DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
Disputes regarding the interpretation or execution of the terms within this
franchise will be submitted to the mayor for attempted mediation. If a mutually
satisfactory resolution cannot then be reached, then the grantee can appeal to
the city council, with each party reserving its rights to judicial relief.
(Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-10: FRANCHISE FEES:
As compensation for the right, privilege and franchise hereby granted, grantee
agrees to pay to the city on or before January 30, April 30, July 30 and
October 30, an amount equivalent to one percent (1%) of grantee's "gross
revenues" for the preceding calendar quarter. For purposes of this section,
"gross revenues" shall mean the amount of money billed by the grantee for the
electricity it sells within the corporate limits of the city to customers, less
uncollectibles. The city shall provide appropriate information to the grantee
to allow the grantee to identify which of its customers are located within the
corporate limits of the city for purposes of paying franchise fees. Grantee
shall not be responsible for any failure to pay franchise fees, which results
from deficiencies in such information provided by the city. In the event the
city annexes a new area into its corporate limits, the terms of this section
regarding franchise fees shall not apply to the annexed area until sixty (60)
days after the city has supplied the grantee with appropriate information for
the identification of the grantee's customers within the annexed area.
The grantee's franchise fee payment obligations hereunder shall commence with
the start of the grantee's first full billing cycle following the effective
date hereof; provided, that the grantee must first receive approval from the
Idaho public utilities commission for the collection of the franchise fee in
the rates charged by grantee.
The city shall have the right during the term of this franchise to increase the
franchise fee hereunder up to three percent (3%), by obtaining approval of a
majority of voters of the city voting on the question at an election held in
accordance with Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 4. Any such vote to increase the
franchise fee hereunder shall provide that the increased franchise fee will
apply to any electric service provider (other than the city) who utilizes the
city's streets, alleys or other public places to provide electrical service
within the city, during the term of this franchise.
   A.    Equality Of Franchise Fees And Costs: In the event that grantor
charges or imposes upon grantee any fees, taxes or other costs in connection
with the issuance, maintenance, existence, continuation, or use of the
franchise, or the public rights of way governed hereby, granted pursuant to
this document, then grantor shall impose equivalent charges, fees, taxes or
costs upon any other franchisee in the same business or competing with grantee.
(Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-11: PRIOR FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED:
This franchise shall update and supersede all prior electric franchises for the
above stated purpose heretofore granted to grantee or its predecessors, by
grantor, or its predecessors, and shall affirm, authorize and ratify all prior
installations authorized by permits or other action not previously covered by
this franchise. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-12: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall have the right to assign its rights, benefits and privileges in
and under this franchise. Any assignee shall, within thirty (30) days of the
date of any assignment, file written notice of the assignment with the grantor
together with its written acceptance of all terms and conditions of this
franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have the right, without
such notice or such written acceptance, to mortgage its rights, benefits and
privileges in and under this franchise for the benefit of bondholders. (Ord.
505, 9-12-2006)
11-2-13: ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of its acceptance of this franchise
within thirty (30) days of the passage and approval of this franchise by
grantor. (Ord. 505, 9-12-2006)
CHAPTER 3
GAS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
11-3-1: Grant Of Franchise
11-3-2: Purpose
11-3-3: Conduct Of Grantee's Business
11-3-4: Vacation Of Properties By Grantor
11-3-5: Relocation Of Facilities
11-3-6: Preservation Of Grantor's Rights To Control
11-3-7: Equality Of Franchise Fees And Costs
11-3-8: Indemnity
11-3-9: Forfeiture
11-3-10: Franchise Dispute Resolution
11-3-11: Franchise Fees
11-3-12: Assignment Of Franchise
11-3-13: Acceptance Of Franchise
11-3-1: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
Avista Corporation, its successors and assigns, is hereby granted a franchise
for the purposes identified below and subject to the following terms and
conditions:
   A.    Term: The rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted to, and
conferred upon the grantee, as the grantee has made a long term investment in
constructing, maintaining and operating a natural gas system in and upon the
streets, alleys, and public rights of way of the grantor, to provide gas
service to the citizens of the grantor. Use of other public lands of grantor
may be permitted without additional charge in the sole discretion of the
discretion of the city upon determination that such facilities can be installed
and operated without impairment of the public value of the lands in question.
This franchise shall, unless it is sooner terminated, as herein provided,
extend for a term of twenty five (25) years.
   B.    Nonexclusive Franchise: This franchise is not, and shall not be deemed
to be, an exclusive franchise. This franchise shall not in any manner prohibit
the grantor from granting other and further franchises under, along, across,
over and upon any of grantor's roads, rights of way or other property of
grantor subject to this franchise, that do not interfere with grantee's rights
under this franchise. This franchise shall not prohibit or prevent the grantor
from using grantor's property or affect the jurisdiction of the grantor over
the same or any part thereof.
   C.    Franchise As Contract: This franchise shall have the effect of and
shall be a contract between grantor and grantee and shall be the measure of the
rights and liabilities of the grantor as well as of grantee. Both grantor and
grantee shall have input and discussion prior to the final passage of this
franchise or any proposed amendments to this franchise.
   D.    Effect Of Invalidity: The franchise is granted pursuant to the laws of
the state of grantor relating to the granting of such rights and privileges by
grantor. If any article, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise
is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity
shall not affect the validity of the franchise or any of the remaining
portions. The invalidity of any portion of this franchise shall not abate,
reduce, or otherwise affect any obligation required of grantee.
   E.    Prior Franchises Superseded: This franchise shall update and supersede
all prior gas franchises for the above stated purpose heretofore granted to
grantee or its predecessors, by grantor, or its predecessors, and shall affirm,
authorize and ratify all prior installations authorized by permits or other
action not previously covered by this franchise. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-2: PURPOSE:
Grantor hereby grants to grantee, its successors and assigns, the right, power,
privilege and authority to enter upon all roads, rights of way, streets,
alleys, highways, lying within the boundaries of grantor and owned or
maintained by grantor now or in the future ("franchised area") to construct, or
otherwise acquire, and to own, maintain, equip, and operate plants and works,
and all necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto ("facilities"), for the
purchase, transmission and distribution of gas, including the right to
construct, lay, maintain, operate, extend, renew, remove, replace, repair, use
and operate a gas distribution system, in, under, upon, over, across, and along
the present and future public rights of way within the present or any future
corporate limits of the grantor, including streets and bridges, for the purpose
of transporting, distributing and selling gas (with the right and privilege to
make such connections with said pipes as will enable the grantee to supply gas)
for heating, lighting, power and any and all domestic, commercial, and
industrial purposes, and other reasons and purposes within and through the
grantor's corporate limits and to the grantor and its inhabitants, and to other
persons, firms, entities or municipal corporations.
   A.    Service To Be Furnished: At all times during the term of this
franchise, the grantee, subject to its tariffs, rules and regulations as filed
with the appropriate regulatory body and subject to available natural gas
supplies, shall supply natural gas to the city, its successors, and to its
inhabitants and persons and corporations thereof and any other consumers who
shall request the same and shall, as appropriate, acquire, construct, maintain,
equip, and operate all necessary facilities for the purchase, transmission and
distribution of natural gas for the benefit and convenience of the city of
Spirit Lake and its inhabitants. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-3: CONDUCT OF GRANTEE'S BUSINESS:
   A.    Noninterference With Existing Facilities: All construction,
installation, repair or relocation of lines and appurtenances performed by
grantee along or under the roads, rights of way or properties subject to this
franchise shall be done in such a manner as not to interfere with the
construction and maintenance of other utilities, public or private, drains,
drainage ditches and structures, irrigation ditches and structures located
therein, nor with the grading or improvement of such roads, rights of way or
other public property subject to this franchise.
Grantee shall provide the grantor, upon the grantor's reasonable request,
copies of available drawings in use by grantee showing the location of its
facilities at specific locations within the franchised area. As to any such
drawings so provided, grantee does not warrant the accuracy thereof and, to the
extent the location of facilities are shown, such facilities are shown in their
approximate location. With respect to any excavations within the franchised
area undertaken by or on behalf of grantee or the grantor, nothing herein is
intended (nor shall be construed) to relieve either party of their respective
obligations arising under applicable law with respect to determining the
location of utility facilities.
   B.   Trimming/Removal Of Trees: The right of grantee to maintain its
facilities and appurtenances shall include the right, as exercised in grantee's
sole discretion, to utilize an integrated vegetation management program.
Grantee or grantee's contractor may prune all trees and vegetation which
overhang a public right of way, property or place, whether such trees or
vegetation originate within or outside said right of way, property or place, in
such a manner and to such an extent as will prevent the branches or limbs or
other parts of such trees or vegetation that obstructs or may obstruct the
grantee's facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the "American National
Standard For Tree Care Operation" (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the
direction of an arborist certified with the International Society Of
Arboriculture or equivalent professional organization. A growth inhibitor
treatment may be utilized for trees and vegetation species that are fast
growing and problematic. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent
grantee, when necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on
which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which
overhang public rights of way that may interfere with grantee's facilities.
   C.   Right Of Excavation: For the purpose of carrying into effect the
privileges granted hereunder and after all necessary and required permits are
secured, grantee is authorized at any time to make all necessary excavations in
the streets, alleys, roads, rights of way within the franchised area, but such
excavation shall be carried out with reasonable dispatch and with as little
interference with or inconvenience to the rights of the public as may be
feasible. Grantee shall restore all streets, alleys, roads, rights of way to a
standard as agreed upon for conditions of safety and use after excavation.
Except in cases of emergency, such excavations shall require prior city
approval.
   D.   Expansion Of Grantee's Facilities: Any facilities and appurtenances in
streets, alleys, rights of way and public places, incidental to the franchised
area, that have been, or are at any future time acquired, leased, or utilized
in any manner by grantee are thereupon to be deemed authorized by and shall be
subject to all provisions of this franchise. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-4: VACATION OF PROPERTIES BY GRANTOR:
If, at any time, the grantor shall vacate any road, right of way or other
public property which is subject to rights granted by this franchise, such
vacation shall be subject to the reservation of a perpetual easement to the
grantee for the purpose of operating and maintaining the facilities of the
grantee and other public utilities. The grantor shall, in its vacation
procedure, reserve and grant said easement to the grantee for grantee's
facilities and shall also expressly prohibit any use of the vacated properties,
which will interfere with grantee's full enjoyment and use of said easement.
(Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-5: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Upon request of the grantor, the grantee shall relocate its facilities as
necessary within the present and future streets, alleys, highways and other
public places owned by the grantor. The grantor shall have no responsibility
for the costs of such relocations. The grantee shall bear the cost of
relocating its facilities at the grantor's request, unless the facilities are
to be relocated for the benefit of a third party, in which case the third party
shall pay the costs of relocation. Grantee agrees to defend and hold grantor
harmless when any third party is required to move grantee's facilities pursuant
to this franchise.
   A.   Public Right Of Way Improvement: Whenever the grantor causes a public
right of way improvement to be undertaken within the franchised area, and such
public right of way improvement requires the relocation of grantee's then
existing facilities within the franchised area, the grantor shall:
      1.   Provide grantee, within a reasonable time prior to the commencement
of such public right of way improvement, written notice requesting such
relocation; and
      2.    Provide grantee with reasonable plans and specifications for such
public right of way improvement.
After receipt of such notice and such plans and specifications, grantee shall
relocate such facilities within the franchised area at no charge to the
grantor. As used in this section, the term "public right of way improvement" is
a grantor funded capital improvement to the public right of way identified in
the grantor's transportation improvement program. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-6: PRESERVATION OF GRANTOR'S RIGHTS TO CONTROL:
The grantor, in granting this franchise, does not waive any rights which it may
now have or may hereafter acquire with respect to road rights of way or other
property of grantor under this franchise, and this franchise shall not be
construed to deprive the grantor of any such powers, rights or privileges which
it now has or may hereafter acquire to regulate the use of and to control the
grantor's roads, rights of way and other public property covered by this
franchise.
   A.    Change Of Boundaries Of Grantor: Any subsequent additions or
modifications of the boundaries of the grantor, whether by annexation,
consolidation or otherwise, shall be subject to the provisions of this
franchise as to all such areas. Grantor shall endeavor to notify grantee of any
change of boundaries promptly upon such change becoming effective.
   B.    Necessary Construction/Maintenance By Grantor: The laying,
construction, operation and maintenance of grantee's facilities authorized by
this franchise shall not preclude the grantor, its agents or its contractors,
from blasting, grading, excavating, or doing other necessary road work
contiguous to the said facilities of grantee, provided that grantee shall be
given reasonable notice of said blasting or other work.
   C.    Removal Of Abandoned Facilities: Only under circumstances of
demonstrated threat to public health and safety or obstruction of public
construction projects within the right of way, the grantor may require the
grantee to remove affected abandoned facilities. Upon a forfeiture of this
franchise, or nonrenewal of this franchise, the grantor may require the
grantee, to remove such of its facilities from the public properties at its own
expense and as soon as practicable, but only where such abandoned facilities
constitute a demonstrated threat to public health and safety. If it becomes
necessary for the grantor to do so, the grantor shall be paid the reasonable
and actual costs of removal by the grantee. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-7: EQUALITY OF FRANCHISE FEES AND COSTS:
In the event that grantor charges or imposes upon grantee any fees, taxes or
other costs in connection with the issuance, maintenance, existence,
continuation, or use of this franchise, or the public rights of way governed
hereby, granted pursuant to this document, then grantor shall impose equivalent
charges, fees, taxes or costs upon any other franchisee in the same business or
competing with grantee. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-8: INDEMNITY:
Grantee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantor, its
appointed and elected officers and employees, from any and all liabilities,
claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses, including costs and
reasonable attorney fees, that the grantor may sustain, incur, become liable
for, or be required to pay, as a consequence of or arising from the
construction, installation, maintenance, condition or operation of the
grantee's equipment or facilities, or appurtenances thereto, connected with
this franchise, that now or may hereafter be upon, under, over, in, across or
along, the highways, roads, alleys, bridges or other public ways or places of
the grantor; provided, however, that this indemnification provision shall not
apply to the extent that said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and so forth
were caused by or result from the negligence of the grantor, its employees or
agents.
Grantor agrees, to the extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the grantee, its officers and employees, from any and all liabilities,
claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses, including costs and
reasonable attorney fees, that the grantee may sustain, incur, become liable
for, or be required to pay, as a consequence of or arising from the negligent
acts or omissions of the grantor, its officers, employees or agents; provided,
however, that this indemnification provision shall not apply to the extent that
said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and so forth were caused by or result
from the negligence of the grantee. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-9: FORFEITURE:
If grantee shall wilfully violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this franchise through wilful and unreasonable neglect or wilful and
unreasonable failure to heed or comply with any notice given grantee under the
provisions of this grant, then grantee shall forfeit all rights conferred
hereunder and this franchise may be revoked or annulled by the grantor;
provided, however, the grantor shall give ninety (90) days' written notice of
its intention to revoke or annul the franchise during which period grantee
shall have the opportunity to remedy any breach. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-10: FRANCHISE DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
Disputes regarding the interpretation or execution of the terms within this
franchise will be submitted to the appropriate official for attempted
mediation. If a mutually satisfactory resolution cannot then be reached,
grantee can then appeal to the city council, reserving its rights to judicial
relief. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-11: FRANCHISE FEES:
As compensation for the right, privilege and franchise hereby granted, grantee
agrees to pay to the grantor on or before January 30, April 30, July 30 and
October 30, an amount equivalent to one percent (1%) of grantee's "gross
revenues" for the preceding calendar quarter. For purposes of this section,
"gross revenues" shall mean the amount of money billed by the grantee for the
natural gas it sells within the corporate limits of the grantor to customers,
less uncollectibles. The grantor shall provide appropriate information to the
grantee to allow the grantee to identify which of its customers are located
within the corporate limits of the grantor for purposes of paying franchise
fees. Grantee shall not be responsible for any failure to pay franchise fees,
which results from deficiencies in such information provided by the grantor. In
the event the grantor annexes a new area into its corporate limits, the terms
of this section regarding franchise fees shall not apply to the annexed area
until sixty (60) days after the grantor has supplied the grantee with
appropriate information for the identification of the grantee's customers
within the annexed area.
The grantee's franchise fee payment obligations hereunder shall commence with
the start of the grantee's first full billing cycle following the effective
date hereof; provided, that the grantee must first receive approval from the
Idaho public utilities commission for the collection of the franchise fee in
the rates charged by grantee.
The city shall have the right during the term of this franchise to adjust
franchise fees annually, according to applicable laws. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-12: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall have the right to assign its rights, benefits and privileges in
and under this franchise. Any assignee shall, within thirty (30) days of the
date of any assignment, file written notice of the assignment with the grantor
together with its written acceptance of all terms and conditions of this
franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have the right, without
such notice or such written acceptance, to mortgage its rights, benefits and
privileges in and under this franchise for the benefit of bondholders. (Ord.
507A, 7-24-2007)
11-3-13: ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of its acceptance of this franchise
within thirty (30) days of the passage and approval of this franchise by
grantor. (Ord. 507A, 7-24-2007)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Authority
12-1-3: Standards
12-1-4: Text And Official Map
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and cited as the SPIRIT LAKE ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority granted by title 67,
chapter 65 of the Idaho Code, and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution, as amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-1-3: STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title
conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing
the higher standard shall govern. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-1-4: TEXT AND OFFICIAL MAP:
This title shall consist of the text thereof and that certain map or maps
identified by the approving signature of the city council and marked and
designated as "zoning map", which map is placed on file with the city clerk.
Said map has been examined and duly considered in detail by the city council
and adopted as part of this title. This title and each and all of its terms and
mapped details is to be read and interpreted in the light of the contents of
said maps and the maps and the text of this title is deemed to arise, the text
of this title shall prevail. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: General Definitions
12-2-2: Specific Definitions
12-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title certain terms are herewith defined. When not
inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the singular number include the plural, words in the plural
number include the singular; the word "persons" may be taken for persons,
association, firm, copartnership or corporation; the word "structure" includes
building; the word "used" includes designed or intended to be used; the word
"shall" or "must" is always mandatory and not merely directive, the word "may"
is permissive and the word "should" is a preferred requirement. (Ord. 518, 6-
10-2008)
12-2-2: SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building that is subordinate to, and incidental to the
principal building on the same lot, but does not include any building
containing a "dwelling unit" as hereinafter defined.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to, and incidental to the
principal use of the same premises.
AFFECTED PERSON(S): One having an interest in real property which may be
adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing a
development.
AGRICULTURE OR AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES: Tilling of soil, horticulture, raising
crops, livestock, dairy, including all uses customarily accessory and
incidental thereto; but excluding slaughterhouses and commercial feedlots.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care
or treatment of cats, dogs, or other animals.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has complete
kitchen and sanitary facilities permanently installed.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: The premises on which new or used passenger automobiles,
trailers, other licensed vehicles, farm implements, or trucks in operating
condition are displayed in the open for sale or trade, and where incidental
repairs and warranty work may occur.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: The premises used primarily for the retail sale and
delivery to the vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and of lubricating oils, tires
and incidental vehicular accessories, and providing vehicular lubrication and
related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed
buildings, on which two (2) or more motor vehicles not in operating condition
are standing or on which used motor vehicles, or parts thereof, are dismantled
or stored intended for, but not exclusive/limited to, sale or profit.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor vehicles
or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and steam cleaning of
vehicles.
BAR: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises not including restaurants where the principal business is serving
food.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Any use of premises occupied by the owner and which has
bedrooms for lodging of paying guests on a short term basis.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals and
overnight accommodations are provided for compensation to three (3) or more
persons, but not more than twelve (12) persons who are not members of the
householder's family.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land, mobile, or demountable and entirely separated on all sides from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors,
windows or opening, that is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or
protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the top of
the highest point of the roof for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which the said building is situated.
BULK PLANT: An establishment where flammable liquids are received by tank,
vessel, pipelines, tank car or tank vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk
for the purpose of distributing such liquids by tank vessel, pipeline, tank
car, tank vehicle or container.
BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction involving the
handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or
livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices,
recreation or amusement enterprise or the maintenance and use of offices or
professions and trades rendering services.
CEMETERY: Land dedicated for burial purposes, including mausoleum and
columbarium, when operated within the boundary of the cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP: The certification of a reputable title insurance
company licensed under the laws of the state of Idaho as to the ownership of
property and of any interest shown therein of record.
CLINIC: A building or portion of a building containing offices and facilities
for providing medical, dental or psychiatric services for outpatients only.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use or occupancy of a structure, or use of land, permitted
only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations
and conditions specified therein.
DAYCARE CENTER: A place, home, building, or location providing care, with or
without instruction, for more than twelve (12) children not residing on the
same premises.
DENSITY: A measurement of the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
   Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed including right of way.
   Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding public
right of way.
DISTRICT OR ZONE: A section or district of the city within which the standards
governing the use of buildings and premises are uniform. These districts or
zones are delineated on the official zoning map of the city.
DUPLEX: A detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
DWELLING: A building, or a portion of a building, containing one or more
dwelling units. The term dwelling does not include any trailer, motel,
guesthouse or "bed and breakfast" as defined by this section.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family building (including triplex) or
portion thereof.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building designed for and occupied
exclusively by one family. For purposes of this title the classification of
"dwelling, single-family" shall include group homes, and manufactured homes as
herein defined.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for, or used as a residence for not
more than one family, including all necessary household employees of such
family, and constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, with a
single kitchen permanently installed. The term does not imply or include such
types of occupancy as a lodging or boarding house, bed and breakfast, club,
sorority, fraternity or hotel.
ELEVATION: An orthographic projection of the exterior faces of a building or
facades which can include the front, right side, left side, and back
projections or the north, south, east, and west views of the building.
FAMILY: A person living alone, or two (2) or more persons customarily living
together as a single household or housekeeping unit and using common cooking
facilities.
FRONTAGE: The portion of a lot, site, tract or parcel of land adjoining a
public or private right of way and measured as a length along said road.
GROUP HOME: In accordance with section 67-6532 of Idaho Code, a home
established for the care of eight (8) or less mentally retarded, elderly or
physically handicapped persons.
HOSPITAL: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and
emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and
injured persons, and licensed by the state of Idaho to provide facilities and
services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practices.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and which is open to transient guests.
JUNK: Old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals, old
rope, old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of cloth, rubber,
glass, empty bottles, and all articles discarded and no longer used as a
manufactured article composed of one or more of said materials.
JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are stored, bought, sold or exchanged or handled.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which four (4)
or more dogs, cats and other household domestic animals are maintained,
harbored, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or kept for
sale.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open off street area of land other
than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing,
loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue
interference with public streets and alleys.
LOT: A unit of land described by metes and bounds or a part of a recorded
subdivision so recorded for transfer of ownership.
   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f60cd1707c6efc2c4b29e3ff411ad1b876941296/
IMAGES/0-0-0-945.gif]
 
   Lot, Corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f60cd1707c6efc2c4b29e3ff411ad1b876941296/
IMAGES/0-0-0-947.gif]
 
   Lot, Reversed Frontage: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f60cd1707c6efc2c4b29e3ff411ad1b876941296/
IMAGES/0-0-0-949.gif]
 
   Lot, Through: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f60cd1707c6efc2c4b29e3ff411ad1b876941296/
IMAGES/0-0-0-951.gif]
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings
and all accessory buildings.
LOT LINE: The boundary property line encompassing a lot. The front lot line is
the boundary line, which abuts a public street. For a corner lot, the owner may
select either street line as the front lot line. The rear lot line is the lot
line or most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front property line.
All other lot lines are side lot lines. An interior lot line is a side line in
common with another lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which is utilized for
the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes for
dwelling or sleeping purposes.
MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings on the same premises whether detached
or in connected rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently
accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space located on the
premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term includes, but is
not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts,
motor lodge, tourist courts or by any other title or sign intended to identify
them as providing lodging to motorists.
NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME: A building housing any facility, however
named, whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide
skilled nursing care and related medical services for two (2) or more
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or requiring
care because of old age.
OPEN SPACE: Any open area free from structures, including, but not limited to,
parks, yards, playgrounds, beaches, waterways, and streets.
PARKING LOT: An open, graded and surfaced area, other than a street or public
way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available to the public,
whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking area or a
building.
PRINCIPAL USE: The specific purpose for which a lot is arranged, intended,
designed, occupied or maintained.
PUBLIC FACILITY: A public facility involving construction of facilities
including, but not limited to, pumping stations, fire stations, telephone
transmission stations, sewage disposal, water tanks or storage maintenance
stations, public libraries.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motor home, travel trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, park
model recreational vehicle designed for recreational, camping or seasonal use.
A park model recreational vehicle is a type of recreational vehicle built on a
single chassis with no more than four hundred (400) square feet in area.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house or
bed and breakfast, where meals are provided for compensation, including, among
others, such uses as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and
dining room.
RETAIL: The selling of goods to ultimate consumers for personal or household
consumption.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE: Every way, lane, road, street and every way or place,
not including private driveways serving only the owner of the property where
situated, which is in private ownership inside the limits of the incorporated
City, and is used, or subject to being used, for travel by the owner or owners
or those persons having express or implied permission from the owner or owners,
but not by other persons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: Every way, lane, road, street, boulevard and every way or
place in the City open or subject to being open, as a matter of right to public
vehicular travel inside the limits of the incorporated City.
SCHOOL: An organization specializing in the instruction of students.
SCHOOL, ACADEMIC: An accredited school specializing in the instruction of
students in kindergarten through twelfth grade.
SETBACK: The shortest distance between a building's or structure's exterior
from the nearest point on the referenced lot line.
SIGHT OBSCURING: A screen that is at least seventy five percent (75%) opaque.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor
elevation directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above
grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
STREET: A public right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, acceptance or grant of which has been officially approved
by the Council. The term "street" includes the terms: highway, thoroughfare,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, not exceeding six
feet (6') in height, which requires permanent location on the ground or is
attached to something having location on the ground.
USE: An activity or purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained, let
or leased. Uses include, but are not limited to, residential, commercial,
industrial and agricultural.
VICINITY: The area surrounding a use in which such use produces a discernible
influence by aesthetic appearance, traffic, noise, glare, smoke, or similar
influences.
WRECKING YARD: See definition of automobile wrecking yard.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of
buildings.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to
the front street/property line.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
YARD, SIDE: The yard lying between the nearest wall of the principal building,
accessory building and side lot line, and extending from the front yard or the
front lot line to the rear yard. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 589, 2-27-
2019; Ord. 602, 10-16-2019)
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: District Classifications
12-3-2: Boundaries
12-3-1: DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS:
To effectuate the comprehensive plan adopted by the city, lands within the
incorporated boundaries of the city are hereby classified into the following
categories, which are further described in subsequent sections and so indicated
on the zoning map:
   A.    Residential:
      R-1 Low density residential
      R-2 Medium density residential
      R-3 High density residential
   B.    C Commercial
   C.    I Industrial (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-3-2: BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning map are unless
otherwise indicated, streets, alleys, lot lines, or other lines of demarcation
as shown on said map. Where a street layout property line or other boundary on
the ground varies from that shown on the zoning map, and where property or
other boundary lines do not exist or are not shown on the zoning map, the
designations shown on the map shall be applied by the planning and zoning
commission by map scale or other method so as to carry out the intent and
purpose of the zoning map for that district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-4-1: Purpose
12-4-2: Restrictions
12-4-3: Area Requirements
12-4-4: Uses Permitted
12-4-5: Conditionally Permitted Uses
12-4-6: Lot Coverage
12-4-7: Setback Requirements
12-4-8: Accessory Uses
12-4-9: Building Height
12-4-10: Parking Requirements
12-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 low density residential district is to preserve
residential neighborhoods, to prevent overcrowding and to encourage the
development of low density areas that are best suited for residential purposes.
The R-1 low density residential district is intended as a residential area that
permits single-family detached housing at a density of one unit per gross acre
(i.e., the density for an acre of unsubdivided land, regardless of where
streets, etc., may or may not be located, will be calculated at a maximum of 1
unit). (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 612, 6-9-2020)
12-4-2: RESTRICTIONS:
In the R-1 low density residential district, no building or premises shall be
used nor shall any building or structure hereafter be erected or altered
(unless provided by this title) except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following site area requirements apply to the R-1 low density residential
district:
   A.   All lots shall have a minimum lot size of twenty-one thousand five
hundred (21,500) square feet.
   B.   All lots shall have a minimum frontage on a public street of ninety
feet (90').
   C.   Minimi size for a single-family dwelling unit: one thousand (1,000)
square feet. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 602, 10-16-2019; Ord. 612, 6-9-
2020)
12-4-4: USES PERMITTED:
Bed and breakfast that meets the following criteria:
   A.   Maximum of five (5) rooms for lodging of paying guests.
   B.    Must provide one off street parking space for each guestroom as well
as all vehicles owned by permanent residents.
   C.   Signage shall be limited to four (4) square feet;
   D.    May not provide meals to paying guests, except for lodging guests.
Buildings accessory to the single-family dwelling.
Cemetery.
Home occupations.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public facilities.
Public or private academic schools.
Single-family dwelling, one. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-5: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
Church.
Daycare center.
Nonprofit community clubhouse. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building or structure, or total combined square footage of all buildings and
structures shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of its building lot. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-7: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Setbacks are measured from the lot lines to the foundation wall of the
structure.
   A.   Front Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty five feet
(25') from the property line.
   B.    Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twelve feet (12')
from any side property line; except corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot
(20') side yard adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which
the building fronts.
   C.    Rear Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty feet (20')
from the property line. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-8: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or
subsequent to the primary allowed building. Such uses shall be limited to one
story in height and shall not encroach upon the front or side yards. (Ord. 518,
6-10-2008)
12-4-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building within the R-1 district shall be constructed greater than a height
of two (2) stories not to exceed a total height of thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-4-10: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For parking requirements, see chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-5-1: Purpose
12-5-2: Restrictions
12-5-3: Area Requirements
12-5-4: Uses Permitted
12-5-5: Conditionally Permitted Uses
12-5-6: Lot Coverage
12-5-7: Setback Requirements
12-5-8: Accessory Uses
12-5-9: Building Height
12-5-10: Parking Requirements
12-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 medium density residential district is to provide medium
to high density residential development, well designed and properly located in
the community pattern. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-2: RESTRICTIONS:
In the R-2 medium density residential district, no building or premises shall
be used, nor shall any building or structure hereafter be erected or altered
(unless provided by this title) except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following site area requirements apply to the R-2 medium density
residential district:
   A.   All lots shall have a minimum lot size of eight thousand seven hundred
twelve (8,712) square feet.
   B.   All lots shall have a minimum of seventy five feet (75') frontage on a
public street.
   C.   Minimum size for a single-family dwelling unit: one thousand (1,000)
square feet. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-4: USES PERMITTED:
All principal uses permitted outright in the R-1 area.
Bed and breakfast that meets the following criteria:
   A.   Maximum of five (5) rooms for lodging of paying guests;
   B.   Must provide one off street parking space for each guestroom as well as
all vehicles owned by permanent residents;
   C.    Signage shall be limited to four (4) square feet;
   D.    May not provide meals to paying guests, except for lodging guests.
Duplex structure, one.
Home occupations as specified in section
12-9-8 of this title.
Nonprofit parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.
Public or private academic schools.
Single-family dwelling, one. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-5: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
Apartment building.
Churches.
Golf course and driving range.
Hospital.
Retirement, convalescent or nursing home. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building or structure, or total combined square footage of all buildings and
structures shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of its building lot. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-7: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Setbacks are from the lot lines to the foundation wall of the structure.
   A.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
twenty-five feet (25') from the property line.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than seven feet (7') or
half of the total wall height whichever is greater from any side property line;
except corner lots shall maintain a ten foot (10') side yard adjacent to the
street which intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
   C.   Rear Yard: No building shall be erected within fifteen feet (15') of
property line if there is an alley, if no alley, then seven feet (7'). (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 609, 5-12-2020)
12-5-8: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or
subsequent to the primary allowed building. Such uses shall be limited to one
story in height and shall not encroach upon the front or side yards. (Ord. 518,
6-10-2008)
12-5-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building within the R-2 district shall be constructed greater than a height
of two (2) stories not to exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-5-10: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For parking requirements, see chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 6
R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6-1: Purpose
12-6-2: Restrictions
12-6-3: Area Requirements
12-6-4: Uses Permitted
12-6-5: Conditionally Permitted Uses
12-6-6: Lot Coverage
12-6-7: Setback Requirements
12-6-8: Accessory Uses
12-6-9: Building Height
12-6-10: Parking Requirements
12-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 high density residential district, is to provide for
medium to high density residential development; and permit mobile home park
development. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-2: RESTRICTIONS:
In the R-3 high density residential district no building or premises shall be
used, nor shall any building or structure hereafter be erected or altered
except for one or more of the following uses in conformance with this chapter.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following site area requirements apply to the R-3 high density residential
district:
   A.   All lots shall have a minimum lot size of eight thousand seven hundred
twelve (8,712) square feet;
   B.   All lots shall have a minimum of seventy five feet (75') of frontage on
a public street.
   C.   Minimum size for a single-family dwelling unit: one thousand (1,000)
square feet. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 602, 10-16-2019)
12-6-4: USES PERMITTED:
Bed and breakfast that meets the following criteria:
   A.    Maximum of five (5) rooms for lodging of paying guests;
   B.    Must provide one off street parking space for each guestroom as well
as all vehicles owned by permanent residents;
   C.    Signage shall be limited to four (4) square feet;
   D.   May not provide meals to paying guests, except for lodging guests.
Cemetery.
Home occupations.
Multiple-family dwellings:
   A.   Each unit shall add one thousand feet (1,000') to the minimum lot size
requirement.
   B.    Multi-family (triplex or more should have a minimum of a 4 foot
fence).
   C.    Site plans are required for multi-family.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public facilities.
Public or private academic schools.
Single-family dwelling, one. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-5: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
Churches.
Club or lodge of a service and fraternal character when not operated for
profit.
Daycare center.
Hospitals.
Mobile home/manufactured home parks.
Nonprofit community clubhouse.
Retirement, convalescent home, nursing home.
Other uses determined by the commission to be in keeping with the purposes and
intent of this district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building or structure, or total combined square footage of all buildings and
structures shall cover more than seventy percent (70%) of its building lot.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-7: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Setbacks are from the lot lines to the foundation wall of the structure.
   A.   Front Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty-five feet
(25') from the property line.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than seven feet (7') or
half of the total wall height whichever is greater from any side property line;
except corner lots shall maintain a ten foot (10') side yard adjacent to the
street which intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
   C.   Rear Yard: No building shall be erected closer than fifteen feet (15')
of the property line if there is an alley, if no alley, then seven feet (7').
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 609, 5-12-2020)
12-6-8: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or
subsequent to the primary allowed building. Such uses shall be limited to two
(2) stories in height not to exceed thirty five feet (35'), shall not encroach
upon the front or side yards, and shall be considered a structure when
calculating lot coverage. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building within the R-3 district shall be constructed greater than a height
of two (2) stories not to exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-6-10: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For parking requirements, see chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 7
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose
12-7-2: Restrictions
12-7-3: Area Requirements
12-7-4: Uses Permitted
12-7-5: Conditionally Permitted Uses
12-7-6: Lot Coverage
12-7-7: Setback Requirements
12-7-8: Accessory Uses
12-7-9: Building Height
12-7-10: Site Plan Review
12-7-11: Parking Lots
12-7-12: Change Of Use
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C commercial district is to establish commercial areas to
fulfill the daily needs of residents in and around the city of Spirit Lake.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-2: RESTRICTIONS:
In the C commercial district, no building or premises shall be used nor shall
any building or structure hereafter be erected or altered (unless provided by
this title) except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no minimum lot size except that residential uses approved
through the conditional use permit process require the same area requirements
as set forth in the R-3 high density residential district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-
2008)
12-7-4: USES PERMITTED:
Animal clinic or hospital, veterinary offices, kennels.
Auto sales and service.
Banks and other financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops.
Boat repair.
Commercial recreational facilities.
Daycare center.
Garden shop, florist, nursery, greenhouse.
General business offices.
Golf course and driving ranges.
Hospitals and emergency services.
Laundromats and dry cleaners.
Lodges and meeting halls.
Public utility facilities.
RV park.
Restaurant, bars, and drive-through food and beverage establishments.
Retail stores.
Riding stables and schools.
Self-storage.
Storage/warehouse. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-5: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
All permitted and conditionally permitted uses in the R-1, R-2, and R-
3 districts. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building or structure, or total square footage of all buildings and
structures shall cover more than seventy percent (70%) of the building lot.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-7: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
There are no setback requirements in the commercial zoning district, except for
the following:
   A.   Commercial use that is adjacent to or across from a residential use
must, at a minimum, meet the most restrictive setback requirements governing
that residential use for the side of the lot that is adjacent or across from
the use and provide adequate screening.
   B.    Residential uses shall meet the setback requirements of the R-3 zoning
district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-8: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or
subsequent to the primary allowed building. Such uses shall be limited to one
story in height. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building within the commercial district shall be constructed greater than a
height of thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-10: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All commercial site plans must be reviewed by the planning and zoning
commission to confirm that the proposed use meets all of the requirements of
this title. The site plan shall comply with the requirements of section
12-9-5 of this title. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-11: PARKING LOTS:
All parking lots are required to be paved. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-7-12: CHANGE OF USE:
If a commercial use changes it shall be reviewed by planning and zoning for
correct parking requirements. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 8
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8-1: Purpose
12-8-2: Restrictions
12-8-3: Area Requirements
12-8-4: Uses Permitted
12-8-5: Conditionally Permitted Uses
12-8-6: Height Regulations
12-8-7: Lot Coverage
12-8-8: Setback Requirements
12-8-1: PURPOSE:
The I Industrial District is established to provide for and encourage the
grouping together of light industrial uses capable of being operated under such
standards as to location and appearance of buildings and treatment of land
about them, that they will be unobtrusive and not detrimental to surrounding
uses. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-8-2: RESTRICTIONS:
In the Industrial District, no building or premises shall be used nor shall any
building or structure hereafter be erected or altered (unless provided by this
title) except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-8-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no minimum lot size. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-8-4: USES PERMITTED:
Contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies or
public utilities, or materials and equipment of a similar nature including
lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards as provided these uses shall:
   A.   Be carried on in such a manner and with such precautions against fire,
explosion hazards, or other physical damage to any adjacent building or plant
growth;
   B.    Screen or store all raw materials, finished products, machinery, and
equipment, including company owned or operated trucks, within a building, a
sight obscuring fence or vegetated barrier;
   C.    Emit no obnoxious odors of any kind;
   D.    Exhaust no waste or dust created by the business operation into the
air;
   E.    Discharge no treated or untreated sewage or waste into any stream or
river;
   F.    Conduct no mining, extraction, filling or soil stripping operations;
   G.    Not emit noise causing sound levels greater than fifty five (55)
decibels between dusk and dawn (night hours) and sixty five (65) decibels
between dawn and dusk (daylight hours) beyond the boundaries of the site on
which such use is conducted;
   H.    Not cause vibration beyond the boundaries of the site on which such
use is conducted.
Manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, processing, packing, repairing, laundry
cleaning, or dry cleaning which has not been declared a nuisance by statute or
any court of competent jurisdiction.
Public utility facilities.
Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, and distribution. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd.
Ord. 589, 2-27-2019)
12-8-5: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
All chemical manufactures, storage or packaging.
Asphalt manufacturing, mixing or refining.
Bulk plants, fuel storage.
Business uses directly related to, and necessary for, the operation of the
industry.
Cement or clay products manufacturing.
Communications tower.
Explosive storage or manufacturing.
Grain elevator and bulk storage such as for potatoes, hay, and other similar
uses.
Public or private schools.
Storage, for wholesale or for distribution in bulk, of any flammable liquid or
solid above or below ground.
Wrecking or scrap yard. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 597, 6-11-2019)
12-8-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure or portions thereof hereafter erected shall not
exceed sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-8-7: LOT COVERAGE:
No building or structure, or total square footage of all buildings and
structures shall cover more than seventy five percent (75%) of its building
lot. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-8-8: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Setbacks are from the lot lines to the foundation wall as in other sections.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
   A.   Front Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty five feet
(25') from the property line, except when an industrial lot abuts, touches,
adjoins, or is across the street from a Residential District, the front yard
setback shall be no less than thirty five feet (35') from the property line.
(Ord. 589, 2-27-2019)
   B.   Side Yard: No setback is required, except when an industrial lot abuts,
touches, adjoins, or is across the street from a Residential District the side
yard setback shall be no less than thirty five feet (35') from the property
line.
   C.   Side Yard, Flanking Street: No building shall be erected closer than
twenty feet (20') from the property line, except when an industrial lot abuts,
touches, adjoins, or is across the street from a Residential District the front
yard setback shall be no less than thirty five feet (35') from the property
line.
   D.    Rear Yard: No setback is required, except when an industrial lot
abuts, touches, adjoins, or is across the street from a Residential District
the rear yard setback shall be no less than thirty five feet (35') from the
property line. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 9
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-9-1: Purpose
12-9-2: Yard Requirements
12-9-3: Height Requirements
12-9-4: General Provisions
12-9-5: Site Plan Requirements
12-9-6: Commercial And Industrial Provisions
12-9-7: Unique Land Use Provisions
12-9-8: Home Occupation Permitted
12-9-9: Consolidation Of Lots
12-9-10: Boundary Line Adjustments
12-9-11: Design Standards
12-9-12: Building Requirements
12-9-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth general requirements that apply to all of the districts
that have been established by this title. The intent of this chapter is to
eliminate redundancy by incorporating general regulations under one (1)
chapter. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-2: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in a district setback requirement
section and in other sections of this title, the following provisions shall be
adhered to:
   A.    Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10')
above the centerline grades of the intersection streets in the area bounded by
the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said
street right-of-way forty feet (40') from the point of intersection.
   B.    Fence And Wall Restriction In Front Yards: In any required front yard,
no fence or wall shall be permitted that is higher than four feet (4') above
the ground level, unless the fence is see through. Ground level shall be the
elevation of the land prior to the construction of any berm.
   C.   Yard Requirements For Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings
shall be considered as one (1) building for the purpose of determining front,
side and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one
(1) front, one (1) rear and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in
the appropriate district.
   D.    Side And Rear Yard Requirements For Nonresidential Uses Abutting
Residential Districts: Landscape or other screening is required to buffer the
impact on the residential use. Such screening shall be masonry or solid fence
between four feet (4') and eight feet (8') in height, maintained in good
condition and free of all advertising or other signs. Landscaping provided in
lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of a strip of land planted with an
evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet
(4') in height at the time of planting, and shall be maintained as such.
   E.   Architectural Projections: Permanent, open structures such as porches,
canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar
architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which it
is attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear
yard. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-3: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
The height limitations contained in each district section do not apply to
spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or
other equipment usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy or for advertisement purposes. (Ord. 518, 6-10-
2008)
12-9-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Portable Structures: Portable business structures are permitted only on
sites with developed site plans and restroom facilities connected to the City
sewer service.
   B.    Required Trash Areas: All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four feet (4') in
height or within an enclosed building or structure. The collection area shall
include adequate vehicular accesses to and from such area or areas sufficient
to allow the passage of a garbage collection truck. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-5: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.    Building permit applications shall include a site plan. The site plan
shall be drawn to an appropriate scale to clearly show all required elements
that include, but are not limited to:
      1.    Boundaries of the property and adjoining parcels.
      2.    Total acreage and area of each use.
      3.    Proposed construction schedule.
      4.    Location and height of existing and proposed structures, including
property line setbacks and building heights.
      5.    Signs.
      6.    Trash enclosures.
      7.    Site lighting.
      8.    Site boundaries and dimensions.
      9.    Grading and drainage, and enough site information from adjoining
properties so that differences in site grading can be minimized or
accommodated.
      10.    Spot elevations shall be included at building corners, drainage
inlets and drywells.
      11.    Sufficient information to determine drainage on the site, setbacks
from property lines.
      12.    Existing or proposed easements.
      13.    Location of existing and proposed utility structures.
      14.    Location and size of existing and proposed sewer and water lines.
      15.    Location of the nearest fire hydrant(s).
      16.    All means of vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to and
from the site.
      17.    Location of all driveways, streets and sidewalks including paved
surfaces, and typical cross sections of roadways and parking areas.
      18.    Location and layout of all off street parking.
      19.    Location of loading areas (if applicable).
      20.    Landscaping and irrigation. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-6: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROVISIONS:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or hazardous conditions that could
adversely affect the surrounding areas of adjoining premises, except that any
use permitted by this title may be undertaken or maintained if acceptable
measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable conditions to
acceptable limits as established by the following performance requirements:
   A.    Fire Hazard: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance that is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the current fire code and the national safety foundation
publications.
   B.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
   C.    Noise: No noises associated with the activity that causes noise that
if sufficiently loud as to be heard within the closed residence of any
residential structure located in a residential zoning district within five
hundred feet (500') of the property. Air raid sirens, emergency equipment and
vehicles, and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from
this requirement.
   D.   Issuance Of Permits: Prior to issuance of any permits, the city may
require the applicant to provide a plan demonstrating how the applicant intends
to address the above requirements.
   E.    Loading Areas: Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or
alleys shall be provided. In no case shall off street loading areas be part of
the area used to satisfy off street parking requirements. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-7: UNIQUE LAND USE PROVISIONS:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this title:
   A.    Accessory buildings: Shall not be located in any required front yard
area.
   B.    Animal clinic, animal hospital, veterinary office and kennel:
      1.    Shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any
residence including motels and hotels, except for an owner's residence. The
city council may modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed
in soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting
residential property.
      2.    Shall comply with all state and local regulations relative to such
an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent
the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and
odor.
   C.    Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases, aboveground and for use
or resale, must meet the following requirements:
      1. Be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a residential
district, a residence, motel, or hotel, except for an owner's residence.
      2.   Obtain approval of the fire chief or his designee.
      3.   Have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities subject to the approval of the fire chief or his designee.
   D.   Chemicals, pesticide and fertilizer storage and manufacturing: Shall
have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved
by the fire chief or his designee.
   E.   Contractor's yard:
      1.   Shall have a six foot (6') sight obscuring fence around the areas
utilized for storage of equipment.
      2.   Shall be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental
to contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
   F.   Drive-through food and beverage establishments:
      1.    Shall be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and
fencing, except for ingress and egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other
properties.
      2.    Shall have a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence along the
property lines that adjoins a residence.
      3.    Shall avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
      4.   Shall provide for adequate trash receptacles.
   G.    Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial materials:
      1.   Shall be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or
residentially zoned area whether or not such property is separated by an
alleyway or street.
      2.   Shall not be located in any front yard setback area.
   H.   Recreational vehicle parks:
      1.    Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from
other structures by at least ten feet (10'). Any accessory structures, such as
attached awnings or carports, shall for the purpose of this separation
requirement, be considered to be part of the recreational vehicle.
      2.    Each recreational vehicle lot shall contain a stabilized vehicular
parking pad composed of paving, compacted crushed gravel, or other all weather
material.
      3.    If it is determined by the city or Idaho transportation department
that traffic control devices or other traffic regulation improvements are
required as a result of development of a recreational vehicle park, the
property owner shall be responsible for the cost of installation or
construction of said improvements.
      4.    Internal roads and parking service areas shall provide safe and
convenient access for service and emergency vehicles and to amenities within
the recreational vehicle park. Internal roads shall not be designed to
encourage use by outside traffic to traverse the recreational vehicle park to
adjoining developed areas.
      5.    The applicant shall provide a minimum of two (2) parking spaces per
RV site in addition to the RV pad, with a storage area provided.
      6.    Any action toward removal of wheels of a recreational vehicle or to
attach the recreational vehicle to the ground for stabilizing purposes is
prohibited.
   I.    Riding stables and schools:
      1.    Stables or loafing shed shall not be located within one hundred
feet (100') from any residence, except for an owner's residence.
      2.    All facilities shall be set back a distance of thirty feet (30')
from any property line.
      3.    The facilities shall be maintained in such a manner to prevent the
creation of a nuisance. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-9-8: HOME OCCUPATION PERMITTED:
All home occupations must meet the following requirements:
   A.   The resident shall obtain a business license and home occupation permit
from the City of Spirit Lake.
   B.    The use of the dwelling unit for home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants
and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of gross floor area of one (1)
floor of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
   C.    The home occupation is considered an accessory use by this title.
   D.    The home occupation must be operated solely within the residential
dwelling unit and shall not alter the exterior character of the dwelling other
than one (1) sign, no larger than four (4) square feet in area, nonilluminated
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building 1
.
   E.    No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation and
any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
meet the off street parking requirements as specified in this title, and shall
not be located in a required front yard.
   F.    No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
   G.    No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except
such as is produced by the occupants on the premises.
   H.    The entrance to the space devoted to such use is from within the
building and no internal or external alterations or construction features not
customary in dwellings are involved.
   I.    No more than one (1) person other than members of the family residing
on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 8-5-8B of this Code.
12-9-9: CONSOLIDATION OF LOTS:
   A.    Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this section to
establish a process for consolidation of two (2) or more existing contiguous
lots into one (1) buildable parcel. Lot consolidation will not be approved for
lots that were not legally created, or lie in separate zones. An application
for a lot consolidation may be submitted to consolidate two (2) or more
existing, contiguous lots into one (1) buildable parcel if the proposed lot
consolidation does not:
      1.   Create any additional lots;
      2.    Include any lots or parcels which are not legal lots, as defined by
City ordinance;
      3.    Impair existing access or easements, or create the need for new
easements or access to any adjacent lots; and
      4.    Create a lot which does not conform with this Code.
   B.   Application: An application for a lot consolidation must be filed with
the Administrator along with such other information as may be required. The
application must include a current title report for the affected properties and
a scaled drawing of the proposed consolidation showing the following:
      1.   All existing and proposed boundaries of the affected lots with
dimensions;
      2.    All existing structures with dimensions and distances to existing
and proposed boundaries;
      3.    Existing sewer and water services to the affected lots;
      4.    Existing street frontages and accesses of each lot.
   C.    Approval: Once the application has been accepted and comments
forwarded to the applicant, a record of survey must be submitted for review and
approval by the Administrator. The record of survey must contain a certificate
of approval for the Administrator. The Administrator will approve the lot
consolidation only after determining that all of the following conditions have
been met:
      1.    The lots were legally created;
      2.    The resulting parcel meets the minimum requirements for area,
frontage and width for the existing zone;
      3.    No existing easements or access have been impaired or the need for
new easements or access to the subject lots or adjacent lots has been created;
      4.    The consolidated lots are served by sanitary sewer and water
services;
      5.    The record of survey has been prepared by an Idaho licensed
surveyor in conformance with the requirements of Idaho State Statutes and this
chapter; and
      6.    Upon determining that all of the above requirements have been met,
the Administrator will affix his certificate of approval to the record of
survey.
   D.   Issuance Of Building Permits: No building permits will be issued on
consolidated lots unless previously approved by the Administrator. (Ord. 570,
6-13-2017)
12-9-10: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this section to
establish the requirements for adjustment of boundary lines of platted lots or
legally created unplatted parcels. Boundary adjustments will not be approved
for lots that were not legally created. An application for a boundary line
adjustment may be submitted to adjust a single common boundary between two (2)
adjoining legal lots or parcels if the proposed boundary adjustment does not:
      1.   Create any additional lots;
      2.    Include any lots or parcels which are not legal lots, as defined by
City ordinance;
      3.    Impair existing access or easements, or create the need for new
easements or access to any adjacent lots; and
      4.    Create any lot which does not conform with this Code. (Ord. 568, 4-
11-2017)
   B.    Application: An application for a boundary line adjustment must be
filed with the City Council along with such other information as may be
required. The application must include a current title report for the affected
properties and a scaled drawing of the proposed adjustment showing the
following: (Ord. 595, 4-18-2019)
      1.   All existing and proposed boundaries of the affected lots with
dimensions;
      2.    All existing structures with dimensions and distances to existing
and proposed boundaries;
      3.    Existing sewer and water services to the affected lots;
      4.    Existing street frontages and accesses of each lot. (Ord. 568, 4-
11-2017)
   C.   Approval: Once the application has been accepted and comments forwarded
to the applicant, a record of survey must be submitted for review and approval
by the City Council. The City Council will approve the boundary line adjustment
only after determining that all of the following conditions have been met:
(Ord. 595, 4-18-2019)
      1.   Only one common lot line between two (2) lots or parcels is being
adjusted;
      2.    Both lots were legally created;
      3.    No additional lots have been created;
      4.    The resultant parcels meet the minimum requirements for area,
frontage and width for the existing zone;
      5.    The accompanying warranty deed accurately describes the property to
be transferred by a metes and bounds description;
      6.    No existing easements or access have been impaired nor has the need
for new easements or access to the subject lots or adjacent lots been created;
      7.    The adjusted lots are served by sanitary sewer and water services.
Lots shall not be adjusted so that they do not, or cannot, have sewer and water
services that conform to applicable City policies and standards;
      8.    The record of survey has been prepared by an Idaho licensed
surveyor in conformance with the requirements of Idaho State Statutes and this
chapter;
      9.    All new property corners have been monumented as generally required
by this title and Idaho Code; (Ord. 568, 4-11-2017)
      10.    Upon determining that all of the above requirements have been met,
the City Council will affix its certificate of approval to the record of
survey. (Ord. 568, 4-11-2017; amd. Ord. 595, 4-18-2019)
   D.    Issuance Of Building Permits: No building permits will be issued on
lots or parcels whose boundaries have been adjusted without the approval of the
City Council, nor will they be issued on lots or parcels whose boundaries are
being adjusted until all the requirements of this section have been met and the
record of survey and warranty deeds recorded. (Ord. 595, 4-18-2019)
12-9-11: DESIGN STANDARDS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   No more than two buildings, homes, or structures shall be constructed
on the same city block with identical front elevations.
   B.   Each third house on the same block and on the same side of the street
shall have a completely different front elevation.
   C.   Identical front elevations shall not be placed adjacent to each other.
(Ord. 602, 10-16-2019)
12-9-12: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   All lots or parcels must be surveyed and corners marked with survey
pins or stakes. Property lines must have no less than two corners strung with
string.
   B.   Residential Driveways, Approaches and Parking Requirements: Residential
driveways, approaches and parking shall meet the following standards:
      1.   Driveway Length: Residential driveways shall be a minimum of twenty-
five feet (25') in length, or shall be paved to the front of the garage
(attached or unattached), or accessory structure that provides parking for
motor vehicles, whichever is greater, exclusive of any sidewalk or pathway.
      2.   Approach: Only an approved approach shall be utilized to access the
property from the right of way. Vehicles shall not cross over stormwater
drainage easements and/or planting strips, unreinforced sidewalks, or other
areas not permitted and intended as a paved driving or parking surface.
      3.   Off-Street Parking: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces
shall be provided per single-family residential dwelling unit. Driveways
meeting standards set forth herein constitute parking space(s), however,
garages shall not constitute a parking space(s) for the purpose of this
requirement.
      4.   Surfacing: All residential approaches, points of access from public
rights of way, driveways and parking spaces as required by this code, shall be
paved with hot asphalt, portland cement concrete, or approved paving blocks or
bricks. (Ord. 602, 10-16-2019)
CHAPTER 10
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
12-10-1: Purpose
12-10-2: Minimum Standards
12-10-3: Application Procedure
12-10-4: Hearing Procedures
12-10-5: Appeal Procedure
12-10-6: Notification To The Applicant
12-10-7: Expiration Of The Conditional Use Permit
12-10-8: Violations
12-10-9: Conditional Use Approval
12-10-10: Multiple Use On One Parcel
12-10-1: PURPOSE:
Each district lists conditional uses that may be allowed if found to be
compatible with surrounding land uses. Every use that requires a conditional
use permit is declared to possess characteristics such as to require review and
appraisal by the commission and council to determine whether or not the use
would cause any damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment to persons or
property in the vicinity. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
An approved conditional use permit shall at least meet the minimum bulk
standards, such as, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot size and
building height, of the underlying district. Exceptions to those requirements
must be sought through the variance procedure. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the
administrator by at least one owner or lessor of the property for which such
conditional use is proposed.
   A.    At minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      1.    Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
      2.    Legal description of the property;
      3.    Description of existing uses;
      4.    Zone district;
      5.    Description of proposed conditional use;
      6.    Site plan: The submittal shall include three (3) copies twenty-two
inch by thirty-four inch (22" x 34") of the site plan to scale showing:
         a.    Proposed building(s);
         b.    Site boundaries;
         c.    Existing streets and easements;
         d.   Setbacks;
         e.    Parking areas;
         f.    Landscaping areas;
         g.    Sign location;
         h.    Northward sign.
      7.    An objective narrative statement evaluating the effects on
adjoining property and proposed methods to mitigate those effects; a discussion
of the general compatibility with adjacent and other properties in the
vicinity.
      8.    Certificate of ownership.
      9.    A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered which must be provided by and certified by a licensed title company
doing business in Kootenai County, Idaho.
      10.   Application fees. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord. 604, 10-16-2019)
12-10-4: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.    Notification: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
public hearing the administrator shall cause the notice of time and place and a
summary of the proposed conditional use to be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the city and its impact area.
Notice by first class U.S. mail shall be sent to all property owners within at
least three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the subject
property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing date. The
administrator shall cause the notice to be posted upon three (3) distinctly
visible areas of the subject site not less than seven (7) days prior to the
public hearing, in a clear plastic protector.
   B.    Action By The Hearing Body: The planning and zoning commission shall
hear conditional use permits. The commission shall consider the facts and
circumstances of each conditional use application. In order to grant the
conditional use permit, the commission must make the following findings:
      1.    The proposed use is allowed as a conditional use as established in
this title for the zoning district involved.
      2.    The proposed use is harmonious with and in accordance with the
general objective of the comprehensive plan.
      3.    The proposed use will not alter the intended character of the area.
      4.    The proposed use will not be detrimental to public health and
safety or adjacent property.
      5.    The proposed use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage
of a natural, environmental, scenic or historic feature of major importance.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: In recommending approval of any conditional use
permit, the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Conditions may include, but shall not be limited
to, specific requirements that would:
      1.    Minimize adverse impacts on other development.
      2.    Control the sequence and timing of development.
      3.    Control the duration of development.
      4.    Assure proper maintenance of development.
      5.    Require the provision for on site and off site facilities or
services.
      6.    Require more restrictive standards than those required by the
Spirit Lake zoning ordinance.
   D.    Decision: Within a reasonable time following the public hearing the
commission shall either grant or deny the applicant's request. The final
decision shall be in writing and shall specify:
      1.    The standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.    The reason(s) for the decision. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-5: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.    Filing Of Appeal: Any person denied a permit or aggrieved by the
decision granting a conditional use permit may, within seven (7) days of
receipt of the written decision, file an appeal with the administrator and pay
all associated fees. Notice shall be considered to have been received three (3)
days after the date of mailing.
   B.    Action By The Council: The council shall hold a public hearing,
subject to the same noticing requirements as the original public hearing before
the commission, to consider the appeal. The council may approve, conditionally
approve or deny the permit. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-6: NOTIFICATION TO THE APPLICANT:
The applicant shall be provided written notice of the council's decision to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application to the applicant. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-7: EXPIRATION OF THE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Unless a longer time is specifically established as a condition of approval, a
conditional use permit shall be considered void twelve (12) months following
the effective date of the permit if construction is not being diligently
pursued toward completion. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-8: VIOLATIONS:
A conditional use permit may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply with
the terms of the permit. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-9: CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL:
A conditional use permit is granted to the subject property and shall remain
valid upon a change in ownership with all attached conditions. Conditional use
permits are not transferable from one parcel to another. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-10-10: MULTIPLE USE ON ONE PARCEL:
More than one conditional use permit may be granted for a single parcel of
property or a conditional use permit may be granted to a single parcel of
property that currently contains a principal use allowed outright by that
district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 11
VARIANCES
SECTION:
12-11-1: Purpose
12-11-2: Application Procedure
12-11-3: Hearing Procedures
12-11-4: Appeal Procedure
12-11-5: Notification To The Applicant
12-11-6: Expiration Of Variance Approval
12-11-1: PURPOSE:
The planning and zoning commission may authorize in specific cases such
variance from the bulk requirements of this title as will not be contrary to
the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same
district and not permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the bulk provisions of this title
would result in unnecessary hardship or inequity. Variance shall not be granted
to allow a use within a district where such use is prohibited by this title.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-11-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An application for a variance shall be filed with the administrator by at least
one owner or lessor of the property for which such variance is proposed.
   A.   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      1.    Name, address and phone number of the applicant.
      2.    Legal description of the property.
      3.    Descriptions of existing use.
      4.    Zone district.
      5.    Description of proposed variance.
      6.    Site plan, as set forth in section
12-9-5 of this title.
      7.    An objective narrative stating the reasoning for a variance and
justification of the variance.
      8.    Certificate of ownership.
      9.    A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses within
three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the subject property.
      10.    Application fees. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-11-3: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.    Notification: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
public hearing the administrator shall cause notice of the time and place and a
summary of the variance request to be published in the official newspaper or
paper of general circulation within the city and its impact area. Notice by
first class U.S. mail shall be sent to all property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the external boundaries of the subject property at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing date. The administrator shall cause
notice to be posted upon three (3) distinctly visible areas of the subject site
not less than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing in a clear plastic
protector.
   B.    Action By The Hearing Body: The planning commission shall consider the
facts and circumstances of each variance application. In order to grant a
variance the commission must make the following findings:
      1.    That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar
to the land involved and that are not applicable to other lands in the same
district.
      2.    That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title.
      3.    That the hardship and/or unique circumstances do not result from
actions or desires of the applicant.
      4.    That granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures or
buildings in the same district.
      5.    The relief granted by the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements
of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such property or
improvement.
   C.    Conditions Of Approval: In recommending approval of any variance
request, the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions in conformity with
this title.
   D.    Decision: Within a reasonable time period following the public hearing
the commission shall make a decision either approving, approving with
conditions or deny the request for a variance. The decision shall be in writing
and shall specify:
      1.    The standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.    The reason(s) for the decision. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-11-4: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person denied a variance or aggrieved by a variance decision of the
planning and zoning commission may within seven (7) days following receipt of
the written decision file an appeal with the administrator and pay all
associated fees. Notice shall be considered to have been received three (3)
days after the date of mailing.
   A.    Action By The Council: The council shall hold a public hearing,
subject to the same noticing requirements as the original public hearing before
the commission, to consider the appeal. The council may approve, conditionally
approve or deny the variance. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-11-5: NOTIFICATION TO THE APPLICANT:
Within a reasonable time period following the expiration of the appeal period
the administrator shall provide written notice of the council's decision to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the variance application to the
applicant. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-11-6: EXPIRATION OF VARIANCE APPROVAL:
Unless a longer time is specifically established as a condition of approval, a
variance approval shall be considered void twelve (12) months following the
effective date of the approval by council if construction is not being
diligently pursued toward completion. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
12-12-1: Purpose
12-12-2: General Parking Requirements
12-12-3: Location Of Parking Spaces
12-12-4: Parking Area Improvements
12-12-5: Parking Lot Design
12-12-6: Parking Spaces Required
12-12-7: Parking Requirements For Uses Not Specified
12-12-8: Common Facilities For Mixed Uses
12-12-9: Off Street Loading
12-12-10: General Provisions; Off Street Loading
12-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the minimum requirements for off
street vehicular parking and loading for various buildings and land uses
irrespective of the district in which they are located. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-2: GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.    Off street parking and loading facilities shall be shown on a site
plan for building permit or administrator review at a scale not less than one
inch equals one hundred feet (1"=100'). This is not required for single-family
or duplex construction on a lot with an attached garage for each unit.
   B.    The parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no
sales, storage, repair work or servicing of any kind conducted thereon, except
where the lot is constructed with adequate space to accommodate trucks.
   C.    Whenever a land use is changed or altered (enlarged, increase in
number of employees, seating capacity, etc.) in such a manner that will
increase the parking space requirement specified by this title, a site plan
showing the design for the additional parking spaces shall be submitted to the
administrator for approval.
   D.    With the exception of residential districts, no inoperable or
unlicensed vehicles shall be parked within public or private off street parking
areas. Inoperable or unlicensed vehicles located in residential districts shall
be located within an enclosed building or an enclosed back yard.
   E.    Groups of three (3) or more parking spaces, except those in
conjunction with single-family or two-family dwellings on a single lot shall be
served by a service drive so that no backward movement or other maneuvering of
a vehicle within a street, other than an alley will be required. (Ord. 518, 6-
10-2008)
12-12-3: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.    An off street parking lot for uses other than residential uses shall
be located on the same lot as the principal use the parking lot serves or
within four hundred feet (400') of the principal building it serves. This four
hundred foot (400') measurement shall be measured from the nearest point of the
principal building to the nearest point of the parking lot.
   B.    Off street parking for residences shall be located on a driveway in
the side, rear or front yard. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-4: PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS:
All public or private parking areas which contain three (3) or more parking
spaces shall be improved according to the following:
   A.    All parking areas except those in conjunction with single- family or
two-family dwellings shall have surfacing of asphalt concrete, or Portland
cement concrete. The council may approve other durable and dust free surfacing
materials for infrequently used parking areas, such as an auditorium,
gymnasium, church or other similar use.
   B.    All parking areas, except those required in conjunction with a single-
family or two-family dwelling, should provide a substantial bumper, which will
prevent cars from encroachment on abutting private or public property.
   C.    All parking areas, including service drives, except those required in
conjunction with single-family or two-family dwellings, which abut a
residential district, shall be enclosed along and immediately adjacent to any
interior property which abuts any residential district with a sight obscuring
fence, wall or hedge not less than three feet (3') nor more than six feet (6')
in height. If fence, hedge or wall is not located on the property line, said
area between fence, hedge or wall and the property line shall be landscaped
with lawn or low growing evergreen ground cover or rock mulch.
   D.    Any lights provided to illuminate any public or private parking area
or vehicle sales area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
any abutting or adjacent residential district.
   E.    Parking areas for residential uses, except those required in
conjunction with a single-family or two-family dwelling, shall not be located
in a required front yard.
   F.    Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the
flow of traffic, provide maximum safety in traffic access and egress and
maximum safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site, but in no case
shall two-way and one-way driveways be less than twenty feet (20') and twelve
feet (12') wide respectively. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-5: PARKING LOT DESIGN:
All parking spaces and parking lots shall be designed and constructed to the
following minimum standards:
   A.   Parking space dimensions: Eight feet (8') in width by twenty feet (20')
in length. Parking area aisle widths shall be as follows:
 
              Parking Aisle Widths
Parking Angle One-Way Traffic Two-Way Traffic
30°          12 feet         24 feet
45°          12 feet         24 feet
60°          24 feet         24 feet
90°          24 feet         24 feet
 
   B.   Stalls must be clearly marked and the markings must be maintained in
good condition.
   C.    Bumpers must be installed along street property line where paved areas
abut street right of way (except driveways).
   D.    No stalls shall be such that cars must back over the property line to
enter or leave a stall.
   E.    Driveway entrances and exits:
      1.   A driveway that serves no more than one dwelling unit: Ten feet
(10') in width.
      2.    A driveway that serves two (2) or more dwelling units: Eighteen
feet (18') in width. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-6: PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
The minimum number of off street parking spaces required shall be no less than
as set forth in the following:
Use  Parking Spaces Required
Residential:
                                                                                Parking
Use                                                                             Spaces
                                                                                Required
Residential:
                                                                                2 for the
                                                                                operator;
   Bed and breakfast                                                        1 for each
                                                                                guestroom;
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                employee
   Hotels, motels, motor hotels,    etc.                                 1 for each
                                                                                guestroom
                                                                                2 for each
   Mobile/manufactured home park                                            dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1.5 for
                                                                                each
                                                                                dwelling
   Multiple-family dwelling                                                 unit;
                                                                                rounded to
                                                                                the
                                                                                highest
                                                                                full unit
   Rooming or boarding houses                                               1 for each
                                                                                guestroom
                                                                                2 for each
   Single-family or two-family                                              dwelling
dwelling                                                                        unit on a
                                                                                single lot
Institutional types:
                                                                                1 for
                                                                                every 4
                                                                                fixed
                                                                                seats or
                                                                                every 8
                                                                                feet of
                                                                                bench
                                                                                length or
                                                                                every 28
                                                                                square
                                                                                feet where
   Churches, clubs, lodges                                                  no
                                                                                permanent
                                                                                seats or
                                                                                benches
                                                                                are
                                                                                maintained
                                                                                in main
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                (sanctuary
                                                                                or place
                                                                                of
                                                                                worship)
                                                                                1 per 350
                                                                                square
   Daycare centers                                                          feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1.5 for
                                                                                each bed;
   Hospitals                                                                rounded to
                                                                                the
                                                                                highest
                                                                                full unit
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                250 square
   Libraries, museums, art galleries                                        feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
   Nursing homes, home for the aged, group care homes, etc.                 1 for each
                                                                                3 beds
                                                                                Elementary
                                                                                or junior
                                                                                high, 1.5
                                                                                for each
                                                                                teaching
                                                                                station
                                                                                plus 4 for
                                                                                every
                                                                                classroom,
                                                                                or 1 for
                                                                                every 42
   Schools                                                                  square
                                                                                feet of
                                                                                seating
                                                                                area where
                                                                                there are
                                                                                no fixed
                                                                                seats in
                                                                                an
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                or
                                                                                assembly
                                                                                area
                                                                                High
                                                                                Schools,
                                                                                1.5 for
                                                                                each
                                                                                teaching
                                                                                station,
                                                                                plus 8 for
                                                                                every
                                                                                classroom
                                                                                or 1 for
                                                                                every 28
                                                                              square
                                                                                feet of
                                                                                seating
                                                                                area where
                                                                                there are
                                                                                no fixed
                                                                                seats in
                                                                                an
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                or
                                                                                assembly
                                                                                area
Commercial types:
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                75 square
   Barber and beauty shops                                                  feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                6 for each
   Bowling alleys                                                           bowling
                                                                                lane
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                200 square
   Medical/dental clinics                                                   feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                400 square
   Office buildings, business and professional offices                      feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                150 square
   Pharmacies                                                               feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                300 square
   Retail establishments, except as otherwise specified herein              feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
   Retail stores handling bulky merchandise, household furniture, or         600 square
appliance repair shops                                                         feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
Establishments or enterprises of a
recreational or an entertainment nature:
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                seating
                                                                                capacity
   Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and   plus
beverages                                                                      employees
                                                                                divided by
                                                                                3, where
                                                                                fraction
                                                                                round up
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                75 square
   Participating type, e.g., skating rinks, dance halls                     feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 parking
   Spectator type, e.g., auditoriums, assembly halls, theaters, stadiums,   space for
places of public assembly                                                       each 4
                                                                                seats
Industrial types:
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                500 square
   Except as specifically mentioned herein                                  feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                300 square
   Laboratories and research facilities                                     feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                400 square
   Machinery or equipment sales                                             feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                1 for each
                                                                                400 square
   Wholesale and storage cooperations                                       feet of
                                                                                gross
                                                                                floor area
 
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR USES NOT SPECIFIED:
The parking space requirements for buildings and uses not set forth herein
shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission and such
determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable
building or use specified herein. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-8: COMMON FACILITIES FOR MIXED USES:
   A.    Requirements: In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for
off street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various
uses. Off street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered to
provide parking facilities for any other use except as provided below.
   B.    Joint Uses Of Parking Facilities: The city council may, upon
application, authorize the joint use of parking facilities required by said
uses and any other parking facility, provided that:
      1.   The applicant shows that there is no substantial conflict in the
principal operating use of the building or use for which the joint use of
parking facilities is proposed.
      2.    The parking facility for which joint use is proposed is not farther
than four hundred feet (400') from the building or use required to have
provided parking.
      3.    The parties concerned in the joint use of off street parking
facilities shall evidence agreement for such joint use by a legal instrument
approved by the city attorney as to form and content. Such instrument, when
approved as conforming to the provision of this title, shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-12-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
Buildings to be built or substantially altered that receive and distribute
materials and merchandise by trucks shall provide and maintain off street
loading berths in sufficient number and size to adequately handle the needs of
the particular use.
   A.    The following standards shall be used in establishing the minimum
number of berths required:
 
Loading Berths Required
Gross Floor Area Of The Building In Square Feet Number Of Berths
Up to 10,000                                    1
10,000 and over                                 2
 
   B.    A loading berth shall contain a space ten feet (10') wide and thirty
five feet (35') long, and have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14').
Where the vehicles generally used for loading and unloading exceed these
dimensions, the required length of these berths shall be increased. (Ord. 518,
6-10-2008)
12-12-10: GENERAL PROVISIONS; OFF STREET LOADING:
The following provisions shall apply to off street loading facilities:
   A.    Requirements: The provision and maintenance of off street loading
space is a continuing obligation of the property owner. No building permit
shall be issued until plans are presented that show property that is and will
remain available for exclusive use of property for which the building permit is
issued and shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and
availability of the amount of loading space required by this title. Should the
owner or occupant of any building change the use to which the building is put,
thereby increasing off street loading requirements, it shall be unlawful and a
violation of this title to begin or maintain such altered use until such time
as the increased off street loading requirements are met.
   B.   Joint Use: Owners of two (2) or more buildings may agree to utilize
jointly the same loading spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap;
provided, that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the city attorney in
the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish the joint use.
   C.    Loading Area Plan: A plan drawn to scale, indicating how the off
street loading requirements are to be fulfilled shall accompany an application
for loading areas.
   D.   Design Requirements For Loading Areas:
      1.    Areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall have
durable and dustless surfaces of asphaltic concrete or Portland cement
concrete, maintained adequately for all weather use and so drained as to avoid
flow of water across sidewalks.
      2.    Loading areas adjacent to residential districts or adjacent to
residential uses shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents.
Artificial lighting which may be provided shall be so deflected as not to shine
or create glare in residential districts or on any adjacent dwelling.
      3.    Access aisles shall be of sufficient width for all vehicular
turning and maneuvering.
      4.    Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by
the intersection of the driveway centerline, the street right of way line and a
straight line joining said lines through points twenty feet (20') from their
intersection. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, AND LOTS
SECTION:
12-13-1: Purpose
12-13-2: General Provisions
12-13-3: Nonconformities Under Permit Authority
12-13-4: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this title to permit nonconforming uses, buildings, and
lots to continue until they are removed or altered in such a manner to bring
them into conformance. It is further the intent of this title that
nonconforming uses, buildings, and lots shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended in such a manner as to increase their nonconformity, without approval
of the city council, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-13-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.    The lawful use of land or structures existing on the effective date
hereof may be continued.
   B.    A nonconforming structure, which conforms with respect to use, may be
altered or expanded if the alteration, expansion or addition is in conformance
with the standards of this title.
   C.    If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six (6)
consecutive months, further use of the property shall conform to this title.
   D.    A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
   E.    A nonconforming use may be changed with the approval of the council,
if recommended by the commission, to another nonconforming use of the same or
of a more restricted nature.
   F.    Normal repairs and alterations may be made to a lawful nonconforming
building, provided that no structural alteration shall be made, except those
required by law. No existing nonconforming structure designed, arranged,
intended for or devoted to a use not permitted under this title for the
district in which such structure is located shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, structurally altered or moved unless such use is changed to a
use permitted under the regulations specified by this title for the district in
which said building is located; and provided further, that nothing in this
title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe and ordered to
be strengthened or restored to a safe condition, unless such building has been
destroyed by an extent exceeding seventy five percent (75%) of full value, as
determined by consideration of the assessed value referred to above.
   G.    When a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is
damaged by fire or by any other cause so that the cost of renewal of the
damaged parts exceeds seventy five percent (75%) of the cost of the replacement
of the entire building (exclusive of foundations) using new materials, then
such building shall not be rebuilt unless the building and its construction and
uses conform fully to this title and other codes of the city as applied to new
buildings. The determination of whether a building is destroyed to the extent
described above shall rest with the council. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-13-3: NONCONFORMITIES UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY:
Nothing contained in this regulation shall require any change in the plans,
construction, alteration or designated use of a structure upon which
construction has commenced or a permit has been obtained prior to the effective
date hereof. If the designated use or structure will be nonconforming, the
construction of such use shall be commenced within six (6) months of permit
issuance. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-13-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   For a lot of record created prior to April 14, 2020 and that does not
meet the minimum lot size or width required by this Zoning Code, structures for
single unit dwellings may be built, expanded, reconstructed, occupied or used.
Such structures and uses shall meet all other applicable requirements of this
Zoning Code.
   B.   For two (2) or more lots, combinations, or portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership created prior to January 1, 1975, and
do not meet the requirements for minimum lot size or width required by this
Zoning Code, the lands involved shall be treated as an undivided parcel.
      1.   No portion of such a parcel shall be used which does not meet lot
size or width requirements established by this title.
      2.   No division of such a parcel shall be made which leaves remaining
any lot size or width below the requirements established by this title. (Ord.
609, 5-12-2020)
CHAPTER 14
APPEALS
SECTION:
12-14-1: Administrative Appeals
12-14-2: Stay Of Proceedings
12-14-3: Action By Commission
12-14-4: Action By Council
12-14-5: Request For Hearing By Affected Persons
12-14-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation of the administrator may
within the fourteen (14) days after the date of the administrator's decision
file a notice of appeal with the planning and zoning commission specifying the
grounds upon which the appeal is being taken. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-14-2: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless such
stay would cause imminent peril to life and property as determined by the
council. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-14-3: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
   A.    The commission shall hold a public hearing on appeals from decisions
of the administrator within a reasonable time period following the date the
notice of appeal was filed.
   B.    The commission shall publish a copy of the notice of appeal with the
time, place and date of the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, once at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the public
hearing.
   C.    The commission shall, within a reasonable time period following the
hearing, issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the
administrator's decision. The written decision shall contain the reasons for
such decision.
   D.    The commission's decision is final unless appealed to the council.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-14-4: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission may within seven
(7) days of the date of the commission's decision file a notice of appeal with
the city council specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is being taken.
   B.    The city council shall hold a public hearing as soon as possible
following the filing of the notice of appeal. The council shall publish a copy
of the notice of appeal in the same manner as outlined under subsection
12-14-3B of this chapter.
   C.    The council shall, within a reasonable time period following the
hearing, issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the
administrator's decision. The written decision shall contain the reasons for
such decision. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-14-5: REQUEST FOR HEARING BY AFFECTED PERSONS:
Any affected person may at any time prior to final action on rezone,
conditional use, or variance, if no hearing has been held on the application,
petition the commission or council in writing to hold a public hearing as
outlined by section 67-6512, Idaho Code; provided, however, that if twenty (20)
affected persons petition for a hearing, the hearing shall be held. (Ord. 518,
6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 15
ZONING PERMITS
SECTION:
12-15-1: Required
12-15-2: Application
12-15-3: Commencement Of Construction Or Use
12-15-4: Penalty
12-15-1: REQUIRED:
No person shall undertake any construction or change of use for which a site
plan review is not required without first obtaining a zoning permit from the
city. The purpose of the zoning permit is to confirm that the proposed
construction or use of the property is in compliance with the requirements of
this title. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-15-2: APPLICATION:
   A.    The zoning permit application shall contain the following information:
      1.    A site plan that meets the requirements of section
12-9-5 of this title.
      2.    An explanation of the proposed change in use or proposed
construction. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-15-3: COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OR USE:
If the commencement of construction or the change of use does not commence
within six (6) months of the issuance of the zoning permit, the permit shall be
void. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-15-4: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a zoning permit when required by this chapter, or use of the
property in violation of a zoning permit, is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 518, 6-10-
2008)
CHAPTER 16
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
12-16-1: Complaints And Violations
12-16-2: Penalties
12-16-3: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
12-16-1: COMPLAINTS AND VIOLATIONS:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or its alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the administrator. The administrator
shall properly record the complaint, immediately investigate and take action
thereon as follows:
   A.    Upon determination by the administrator that a violation of this title
has occurred he shall notify the responsible party of the violation. The notice
of violation shall be in writing and shall include:
      1.    A description of the premises sufficient for identification.
      2.    A statement indicating the nature of the violation.
      3.    A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance.
      4.    The date before which the violation shall be corrected.
      5.    A statement that failure to obey may result in further action.
   B.    The notification of violation is deemed to have been properly served
to the responsible party if it is served to him personally or sent by certified
mail to his last known address. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-16-2: PENALTIES:
Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the provisions of this
title shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
council or any other public official or private citizen from taking lawful
action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-16-3: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals,
variances, conditional use permits, plan approvals, and other matters
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this title requiring
investigations, inspections, legal advertising, consultation services, postage,
and other expenses.
In addition, the applicant shall pay to the city of Spirit Lake the cost of
legal publication and attorney fees required for legal opinions, research and
investigation of matters required by this title and/or Idaho Code.
Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on the application or appeal. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 17
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
12-17-1: Purpose
12-17-2: Initiation Of Zoning Amendments
12-17-3: Contents Of Application
12-17-4: Zoning Amendment Procedure
12-17-5: Action By Commission
12-17-6: Action By Council
12-17-7: Resubmission Of Application
12-17-8: Zoning Upon Annexation
12-17-1: PURPOSE:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, the council may, by ordinance, after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the commission and subject to procedures provided
by Idaho Code, section 67-6511, amend, supplement, change or repeal the
regulations, restrictions and boundaries or classification of property. (Ord.
518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-2: INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
   A.    By the commission;
   B.    By the city council; or
   C.    By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-3: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Applications for amendments to the official zoning map, adopted as part of this
title shall be filed with the administrator and contain at least the following
information:
   A.    Name, address and phone number of the applicant and his
representative;
   B.    Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the city council;
   C.    Present land use;
   D.    Present zoning district;
   E.    A vicinity map at a scale approved by the commission showing property
lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the
administrator may require;
   F.    A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered which must be provided by and certified to by a licensed title
company doing business in Kootenai County, Idaho;
   G.    A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the comprehensive
plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding
area; and
   H.    A fee as established by the council in accordance with this title.
(Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-4: ZONING AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
The zoning ordinance shall be amended in the following manner:
   A.    Requests for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be submitted
to the commission, which shall evaluate the request at a public hearing to
determine the extent and nature of the amendment requested.
   B.    If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the commission may recommend that the city council adopt or reject the
requested amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided.
   C.    If the request is found to not be in accordance with the comprehensive
plan, the commission shall recommend that the city council reject the requested
amendment.
   D.    Requests for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall then be
submitted to the council, which shall evaluate the request at a public hearing
to determine the extent and nature of the amendment requested.
   E.    If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the city council may adopt or reject the requested amendment under the notice
and hearing procedures as herein provided.
   F.    If the request is found to not be in accordance with the comprehensive
plan, the council shall reject the requested amendment. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-5: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations to the city
council on proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or
map revisions.
   A.    Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment: Within a reasonable time period
following the filing of the application, the commission, prior to recommending
a zoning ordinance text amendment to the city council shall conduct at least
one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and
place and the amendment shall be published in the newspaper designated as the
official newspaper of the city of Spirit Lake. Following the commission's
hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was presented at
the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the council.
   B.   Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment: Within a reasonable time period
following the filing of the application, the commission, prior to recommending
a zoning ordinance map amendment that is in accordance with the comprehensive
plan to the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and the amendment shall be
published in the newspaper designated as the official newspaper of the city of
Spirit Lake. Additional notice by first class U.S. mail shall be provided to
property owners and residents within the land being considered; three hundred
feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered; and any
additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by
the commission. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property
owners or residents, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3) notices in the
newspaper designated as the official newspaper of the city of Spirit Lake is
sufficient, provided that, the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing.
   C.    Material Change: Following the commission's hearing, if the commission
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards its
recommendation to the council. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-6: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
The council, prior to adopting, revising, or rejecting the amendment to the
zoning ordinance as recommended by the commission may conduct at least one
public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the city council hearing, if the council makes a material change from
what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the council adopts the amendment.
upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning ordinance, the
council shall specify:
   A.    The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   B.    The reasons for approval or denial. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008; amd. Ord.
614, 7-14-2020)
12-17-7: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by
the council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or with
reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a
period of one year from the date of such final action; unless there is an
amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions
as applying to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 518, 6-10-2008)
12-17-8: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Upon annexation of an unincorporated area, the council shall request and
receive a recommendation from the commission on the proposed comprehensive plan
and zoning ordinance changes for the unincorporated area. The commission and
the council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho
Code, section 67-6509. Concurrently with the adopting of an ordinance of
annexation, the city council shall amend the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 518, 6-10-
2008)
