CITY CODE
of
TWIN FALLS, IDAHO
1978
Code current through:
Ord. O-2025-011, passed 7-21-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Twin Falls, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance O-2025-011, passed July 21, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1997
AN ORDINANCE FOR REVISING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF TWIN FALLS, IDAHO.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TWIN FALLS, IDAHO,
AN IDAHO MUNICIPAL CORPORATION:
SECTION: 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code
of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under
the direction of the governing body of the City, containing all ordinances of a
general nature in effect at the time of such codification, shall be accepted in
all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the City as enacted
by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new provision
shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the insertion of
the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3) copies of
which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code of Twin Falls, Idaho.
SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6. The interim Zoning Code of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho, and its
effective date appearing and cited as Title 10 in the newly-codified City Code,
and by Chapter 1, Section 10 of said Title 10 effective to and through December
31, 1980, is hereby extended to and through December 31, 1981, or to the date
of publication of an ordinance adopting said Title 10 as the final and
permanent zoning code of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho, and the first to occur
of said events.
SECTION 7. This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and the publication of this
Ordinance in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by
order of the Mayor and City Council.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL October 20, 1980
SIGNED BY THE MAYOR October 20, 1980
ORDINANCE NO. 2021-005
   AN ORDINANCE FOR REVISING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF TWIN FALLS, IDAHO.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TWIN FALLS,
IDAHO, AN IDAHO MUNICIPAL CORPORATION:
   SECTION 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho, prepared by American Legal Publishing
Corporation, under the direction of the governing body of the City, containing
all ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by American Legal Publishing Corporation, whereby each newly adopted
ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper
heading and is inserted in the proper place in the official copy. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon its passage. An official copy of City
Code shall be maintained in the office of the City Manager, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of Twin Falls, Idaho.
   SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6. This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and the publication of this
Ordinance in accordance with law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL, March 8, 2021.
SIGNED BY THE VICE MAYOR, March 10, 2021.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Twin Falls City Code
1-1-2: Severability Clause
1-1-1: TWIN FALLS CITY CODE:
This city code is hereby declared to be and shall constitute the official city
code of the city of Twin Falls. Any reference made to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under
its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal document. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
1-1-2: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
1-2-1: Mayor
1-2-2: Vice Mayor
1-2-3: City Manager
1-2-4: Department Heads
1-2-1: MAYOR:
At the time of installing and swearing in the councilmen following each general
city election, or special election called for the purpose of electing
officials, the council shall elect one of their members to be designated the
mayor. He/she shall serve for a period of two (2) years unless sooner removed
by the council or becomes disqualified. The mayor shall preside at the meetings
of the council and perform such other duties consistent with his office as may
be imposed by the council. He/she shall be entitled to a vote on all matters
coming before the council, but shall possess no veto power. He/she shall be
recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the
courts of the purposes of serving civil processes, and by the governor for
military purpose. He/she may use the title of mayor in any case in which the
execution of contracts or other legal instruments in writing, or other
necessity arising from the general laws of this state may so require, but this
shall not be construed as conferring upon him/her administrative powers or
functions of a mayor under the general laws of the state. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-
2015)
1-2-2: VICE MAYOR:
Upon taking office, the mayor shall appoint with the consent of the council any
other councilman to act in the absence or disability of the mayor. Said
appointed councilman shall be titled vice mayor and shall during the temporary
absence or disability of the mayor, have all duties, powers and rights of the
mayor. The designated vice mayor's term of appointment shall continue until
another councilman is appointed vice mayor. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
1-2-3: CITY MANAGER:
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of
the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and
neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the city manager. It shall be the responsibility of the city
council and its members to aid and assist in an advisory capacity any
department head, individually or collectively, on any phase of policy and/or
public relations, such association not to conflict with the administrative
duties of the city manager. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
1-2-4: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
Department heads shall include deputy city managers, chief financial officer,
police chief, fire chief, city engineer, public works director, economic
development director, and human resource director. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015; amd.
Ord. 2022-013, 7-18-2022)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any section of this code for which special penalty be not
provided, shall be guilty of the offense defined and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six (6) months or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
The city manager shall designate a code enforcement officer who shall have the
right of ingress or egress to any premises for the purpose of inspecting for
violations of this code, and shall be authorized to enforce this code by
issuance of Idaho uniform citations. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the city may be revoked by the council or
by the court having proper jurisdiction. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3106, 10-5-
2015)
CHAPTER 5
EMERGENCY POWERS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Legal Authority
1-5-2: Purpose And Intent
1-5-3: Scope
1-5-4: Definitions
1-5-5: Public Health Emergency Orders
1-5-6: Process For Enacting Public Health Emergency Orders
1-5-7: Exclusions
1-5-8: Suspension And Waiver Of Certain City Services, Ordinances, And Policies
And Procedures
1-5-9: Force Majeure
1-5-10: Penalty
1-5-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-304, 50-811(10), and 50-606 authorize the City of Twin
Falls ("City") to pass ordinances granting certain powers to the City Manager
related to public health emergencies.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City finds that the preservation of public health, safety, and welfare may
require immediate action by the City in response to emergency situations.
Therefore, the City hereby authorizes the City Manager certain powers for
immediate response to foreseeable, imminent, or present public health
emergencies.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the procedures for activating the emergency powers of
the City Manager and the specific powers of the City Manager during a public
health emergency.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein, shall
have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply
to the feminine, masculine, and neuter genders.
ISOLATION: The separation of infected persons, or of persons suspected to be
infected, from other persons to such places, under such conditions, and for
such time as will prevent transmission of the infectious agent.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: The foreseeable, imminent, or present threat of any
pathogen, agent, vector, or environmental condition, including hazardous
materials, which does or may cause illness or injury to humans.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDER: An advisory, social distancing, isolation, or
quarantine order enacted by the City Manager.
QUARANTINE: The restriction placed on the entrance to and exit from the place
of premises where an infectious agent or hazardous material exists.
SOCIAL DISTANCING: Actions taken to maintain distance from other people,
including avoiding or canceling congregate settings and mass gatherings.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-5: PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
The City Manager, being duly authorized by Idaho Code sections 50-304, 50-811
(10), and 50-606, may issue the following orders, as deemed appropriate by the
City Manager following consultation with or review of information issued by
local, regional, statewide, or nationwide public health authorities.
   (A)   Advisory Order: Where a public health emergency is foreseeable or
imminent, the City Manager may enact an advisory order, which order may provide
information and recommended guidelines for preventing, detecting, and/or
mitigating the onset or spread of a public health hazard.
   (B)   Social Distancing Order: Where a public health emergency is imminent,
the City Manager may, with majority approval of the City Council, enact a
social distancing order, which order may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   Appropriate restrictions regarding the operation or occurrence of
planned or foreseeable commercial, recreational, or expressive gatherings or
events.
      2.   Restrictions on travel through or visitation within the community.
      3.   Postponement or cancellation of public meetings and hearings.
      4.   A limit on the number of persons who may gather in one location and
may apply to indoor or outdoor venues.
      5.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   A social distancing order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. A social distancing order shall apply within
Twin Falls city limits, and five (5) miles outside Twin Falls city limits.
   (C)   Isolation Order: Where a public health emergency is present, and poses
a clear threat of harm to the public health, the City Manager may, with super-
majority approval of the City Council, enact an isolation order, which order
may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the isolation order.
      7.   An isolation order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. An isolation order shall be effective only
when and for so long as the public health emergency is present, and when no
less restrictive alternative exists. Any person shall be entitled to appeal an
isolation order, or to request a modification of any provision of such order by
filing a written appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal shall be heard by City
Council at their next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term
of the isolation order, the Fire Chief or designee shall review such appeal and
issue a written decision. The Fire Chief's decision shall be final.
   (D)   Quarantine Order: Where a health emergency is present, and poses a
clear threat of harm to the public health, the City Manager may, with super-
majority approval of the City Council, enact a quarantine order, which order
may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical or other areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken in order to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or
mitigate a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the quarantine.
      7.   A quarantine order shall include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order. A quarantine order shall be effective only
when and for so long as the public health emergency is present, and when no
less restrictive alternative exists. Any person shall be entitled to appeal a
quarantine order, or to request a modification of any provision of such order
by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal shall be heard by
City Council at their next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the
term of the quarantine order, the Fire Chief or designee shall review such
appeal and issue a written decision. The Fire Chief's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-6: PROCESS FOR ENACTING PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
   (A)   Advisory Order Enactment: The City Manager shall prepare a written
advisory order and publish it pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Social Distancing Order: When enacting a social distancing order, the
City Manager shall present to City Council, at a duly-noticed public meeting,
the proposed social distancing order. Public input may be taken at such
meeting, but a public hearing shall not be required. Following presentation to
the City Council, a roll call vote will be taken. If approved by a majority of
the City Council, the City Manager shall prepare a written order and publish it
pursuant to this section. Except as may be specifically stated in the social
distancing order, such order shall be effective upon posting at Twin Falls City
Hall.
   (C)   Isolation Or Quarantine Order: When enacting an isolation or
quarantine order, the City Manager shall present to City Council, at a duly
noticed public meeting, the proposed order. Public input may be taken at such
meeting, but a public hearing shall not be required. Following presentation to
the City Council, a roll call vote will be taken. If approved by a super-
majority of the City Council, the City Manager shall prepare a written order
and publish it pursuant to this section. Except as may be specifically stated
in the order, such order shall be effective upon posting at Twin Falls City
Hall.
   (D)   Council Veto: A majority of Council members may override any action
the City Manager takes pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   Publication Of Public Health Emergency Order: As possible and prudent
under the circumstances, the City Manager shall cause a public health emergency
order to be published:
      1.   Posting the order in a prominent place at Twin Falls City Hall;
      2.   Posting the order on the City's website;
      3.   E-mailing the order to all persons subscribed to City e-mail
notification services;
      4.   Posting the order to all City social media accounts;
      5.   Providing the order to local television and radio broadcast outlets;
and
      6.   Notifying other government agencies, including Twin Falls School
District, Twin Falls Highway District, Twin Falls County, and other
municipalities.
   Except as may be specifically stated in the Public Health Emergency Order,
such order shall be effective upon posting at Twin Falls City Hall.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-7: EXCLUSIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by a Public Health Emergency Order
duly enacted by the City Manager, the following activities shall be exempt from
the scope of such order:
   1.   Any and all expressive and associative activity that is protected by
the United States and Idaho Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly,
and/or religious activity.
   2.   Educational institutions, which shall follow the duly adopted policies
of their respective governing bodies.
   3.   Activities necessary to operate critical infrastructure and utilities.
   4.   Activities necessary to operate and use medical facilities and
services.
   5.   Activities necessary to buy, sell, or otherwise deliver food and
necessities.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-8: SUSPENSION AND WAIVER OF CERTAIN CITY SERVICES, ORDINANCES, AND POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES:
During a public health emergency and upon issuance of a public health emergency
order, the City Manager may suspend certain non-essential City government
services and functions as deemed necessary and advisable given the specific
public health emergency and in consideration of the health of employees and the
general public. During such time, the City Manager may also suspend the regular
meetings of City boards, commissions, committees created by the City Council of
the City of Twin Falls. In order to facilitate such suspension of meetings, the
ordinances providing for the regular meetings of these commissions shall be
temporarily suspended. Those ordinances providing the timeline for processing
applications shall also be suspended. The City Manager is also authorized to
waive such internal rules, regulations and procedures as deemed necessary to
protect the health and welfare of City employees.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-9: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the context of this chapter, a public health emergency is a force majeure.
No person shall be entitled to recover from the City of Twin Falls any costs
incurred, or profits lost as may be alleged to be attributed to the enactment
of a public health emergency order.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
1-5-10: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful to violate any provision or directive of a duly enacted
social distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order while such order
is in effect. The violation of any provision or directive of a social
distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2020-007, 4-6-2020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADVISORY COMMISSIONS MEMBERSHIP ELIGIBILITY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Limitation Of Eligibility
2-1-2: Local Background Checks
2-1-1: LIMITATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall be eligible to serve more
than two (2) consecutive full terms upon any advisory commission of the city
and the Twin Falls housing authority, Twin Falls library board and Twin Falls
urban renewal agency. A partial term served before the first full term shall
not disqualify a person from serving two (2) consecutive full terms. There
shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms served by members of the
advisory committee to the Twin Falls building inspection department.
The members of all advisory commissions established under this title shall be
residents of the city unless this residency requirement is specifically waived
by the council.
No person shall be appointed to an advisory commission where a related person
serves on the same advisory commission. For purposes of this section,
"relative" shall mean any person related by either blood or marriage within the
second degree. "Second degree" shall be defined as grandparents, parents,
children, brothers or sisters. (Ord. 2972, 6-15-2009)
2-1-2: LOCAL BACKGROUND CHECKS:
All persons proposed for appointment/election to a city advisory commission, as
either a board member or officer, shall first be subject to a local criminal
background check by the Twin Falls police department. The results of these
background checks shall be made available to the mayor and city council before
any such appointment/election. (Ord. 3080, 11-3-2014)
CHAPTER 2
CITIZEN FINANCE AND PLANNING COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 3046, 1-14-2013)
CHAPTER 3
GOLF ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Creation; Purpose
2-3-2: Membership
2-3-3: Removal Of Members
2-3-4: Nonpolitical; No Compensation
2-3-5: Officers; Tenure
2-3-6: Meetings; Quorum
2-3-7: Rules
2-3-8: Expenditures
2-3-1: CREATION; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created the city of Twin Falls golf advisory commission. The
purposes of the commission shall be as follows:
         (A)   To advise and recommend to the city council on matters
concerning the city golf program and facilities and the maintenance and
operation of the city golf course.
         (B)   To inform and advise the public on the city golf program and
facilities.
         (C)   To solicit support of the public and organizations in the
community in the development, operation and financing of the city golf program
and golf course. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
There shall be seven (7) voting members of the golf advisory commission. One
member shall be a representative from the Men's Golf Association; one member
shall be a representative from the Women's Golf Association; and five (5)
members shall be representatives at large to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. At the discretion of the mayor and with approval
by the council, the parks and recreation commission may be appointed to fulfill
the duties of the golf advisory commission.
In addition to the regular members, the following persons shall be ex officio
members of the commission: city manager, director of parks and recreation, city
golf professional, and a city council member appointed by the mayor. (Ord.
3094, 4-20-2015)
2-3-3: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the commission may be removed after a public hearing by a
majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-4: NONPOLITICAL; NO COMPENSATION:
The members of the commission shall be selected without regard to political
affiliation and shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-5: OFFICERS; TENURE:
The commission shall elect its chairman and such other offices as it may
require.
The tenure of office shall be as follows:
         (A)   All regular members shall serve a term of three (3) years.
Vacancies arising in any member's position would be filled for the remaining
term of the member originally appointed.
         (B)   The ex officio members of the commission shall hold office
corresponding to their respective tenures in regular city administration
positions. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-6: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
The commission shall hold at least nine (9) meetings during the year at a
designated time and place, and all meetings shall be open to the public. A
majority of the voting members of the commission shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to conduct business at any meeting of the commission. (Ord.
2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-7: RULES:
The commission shall adopt general rules for the transaction of its business
and shall make written records of meetings, resolutions, findings,
determinations and of its recommendations, which written record shall be kept
as a permanent public record. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
2-3-8: EXPENDITURES:
The commission shall make no expenditures, exclusive of gifts, except as to
those amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council for the purpose of
the commission as provided by law, and within such limits the commission is
authorized to employ employees and technical advisors as it deems necessary for
the promulgation of its work. (Ord. 2853, 3-27-2006)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment And Title
2-4-2: Duties And Purposes
2-4-3: Membership
2-4-4: Vacancies
2-4-5: Removal Of Members
2-4-6: Nonpolitical; No Compensation
2-4-7: Officers
2-4-8: Tenure
2-4-9: Meetings
2-4-10: Quorum
2-4-11: Rules
2-4-12: Expenditures
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a parks and recreation commission to be
known as the Twin Falls parks and recreation commission. (1985 Code, ch. III,
art. 2)
2-4-2: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of the parks and recreation commission shall be as
follows:
         (A)   To make a complete and comprehensive study of the city's needs
for community recreation programs and projects for persons of all ages.
         (B)   To learn of the desires of the public as to recreation
requirements, and the needs for additional parks and park facilities.
         (C)   To act in an advisory capacity and recommend to the city council
as to the needs for community recreation programs and projects for persons of
all ages.
         (D)   To advise the city council of the wishes of the public in regard
to the public's desires as to parks and recreation requirements and the
administration of a sound and comprehensive recreational program.
         (E)   To advise and to recommend to the city council types of
facilities required to accomplish the purposes of a sound and comprehensive
recreation program.
         (F)   To inform and educate the public on already established
recreational facilities and programs, and to educate the public on the methods
of bettering recreational facilities and programs.
         (G)   To solicit the support of and cooperation among the citizens and
various organizations of the community in the development, construction and
financing of recreation programs and facilities. (1958 Code, ch. III, art. 2)
2-4-3: MEMBERSHIP:
There shall be nine (9) voting members of the parks and recreation commission
to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the members of the city council.
There shall be four (4) ex officio members of the commission:
City council member appointed by the mayor
City manager
Recreation director
Superintendent of parks and recreation
(Ord. 2524, 4-8-1996)
2-4-4: VACANCIES:
Any vacancies occurring in the membership of the parks and recreation
commission for any reason shall be filled by the mayor, to be confirmed by the
city council. (1958 Code, ch. III, art. 2)
2-4-5: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the parks and recreation commission may be removed by a majority
vote of the councilmen of the city. (Ord. 1748, 12-15-1975)
2-4-6: NONPOLITICAL; NO COMPENSATION:
The members of the parks and recreation commission shall be selected without
regard to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation. (1958
Code, ch. III, art. 2)
2-4-7: OFFICERS:
The parks and recreation commission shall elect its chairman and vice chairman
and fill such other offices as it may determine necessary. (1958 Code, ch. III,
art. 2)
2-4-8: TENURE:
The following tenure of office shall be provided for the members of the parks
and recreation commission:
         (A)   Each member shall serve a term of three (3) years. Vacancies
arising in any member's position would be filled for the remaining term of the
member originally appointed.
         (B)   The four (4) ex officio members of the parks and recreation
commission shall hold office corresponding with their respective tenures in
regular city administrative positions. (Ord. 2358, 12-16-1991)
2-4-9: MEETINGS:
The parks and recreation commission shall hold at least one regular meeting
each month of the year at the designated time and place, and all such meetings
of the said commission shall be open to the public. (1958 Code, ch. III, art.
2)
2-4-10: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed members of the parks and recreation commission
shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any
meeting of the said commission. (1958 Code, ch. III, art. 2)
2-4-11: RULES:
The parks and recreation commission shall adopt general rules for the
transaction of its business and shall make a written record of the meetings,
its resolutions, findings, determinations and of its recommendations, which
said written record shall be kept as a permanent public record. (1958 Code, ch.
III, art. 2)
2-4-12: EXPENDITURES:
The parks and recreation commission shall make no expenditures, exclusive of
gifts, except as to those amounts appropriated and set aside by the city for
the purpose of said commission as provided by law, and within such limits said
commission is authorized to employ such employees and technical advisors as it
deems necessary for the promulgation of its work. (1958 Code, ch. III, art. 2)
CHAPTER 5
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Establishment And Title
2-5-2: Duties And Purposes
2-5-3: Membership
2-5-4: Expenditures
2-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby created the Twin Falls Traffic Safety Commission. (Ord. 2674,
11-20-2000)
2-5-2: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of said commission are as follows: to recommend and
make suggestions to the City Council for the adoption of plans for traffic
safety as recommended by the National Safety Council Study; to coordinate City
traffic safety plans into the State of Idaho plan; to make suggestions for
projects designated to increase safety in pedestrian and school traffic and to
generally improve traffic safety in the City; to recommend the development,
study and needs for public streets, highways and transportation facilities in
and surrounding the City; to recommend plans for the location, extension and
construction and development of public streets within the City and for County,
State and Federal highways surrounding the City or in which the City may be
interested or affected; to study and recommend to all governmental bodies and
agencies legislation and policies for the improvement, safety and development
of public streets and highways; to work with and submit recommendations,
studies and advice to the Twin Falls Planning Commission; to solicit the
support and cooperation of the citizens and organizations of the community; to
promote and obtain street and highway development; to prepare and disseminate
information needed by various governmental bodies and agencies; to aid in the
development and improvement of the public streets and highways in the City or
in which the City may be interested or affected. (Ord. 2674, 11-20-2000)
2-5-3: MEMBERSHIP:
         (A)   There shall be seven (7) voting members of said commission, all
to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Members on said
commission shall be appointed, one each from the following organizations:
School District 411, Twin Falls Chamber of Commerce, and five (5) City
residents as members at large.
         (B)   There shall be five (5) additional ex officio members as
follows: City Manager, City Engineer, Police Chief, Police Traffic Supervisor,
and a member of the City Council. (Ord. 2674, 11-20-2000)
         (C)   Tenure of office for the voting members of said commission shall
be as follows:
      1.   The term of each member shall be three (3) years.
      2.   The five (5) ex officio members shall hold membership corresponding
to their tenures of office in the City administration. (Ord. 2932, 4-14-2008)
         (D)   Vacancies of membership of said commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
         (E)   Any member of said commission may be removed by a majority vote
of the City Council.
         (F)   Members of said commission shall be selected without regard to
political affiliation and shall serve without compensation.
         (G)   Said commission shall elect a Chairman and such other officers
as it may deem necessary and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business
and make written records of all meetings, resolutions, determinations and
recommendations which records shall be kept as a permanent public record. A
majority of the appointed members of said commission shall constitute a quorum
to conduct business.
         (H)   Said commission shall hold meetings at designated times and
places and at such intervals as it shall deem necessary and all meetings shall
be open to the public. (Ord. 2674, 11-20-2000)
         (I)   With approval from the City Council, the Mayor may appoint the
Planning and Zoning Commission to fulfill the duties of the Traffic Safety
Commission. (Ord. 2018-022, 11-5-2018)
2-5-4: EXPENDITURES:
The members of said commission shall make no expenditure or incur any
indebtedness except as may be authorized and appropriated by the City Council.
(1958 Code ch. III, art. 6)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Establishment And Title
2-6-2: Duties And Purposes
2-6-3: Membership
2-6-4: Expenditures
2-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby created the advisory committee to the Twin Falls building
inspection department. (Ord. 2205, 6-1-1987)
2-6-2: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of the committee are as follows:
         (A)   To make suggestions and recommendations to the Twin Falls
building inspection department on issues relating to the international building
code, other city adopted building codes, such as the fire, plumbing,
mechanical, and electrical codes, and other related matters as requested by the
building official of the building inspection department or the applicant for a
building permit.
         (B)   To hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of the international building code and other city adopted
building codes, such as the fire, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical codes.
      1.   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of the building code(s) or the rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the building code(s) do not
fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
      2.   This committee shall have no authority to waive requirements of the
building code(s). (Ord. 2968, 5-4-2009)
2-6-3: MEMBERSHIP:
         (A)   There shall be nine (9) voting members of the committee, all to
be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members on the
committee shall be actively engaged in the profession of the building
construction industry. Members are more specifically to be appointed from the
following organizations or professions: two (2) members from residential
construction, one member each from commercial construction, electrical
construction, mechanical construction, plumbing construction, the architectural
profession, and the engineering profession, and one member at large.
         (B)   There shall be two (2) additional ex officio members as follows:
the building official and a member of the city council.
         (C)   Tenure of office for the voting members of the committee shall
be as follows:
      1.   The nine (9) members of the advisory committee to the building
inspection department are to be appointed on a staggered term basis as follows:
the first three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years, the next
three (3) members shall be appointed for two (2) years, and the last three (3)
members shall be appointed for one year.
      2.   Thereafter, the term of each member shall be three (3) years.
      3.   The two (2) ex officio members shall hold membership corresponding
to their tenures of office or employment in the city administration.
         (D)   Vacancies of membership of the committee shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
         (E)   Any member of the committee may be removed after public hearing
by a majority vote of the city council.
         (F)   Members of the committee shall be selected without regard to
political affiliation and shall serve without compensation.
         (G)   The committee shall elect a chairman and such other officers as
it may deem necessary and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and
make written records of all meetings, resolutions, determinations and
recommendations, which records shall be kept as a permanent public record. A
minimum of five (5) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum to
conduct business or pass an issue. A majority vote of the members present will
pass any issue decided by the committee.
         (H)   The committee shall hold meetings at designated times and places
and at such intervals as it shall deem necessary, and all meetings shall be
open to the public. (Ord. 2968, 5-4-2009)
2-6-4: EXPENDITURES:
The members of the committee shall make no expenditure or incur any
indebtedness except as may be authorized and appropriated by the city council.
(Ord. 2205, 6-1-1987)
CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Purpose
2-7-2: Definitions
2-7-3: Historic Preservation Commission Created
2-7-4: Organization, Officers, Rules, Meetings
2-7-5: Powers, Duties, And Responsibilities
2-7-6: Special Restrictions
2-7-7: Separability
2-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the city through the identification,
evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas,
structures, and objects which reflect significant elements of the city's, the
state's, and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural
heritage. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Twin Falls.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Twin Falls.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state
or the nation. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
2-7-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION CREATED:
   (A)   There is hereby created a historic preservation commission, which
shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the council.
   (B)   All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest,
competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The council shall
endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or
experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history,
urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law, or other historic preservation
related disciplines.
   (C)   Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one
1- year term; two (2) 2-year terms; two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Commission members may be
reappointed to serve additional terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder
of the unexpired term.
   (D)   The members of the commission may be reimbursed by the city for
expenses incurred in connection with their duties. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997; amd.
Ord. 2983, 4-12-2010; Ord. 2024-004, 2-12-2024)
2-7-4: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS:
   (A)   The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are
necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter. Rules
of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be available for public
inspection.
   (B)   The commission shall elect officers from among the commission members.
The chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice chairman
shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman.
   (C)   All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and follow
the requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws. The Commission shall keep
minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings,
and actions.
   (D)   The commission may recommend to the council, within the limits of its
funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the
services of technical experts or other persons as it deems necessary to carry
on the functions of the commission. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
2-7-5: POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Commission shall be advisory to the Council and shall be authorized to:
   (A)   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   (B)   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequests, or
donation.
   (C)   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
City.
   (D)   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
   (E)   Contract, with the approval of the Council, with the State or Federal
government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
   (F)   Cooperate with the Federal, State, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   (G)   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
County, the City, the State, or the Federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
   (H)   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation in the City.
   (I)   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties in the City.
   (J)   Commission members, employees or agents of the Commission may enter
private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of their official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   (K)   Review nominations of properties to the National Register of Historic
Places for properties within the City's jurisdiction. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
2-7-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code 67-4612, the City may provide by ordinances,
special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement and
preservation of historic properties. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
2-7-7: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2543, 3-24-1997)
CHAPTER 8
TREE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-8-1: Establishment And Title
2-8-2: Purpose
2-8-3: Organization Of Commission
2-8-4: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby created the tree commission. (Ord. 2600, 11-23-1998)
2-8-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies, regulations and standards
necessary to ensure that the city will continue to realize the benefits of the
community forest. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to help coordinate
maintenance of public trees; emphasize use of good tree care practices and
promote tree diversity; promote education for all citizens on proper tree care
practices; and provide guidance to the tree commission. (Ord. 2600, 11-23-1998)
2-8-3: ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION:
The commission shall be composed of five (5) members and one alternate member
appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. The alternate member shall
vote only in the absence of a regular member. All members shall serve a three
(3) year term. At the discretion of the mayor and with approval by the council,
the parks and recreation commission may be appointed to fulfill the duties of
the tree commission. (Ord. 2983, 4-12-2010)
2-8-4: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   The commission shall determine rules of conduct and bylaws for the
commission, subject to council approval. The commission shall elect officers
and establish procedures for conduct of documented business as may come before
the commission. The commission, in its discretion, may also appoint nonvoting
members to give advice.
   (B)   The commission shall draft and recommend necessary amendments to the
tree ordinance 1 . The commission shall also draft and recommend an
arboricultural specifications manual and community forestry plan to the council
by June 1, 1999. Should the manual and plan be accepted and codified by the
council, the commission shall draft and recommend necessary amendments to those
documents. Both the manual and the plan shall be reviewed every five (5) years
after the effective date of the documents.
   (C)   The commission may assist with policies concerning selection,
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants in the
city. The commission will promote public education of good arboricultural
practices.
   (D)   The commission shall recommend to the council the community forestry
plan and an implementation strategy, for the establishment of educational and
informational programs, and for the development of policies and procedures
regarding the city's duties.
   (E)   The commission shall maintain and publish a list of certified
arborists.
   (F)   The commission shall keep the council apprised of its activities.
(Ord. 2600, 11-23-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 9
ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 3017, 10-3-2011)
CHAPTER 10
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2995, 11-22-2010)
CHAPTER 11
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-11-1: Establishment And Title
2-11-2: Duties And Purposes
2-11-3: Membership
2-11-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby created the city of Twin Falls development impact fee advisory
committee. (Ord. 2929, 2-19-2008)
2-11-2: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of said committee are as follows:
         (A)   Assist the governmental entity in adopting land use assumptions;
         (B)   Review the capital improvements plan, and proposed amendments,
and file written comments;
         (C)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
plan;
         (D)   File periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to the
capital improvements plan and report to the governmental entity any perceived
inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the development impact fees;
and
         (E)   Advise the governmental entity of the need to update or revise
land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and development impact fees.
(Ord. 2929, 2-19-2008)
2-11-3: MEMBERSHIP:
         (A)   There shall be nine (9) voting members of said committee, to be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Four (4) or more
members shall be active in the business of development, building or real
estate.
         (B)   Vacancies of membership of said committee shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
         (C)   Any member of said committee may be removed by a majority vote
of the city council.
         (D)   Members of said committee shall be selected without regard to
political affiliation and shall serve without compensation.
         (E)   The term of each member shall be three (3) years, except for the
appointments of the initial committee, and except for appointments to fill
vacancies.
         (F)   Said committee shall elect a chairman and such other officers as
it may deem necessary and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and
make written records of all meetings, resolutions, determinations and
recommendations which records shall be kept as a permanent public record. A
majority of the appointed members of said committee shall constitute a quorum
to conduct business.
         (G)   Said committee shall hold meetings at designated times and
places and at such intervals as it shall deem necessary and all meetings shall
be open to the public. (Ord. 2929, 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 12
IMPROVEMENT REIMBURSEMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Establishment And Title
2-12-2: Duties And Purposes
2-12-3: Membership
2-12-4: Vacancies
2-12-5: Removal Of Members
2-12-6: Nonpolitical; No Compensation
2-12-7: Officers
2-12-8: Tenure
2-12-9: Meetings
2-12-10: Quorum
2-12-11: Rules
2-12-12: Conflict Of Interest
2-12-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created an improvement reimbursement commission
to be known as the Twin Falls improvement reimbursement commission. (Ord. 2974,
7-13-2009)
2-12-2: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of the improvement reimbursement commission shall be as
follows:
         (A)   Administer the council approved resolution for the amounts,
methods and procedures for reimbursement of costs to private initial developers
who installed public works improvement(s) by any subsequent developer or
property owner that connects to those systems.
         (B)   With the assistance of the city engineer, prepare and maintain a
system to track any public works improvement(s) that are subject to
reimbursement.
         (C)   Accept requests for reimbursement, to include actual receipted
costs and plans, from the initial developers that have installed the public
works improvement(s), to be paid back by subsequent developers or property
owners.
         (D)   With the assistance of the city engineer, establish the
boundaries of properties that will be required to reimburse the initial
developer that installed the public works improvement(s), and notify the owners
of those properties of the requirement to reimburse when their own properties
develop.
         (E)   Using cost information from the developer that installed the
public works improvement(s) or other approved method, determine the proper
compensation that any developer or property owner that connects to the public
works improvement(s) will pay.
         (F)   Verify that the reimbursement has been made to the initial
developer that installed the public works improvement(s) by any subsequent
developer or property owner that connects to those systems, before allowing any
subsequent development or property owner to connect to those systems. (Ord.
2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-3: MEMBERSHIP:
There shall be seven (7) voting members of the improvement reimbursement
commission to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the members of the
city council. Members on the commission shall be actively engaged in the
profession of community development. Members are more specifically to be
appointed from the following organizations or professions: two (2) members from
the development community; two (2) members that are engineers, surveyors or
architects; and three (3) members at large. In addition to the seven (7) voting
members, there shall be two (2) nonvoting ex officio members of the commission:
city council member appointed by the mayor and city engineer or designated
representative. The members of the commission established under this section
shall be residents of the city unless this residency requirement is
specifically waived by the council. At the discretion of the mayor and with
approval by the council, the development impact fee advisory committee may be
appointed to fulfill the duties of the improvement reimbursement commission,
notwithstanding the membership described above. (Ord. 3104, 8-17-2015)
2-12-4: VACANCIES:
Any vacancies occurring in the membership of the improvement reimbursement
commission for any reason shall be filled by the mayor, to be confirmed by the
city council. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-5: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the improvement reimbursement commission may be removed by a
majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-6: NONPOLITICAL; NO COMPENSATION:
The members of the improvement reimbursement commission shall be selected
without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-7: OFFICERS:
The improvement reimbursement commission shall elect its chairman and vice
chairman and fill such other offices as it may determine necessary. (Ord. 2974,
7-13-2009)
2-12-8: TENURE:
The following tenure of office shall be provided for the members of the
improvement reimbursement commission:
         (A)   The seven (7) members of the improvement reimbursement
commission are to be appointed on a staggered term basis as follows: the first
two (2) members shall be appointed for three (3) years, the next two (2)
members shall be appointed for two (2) years, and the remaining members shall
be appointed for one year. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be three
(3) years. The limitation of eligibility for successive terms shall be per
section
2-1-1 of this title.
         (B)   The ex officio members of the improvement reimbursement
commission shall hold membership corresponding to their tenures of office or
employment in the city administration. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-9: MEETINGS:
All meetings will take place at council chambers and shall be open to the
public. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-10: QUORUM:
At least four (4) of the appointed voting members of the improvement
reimbursement commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and conduct
any business at any meeting of the said commission. Any decision of the
commission will require a majority of at least four (4) members' approval for
acceptance of the reimbursement. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
2-12-11: RULES:
The improvement reimbursement commission shall adopt general rules for the
transaction of its business and shall make a written record of the meetings,
its resolutions, findings, determinations and of its recommendations, which
said written record shall be kept as a permanent public record. (Ord. 2974, 7-
13-2009)
2-12-12: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A member of the commission shall not participate in any proceeding or action
when the member, his employer, or his employee, business partner or associate,
his business, or any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within
the second degree has an economic interest in the procedure or action. Any
action or potential interest in any proceedings shall be disclosed at or before
any meeting, duly entered and recorded in the minutes, at which the action is
being heard or considered. (Ord. 2974, 7-13-2009)
CHAPTER 13
PUBLIC ART COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-13-1: Establishment And Title
2-13-2: Purpose
2-13-3: Mission
2-13-4: Definition
2-13-5: Duties And Responsibilities
2-13-6: Membership
2-13-7: Removal Of Members
2-13-8: Officers; Tenure
2-13-9: Nonpolitical; No Compensation
2-13-10: Meetings
2-13-11: Quorum
2-13-12: Rules
2-13-13: Expenditures
2-13-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby created the Twin Falls Public Art Commission. (Ord. 2019-009,
9-23-2019)
2-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Twin Falls Public Arts Commission (TFPAC) is to establish
policies and procedures for the operation, funding and implementation of a
public art program in the City of Twin Falls. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-3: MISSION:
The mission of a public art program is to support a thriving arts community
through the activation of public spaces. Expanding the opportunities for Twin
Falls residents to experience various genres of art in public places will
create a more visually pleasing and culturally rich environment while expanding
the public's knowledge of arts and culture. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-4: DEFINITION:
Public art is any work of art in any media that has been designed, planned,
sited or executed in a space accessible to the general public, anywhere from a
public square to a wall inside a building open to the public. (Ord. 2019-009,
9-23-2019)
2-13-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The duties and responsibilities of this commission may include but are not
limited to the following:
   (A)   To facilitate the placement of public art in public buildings and
public spaces;
   (B)   To inform City residents and visitors about public art;
   (C)   To make recommendations to the City Council on a public art policy;
   (D)   To make recommendations to the City Council regarding the selection of
art and artists, the acquisition of works of art, and the acceptance of gifts
and loans of art work;
   (E)   To recommend sites and placement of public art projects;
   (F)   To raise funds for public art projects;
   (G)   To maintain an inventory and documentation of the City's collection of
public art; and
   (H)   To survey the City's collection of public art to determine if works
require maintenance or other attention. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-6: MEMBERSHIP:
   (A)   The TFPAC will represent the City's interests in matters pertaining to
public art, and will advise and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning public art and public art activities, and will be responsible for
carrying out this public art policy.
   (B)   The TFPAC should be comprised of not more than seven (7) voting
members who will serve at the appointment of the Mayor, as approved by City
Council. One (1) member shall be a representative from the Magic Valley Arts
Council.
   (C)   In addition to the regular members, representatives from the following
city departments shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the TFPAC: City
Manager's Office, Parks and Recreation Department, and Planning and Zoning
Department. One (1) member of the City Council, appointed by the Mayor, shall
also serve as an ex officio member. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-7: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the commission may be removed after a public hearing by a
majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-8: OFFICERS; TENURE:
   (A)   The Commission shall elect its chairman and vice chairman and any
other such officers as it may require.
   (B)   The tenure of office shall be as follows:
      1.   All regular members are appointed at large and will serve a three
(3) year term. Vacancies arising in any member's position would be filled for
the remaining term of the member originally appointed.
      2.   Ex officio members of the commission shall hold officers
corresponding to their respective tenure in regular city administration
positions. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-9: NONPOLITICAL; NO COMPENSATION:
TFPAC voting members shall be selected without regard to political affiliations
and shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-10: MEETINGS:
The TFPAC shall hold at least one regular meeting each month of the year at the
designated time and place, and all such meetings of the said commission shall
be open to the public in compliance with Idaho's open meeting laws and in
accordance with Second Amended Resolution 1912. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-11: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed members of the TFPAC shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum. A quorum is required to conduct any business of the
commission. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-12: RULES:
The TFPAC shall adopt general rules for the transaction of its business and
shall make a written record of the meetings, its resolutions, findings,
determinations of its recommendations, which said written record shall be kept
as a permanent public record. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
2-13-13: EXPENDITURES:
The commission shall make no expenditures, exclusive of gifts, except as to
those amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council for the purpose of
the commission as provided by law, and within such limits the commission is
authorized to employ employees and technical advisors as it deems necessary for
the promulgation of its work. (Ord. 2019-009, 9-23-2019)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
CARD ROOMS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required; Term
3-1-2: License Fee
3-1-3: Denial of License
3-1-4: Inspection
3-1-5: Liquor Prohibited
3-1-6: Appeal of City Clerk's Decision
3-1-7: Revocation of License
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or permit the conducting or
permit the playing of any game of cards or any game in which playing cards are
used, in any place of business, place of amusement or in any room or place open
to the public, in his possession or control, without first obtaining from the
City a license therefor, signed by the City Clerk.
The license mentioned above shall be a yearly license and must be obtained on
July 1 of each year; provided, that when said first day shall fall upon Sunday
or a legal holiday, then it shall be obtained on the day following such
holiday. The person desiring such license shall file a written application for
such license with the City Clerk and pay the license fee hereinafter required.
(Ord. 2197, 3-16-87)
3-1-2: LICENSE FEE:
The applicant for a card room license shall pay a license fee at the time of
his application of ten dollars ($10.00) for each card table or other
paraphernalia, per month, upon which may be conducted a continuous game of
cards or game played by means of cards. (1958 Code, Ch. VI, Art. 1)
3-1-3: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Whenever the person making application for such license has been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude, or the reputation of such applicant in the
City is such that the City Clerk shall believe that such applicant will conduct
or permit the conducting of a gambling game or gambling games under such
license, either openingly or surreptitiously, the City Clerk shall refuse to
issue such license. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-87)
3-1-4: INSPECTION:
Any person conducting or who shall permit the conducting of any game or games
under license issued as aforesaid, shall permit any member of the Council and
any police officer or officers and any executive officer of the City, or any or
either thereof, to freely visit and view such game or games and to remain and
view the same at will, and any person or any person acting as an officer or
agent thereof or any person having immediate control or conduct of such
business, place of amusement, room or place where said game is being carried
on, or is being permitted to be carried on, under such license, shall answer in
writing any question or questions which may be propounded to him or them by any
of the officers aforesaid in regard to such game or games, and shall make a
statement in writing under oath when required by any such officer setting forth
such information as shall be required by said officer in regard to such game or
games and the conduct thereof, and shall exhibit when and as often as required
any matter or thing in the possession or under the control of such person
conducting or permitting the conduct of such game or games, which is in any way
connected with said game or games or which, in the opinion of such officer,
would be evidence of the conducting of a gambling game or any improper conduct
of said game, and if such person shall refuse or fail, either individually or
by or through its officers or agents or person having charge or control, to
answer the inquiries or make the statement or statements or exhibit matters and
things aforesaid, in the manner and to the extent aforesaid, then the Council
may, at a regular meeting or any special meeting called for that purpose,
revoke the license issued to such person so offending and the licensee shall
forfeit all fees paid thereunder, and the Council shall refuse to issue any
further license to the person so offending and when such licensee so offending
shall have been notified of the revocation of such license, it shall be
unlawful for him to conduct or permit the conducting or permit the playing of
any such game or games as in this Chapter mentioned in his place of business or
amusement, or any place or room under his possession or control.
3-1-5: LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
No beer, wine, hard liquor or any liquor of any alcoholic content whatsoever,
shall be served to anyone at said card tables, and no person shall drink or be
permitted to drink such liquor at said tables. (1958 Code, Ch. VI, Art. 1)
3-1-6: APPEAL OF CITY CLERK'S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk, the applicant
may appeal such decision to the City Council within seven (7) days of notice of
the decision of the City Clerk. The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the
City Council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not be
denied a license. The City Council shall set the time and place for a hearing a
reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal.
Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed
postage prepaid to the applicant at his last known address, at least three (3)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of the City Council shall be
final.
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council may revoke any license issued under this Chapter for violation
of any of the provisions of this Code or ordinance of the City or laws of the
State of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the City Council, the City Clerk or City
Council shall notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice
shall be personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the
licensee at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-87)
CHAPTER 2
HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-007, 2-6-2017)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC DANCE HALLS
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 4
PAWNSHOPS, BROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License, Application And Procedure
3-4-3: Qualifications
3-4-4: Records
3-4-5: Sales
3-4-6: Restrainment Of Sales; Notice From Police Department
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
PAWNBROKER: Every person, firm, association or corporation engaged in
conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning or advancing money,
check or draft for money, for himself or for another, upon deposit or purchase
of personal property, personal security, pawns, pledges, bailment or other
valuable thing, excluding firearms, or who deals in purchasing articles of
personal property or other valuable thing, excluding firearms, on condition of
reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assigns
at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or
personal property, having possession of the property, or any portion or part
thereof mortgaged or who advertises by use of pawnbroker's sign, or by
advertising "unredeemed pledges", or by any other expression designating
pawnbroker's business, shall, for all intents and purposes under this chapter,
be declared to be a pawnbroker within the meaning of this chapter. This section
shall only apply to Type 02 Federal Firearms License holders.
FIREARMS: The term "firearms" includes any weapon designed to expel a
projectile by explosive action, the frame or receiver of such a weapon, firearm
silencers, and destructive devices, excluding antiques 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3).
This definition shall also include any legal firearm accessory attached to the
weapon, regardless of whether it is serialized.
PAWNSHOP: Any room, store or place in which any such business of "pawnbroker"
as defined herein is engaged in, carried on or conducted.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person, firm, association or corporation who buys,
accepts as trade, or otherwise deals in secondhand tools, goods, wares,
merchandise or other articles and things usually found in a secondhand store,
other than recording media. The following are specifically excluded from the
definition of secondhand dealer:
   (A)   Dealers in new merchandise who do not pay in cash for used property,
but allow their patrons an exchange value when making a sale of new goods of
the same type.
   (B)   Dealers in antique goods who do not purchase electronic equipment,
tools, coins or precious jewelry.
   (C)   Rummage sales, garage sales and yard sales conducted on a temporary
basis (not more than ten (10) days).
   (D)   Any person, firm, association or corporation that accepts or receives,
as donation only, and does not pay in cash for any property, clothing,
furniture, or any other valuable thing.
SECONDHAND STORE: Any room, store or place in which any such business of
"secondhand dealer" as defined herein is engaged in, carried on or conducted.
(Ord. 2591, 9-8-1998, eff. 10-1-1998)
3-4-2: LICENSE, APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
   (A)   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage,
conduct, keep, manage or operate any pawnshop or secondhand store without
having first obtained a license therefor as provided for in this chapter and
which is in full force and effect.
   (B)   Application: An application for such license shall be made in writing
to the city clerk in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
   (C)   Partnership, Corporation Or Association: When application for a
license is made by or on behalf of a partnership, corporation or association,
such application shall be made by the manager, officer, agent or other person
who will have the direct charge and management of such pawnshop or secondhand
store.
   (D)   Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the
police department shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant.
   (E)   Issuance Of License: Upon completion of such investigation, if the
police department finds that the license applicant complies with the required
qualifications set forth in this chapter, the city clerk shall issue a license.
Licenses shall not be transferable either as to person or place.
   (F)   License Fees:
      1.   Regular License: The city clerk shall collect before the issuance of
any license or renewal thereof an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
If a license is granted pursuant to an application filed after June 30 of any
year, the license fee for the balance of such year shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
      Each license shall remain in full force and effect until relinquished,
suspended, revoked or expired. Every licensee, on or before each January 31,
shall pay the city clerk five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each license held
by him/her as the annual fee for the succeeding calendar year.
      2.   Limited License: For those secondhand dealers who purchase not more
than ten (10) transactions of secondhand goods per month, the annual license
fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (G)   Age Requirement: No license shall be issued to any person who is not
eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   (H)   License Denial; Refund: If any license applicant is denied a license
for any reason, the required license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. No
license fee shall be refunded as result of any suspension, revocation or for
any license that is voluntarily surrendered by the holder of such license.
   (I)   Location Requirements: No license shall be issued to any person for
any proposed location that does not comply with the planning and zoning
regulations and fire codes established by the city, county and the state.
   (J)   Criminal History: To determine the suitability of prospective
applicants for pawnshop, pawnbroker and secondhand dealer licenses, the police
department shall require an applicant to provide information necessary to
perform a local Twin Falls city background check, warrant check and a check of
the Idaho Courts online records system.
(Ord. O-2025-001, 1-27-2025)
3-4-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Every applicant and every employee of an applicant shall meet the following
minimum qualifications:
   (A)   Must be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   Must not have had a city pawnbroker's business license or similar
permit or license revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local
agency within three (3) years prior to the date of the application.
   (C)   Must not have been convicted within the preceding five (5) years of:
      1.   Any felony or crime that would be deemed a felony according to the
laws of the state.
      2.   Theft in any degree.
      3.   Obscene or lewd conduct.
   (D)   Must provide all information needed by the police department to
perform a background investigation.
   (E)   The police department shall investigate the aforementioned
qualifications pursuant to this chapter and shall report to the city clerk its
recommendations. The city clerk shall, if the applicant complies with the
licensing requirements, issue a license to the applicant upon the payment of
the proper fee.
(Ord. O-2025-001, 1-27-2025)
3-4-4: RECORDS:
   (A)   Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, except dealers of secondhand
clothing, shall keep a record of every article pledged, consigned, or traded
with him/her, sold to him/her, or received by him/her. The requirements of this
provision do not include firearms, though pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers may
keep such records of firearms.
   (B)   This record shall be open to the inspection of any city police officer
at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall be completed on a
form specified by the city.
   (C)   Upon the purchase, pledge or receipt of any property or article said
record shall be completed. One copy of said record shall be retained by said
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date said form is completed. One copy of said record shall be provided to the
seller, pledger, trader or consignor. No entry on such record shall be altered,
erased, obliterated, or defaced, and all property described in the record shall
be open to the inspection of any city police officer during business hours.
Original records shall be free of any staples, tape or other items that may
deface, obliterate, or damage said record. A complete and accurate description
of the property shall be reported to "LeadsOnline.com" within twenty-four (24)
hours of receipt. While not mandatory, submitting details of firearms
transactions into LeadsOnline is highly encouraged. This voluntary submission
helps enhance public safety by aiding in the recovery of lost or stolen
firearms.
   (D)   Each record of purchase, pledge, trade, consign or receipt of property
or articles shall contain an accurate description of the property or article
and the person from whom it was received. Said record shall also contain the
following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the pawnshop or secondhand
store.
      2.   Last name, first name and middle initial, complete residence
address, phone number, date of birth, height, weight, sex, hair color and eye
color of the seller, pledger, or any person from whom any property or article
was received.
      3.    The driver's license number and the state of issue, or official
state of Idaho identification, or official United States military
identification, or passport, with photograph and signature block of the seller,
pledger, trader, consignor.
      4.   The date of the transaction; the amount of loan, purchase, pledge,
trade or consign; the interest amount and terms of any loan or pledge.
      5.   A complete description of the property or article purchased,
pledged, traded or consigned, to include, brand name or make, model, serial
number, model number, owner applied number or other engravings, vehicle
identification number, type and color. (No record shall contain more than six
(6) article or property entries).
      6.   Signature lines or space for the execution by pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer and the seller, pledger, trader or consignor, or any person from whom
property was received.
      7.   A space shall be provided and shall bear a legible ink, chemical, or
other acceptable impression of the right or left thumbprint of the seller,
pledger, trader, consignor, or any person from whom property was received.
   (E)   Every record shall be completed and signed by the pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer or employee and the seller, pledger, trader, or consignor at
the time of execution. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall compare the
signature upon the required identification with that upon the record. The
signature by the seller, pledger, trader, or consignor shall be a certification
that the described property or article has not been obtained by illegal means
and is free and clear of any encumbrances.
   (F)   This Section shall apply to all secondhand merchandise, pledges,
articles or property for trade or resale, but shall not apply to articles of
new merchandise purchased directly from the manufacturers, wholesale dealers or
distributors having established places of business or of any purchase in the
open market or secured from any persons doing business and having an
established place of business in the City. Such goods, however, shall be
accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of legitimate purchase and must
be shown to any City police officer upon request.
   (G)   Each record issued shall be numbered consecutively, and if stubs are
used in connection with such records, such stubs shall be numbered
consecutively to conform to the tickets.
   (H)   Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer receiving in pledges or otherwise
any article, shall affix to said article a tag, and upon such tag shall be
written a number in legible characters. Such number shall correspond to the
number in the record required to be kept by him/her.
(Ord. O-2025-001, 1-27-2025)
3-4-5: SALES:
   No personal article, property or other valuable thing, pledged to, purchased
by, received in trade by or deposited with any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer
at this place of business shall be sold from such place of business for a
period of at least thirty (30) days after being so acquired; provided, this
Section shall not apply to firearms or new merchandise purchased from
manufacturers or wholesale dealers having established places of business or any
purchase in the open market or secured from any person doing business and
having an established place of business in the City. Such goods, however, shall
be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of legitimate purchase and
must be shown to any City police officer upon request.
(Ord. O-2025-001, 1-27-2025)
3-4-6: RESTRAINMENT OF SALES; NOTICE FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   Whenever the Chief of Police or any City police officer shall notify
any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in writing that certain property is alleged
to be stolen, such property (excluding firearms) shall not be sold or permitted
to be redeemed or otherwise released for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of such notice, but such notice may be renewed for an additional thirty
(30) day period or periods.
   (B)   Written notice of hold shall bear the date, accurate description of
held property, requesting agency case number, name of business where questioned
item is held, amount owed to pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, name of person
property was received from and the requesting officer's name and agency. A
duplicate copy of this information shall be left with the pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer at the time an item is placed on hold.
(Ord. O-2025-001, 1-27-2025)
CHAPTER 5
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Auctioneer's License
3-5-2: Jewelry Auctions (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
3-5-3: Auction Sales
3-5-4: Exclusions And Exemptions
3-5-5: Fees For Auctions
3-5-6: Appeal Of City Clerk's Decision
3-5-7: Revocation Of License
3-5-1: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work of an auctioneer
unless said person shall first obtain an auctioneer's license from the City
Clerk. The fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per annum
from date of issue, and no such license shall be issued for a period less than
one year. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-5-2: JEWELRY AUCTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
3-5-3: AUCTION SALES:
         (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at
public auction any personal property unless said person shall first make
application for and obtain an auction sale permit from the City Clerk. (Ord.
2197, 3-16-1987)
         (B)   Said application shall give the name of the business, business
address, owner or manager of business, residence address of the owner or
manager, expiration date, name of the applicant along with other pertinent
information as prescribed by the City Clerk.
         (C)   Applicant must post with the City Clerk at the time of
application a bond in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) issued
by a surety company authorized to do business in this State assuring that the
sale will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and
indemnify any person purchasing any personal property at said auction sale
against loss or damage occurring by reason of violation of this Chapter,
misrepresentation of merchandise sold or breach of warranty of merchandise
sold. (Ord. 2203, 6-1-1987)
         (D)   It shall be unlawful to hold any auction sales in any section of
the City zoned for residential purposes; except churches, schools and service
organizations may hold auction sales for charitable purposes, and individuals
selling at their own home, their own personal belongings, for one day only may
conduct auction sales in the residential areas of the City. No fees shall be
collected for holding charitable auctions; no fee shall be charged for
individuals selling at their own home their personal belongings.
It shall be unlawful to hold any auction sale upon any City property,
sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or highways.
         (E)   It shall be unlawful to hold any auction sale heretofore
provided for, before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and after ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
3-5-4: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to migratory livestock; the sale at auction under
or by virtue of any order of court, Idaho statute or City ordinance; the sale
of real property. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 7)
3-5-5: FEES FOR AUCTIONS:
At the time of making application for a jewelry auction sale permit or any
other auction sale permit, the applicant shall pay a twenty five dollar
($25.00) fee which shall also be the permit fee, and if the permit be not
granted, the applicant shall be refunded fifteen dollars ($15.00). The fees
provided herein are for preparing the application and policing the auction.
(1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 7)
3-5-6: APPEAL OF CITY CLERK'S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk, the applicant
may appeal such decision to the City Council within seven (7) days of notice of
the decision of the City Clerk. The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the
City Council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not be
denied a license. The City Council shall set the time and place for a hearing a
reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal.
Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed
postage prepaid to the applicant at his last known address, at least three (3)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of the City Council shall be
final. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-5-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council may revoke any license issued under this Chapter for violation
of any of the provisions of this Code or ordinance of the City or laws of the
State. Prior to revocation by the City Council, the City Clerk or City Council
shall notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the licensee
at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the
hearing. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Findings And Intent
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Special Event Permit Required
3-6-4: Permit Application; Fees; Insurance And Indemnification
3-6-5: Issuance Of Permit; Extraordinary Resources; Conditions Of Approval;
Grounds For Denial
3-6-6: Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit
3-6-7: Prohibitions And Penalties
3-6-8: Attendance And Participant Good Faith Estimate
3-6-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
   (A)   The Twin Falls city council finds that special events which are
offered to the general public or a substantial segment of the public often
attract large gatherings of people which may cause adverse public health and
safety conditions requiring municipal regulation to ensure adequate protection
of public health and safety.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Twin Falls city council that this chapter be
enacted to protect and promote the health, welfare and safety of the citizens
of and visitors to the city of Twin Falls and to regulate special events for
the benefit and protection of the public health and safety. Special event
applicants, promoters and sponsors whose special events require the use of
extraordinary city resources as a result of their anticipated attendance or
heightened security concerns should pay for those extraordinary resources. It
is the further intent of the Twin Falls city council that this chapter be
construed liberally in favor of protecting and promoting the health, welfare
and safety of the citizens of, and visitors to the city of Twin Falls. (Ord.
2986, 6-21-2010)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
APPLICANT, PROMOTER OR SPONSOR: The person making application for a permit to
plan and operate a special event within the city of Twin Falls. As used herein,
the applicant, promoter and sponsor may be used interchangeably and the
requirements of this chapter and any administrative regulations shall be
enforced against the applicant, promoter and sponsor.
EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES: Government, public health and safety personnel,
equipment or other resources which would not, in the absence of the special
event, be required or expended.
INSURANCE: A general liability policy and, if necessary, an automobile
liability policy for each permitted event in the amount designated within this
chapter written by an insurer authorized by the state of Idaho to write
insurance policies and kept continuously in force for the full term of the
permit.
LICENSING OFFICER: The chief of police or his/her designee.
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, walk-a-thon or
procession of any kind consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or a
combination thereof, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the city.
PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, reserves, sports complexes, swimming pools,
golf courses, trails and other special places that are publicly owned, operated
or maintained.
PERMITTEE: A person having a city permit in full force and effect issued
hereunder to plan and operate a special event within the city of Twin Falls.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any
organization of any kind.
PROJECTED ATTENDEES AND PARTICIPANTS: The estimated number of persons who will
attend or participate, are reasonably likely to attend or participate, or are
expected to attend or participate in a special event. The number estimate
should consider the type and format of the special event, the size and location
of the event, any prior events which were similar, including the special event
history itself if it is an annual event or part of a series of gatherings or
events, and the entertainment, if any, planned.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
SPECIAL EVENT: A preplanned single gathering, event or series of related
consecutive daily gatherings or events of an entertainment, cultural,
recreational, educational, political, religious or sporting nature, or of any
other nature that:
   (A)   Is expected to draw five hundred (500) or more persons at any session
as participants or spectators and is proposed to be held at a park;
   (B)   Impacts city streets, sidewalks, parks and common areas, or city
resources;
   (C)   Unless otherwise permitted to do so, propose to sell or serve alcohol
publicly; or
   (D)   Intends to broadcast amplified sound or generate unusual noise.
Examples of special events include, by way of illustration and without
limitation, these types of events: concerts, dances, assemblages, processions,
parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, community events, mass
participation sports (such as, marathons and running events, bicycle races or
tours, sports tournaments), other organized activity conducted for a common or
collective use.
Excluded from this requirement are venues that are permitted to hold such
activities by the property's zoning or through an approved special use permit.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right of way, or
median strip thereof. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010; amd. Ord. 3092, 3-16-2015)
3-6-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall stage, promote, or conduct any special event in the
city without first obtaining a special event permit from the chief of police or
his/her designee. With the exception of events at which alcohol is served or
sold publicly and events intending to generate amplified sound or excessive
noise, no special event permit under this chapter will be required for events
to be attended by fewer than five hundred (500) people.
   (B)   The requirements for permitting under this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Funeral processions;
      2.   Spontaneous events for the purpose of expressive activity that occur
in response to breaking or emerging news;
      3.   Lawful picketing on sidewalks; and
      4.   Venues that are permitted to hold such activities by the property's
zoning or through an approved special use permit.
In determining whether an event is exempt, no consideration shall be given to
the content of any constitutionally protected expression connected with the
planned activity. No permit shall be required under this chapter, nor any
condition imposed on any permit, if requiring a permit or imposing the
condition would violate rights protected by the constitution of the United
States or by the constitution of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
3-6-4: PERMIT APPLICATION; FEES; INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   (A)   All applicants for a special event permit shall submit an application
for a special event permit to the chief of police or his/her designee no later
than forty five (45) days and no earlier than one year prior to the date of
commencement of the special event.
   (B)   The application for a special event permit shall contain and require
information as determined by the chief of police or his/her designee.
   (C)   Separate application is required for licenses and permits related to,
or necessary for the special event, including licenses or permits to sell
alcoholic beverages in parks or on streets or sidewalks, as required by Idaho
law and this code.
   (D)   Any event that includes the sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages
on public property or public right of way shall require the use of ID bracelets
identifying the legal drinking age of anyone purchasing alcoholic beverages, a
designated sales area and security approved by the chief of police or his/her
designee. Alcohol service and consumption is absolutely prohibited in all city
parks during the operating hours of an event except that which is sold, served
and consumed in an area specifically designated for such activity.
   (E)   All applicants shall submit, with the application, and maintain, at
least until the conclusion of the special event, a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) with the city of Twin Falls or Twin Falls County highway district
(or both, depending upon the location of the special event) named as a
certificate holder, and written by a company authorized to write insurance
policies within the state of Idaho, and filed with the chief of police or his/
her designee. Applicants must also execute indemnification and hold harmless
provisions contained within the application.
   (F)   A twenty five dollar ($25.00) administrative application fee will be
required upon submitting each special event application.
   (G)   All applications must be completed in their entirety. (Ord. 3092, 3-
16-2015)
3-6-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES; CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL;
GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   (A)   Upon submission of the application and items required by this chapter,
the chief of police or his/her designee shall review the application for
completeness. Chief of police or his/her designee may approve, approve with
standard or special conditions, or deny a permit. If additional information is
needed by the chief of police or his/her designee, the applicant shall have
five (5) business days to submit to the chief of police or his/her designee all
requested information.
   (B)   Special event applicants, promoters and sponsors whose special events
require the use of extraordinary city resources as a result of their
anticipated attendance or heightened security concerns shall be required to pay
for those extraordinary resources, as determined by the chief of police or his/
her designee. Full cost recovery for extraordinary resources shall be required
no later than sixty (60) days following the conclusion of the event. Any
extraordinary resources for which there are additional costs shall be solely
dedicated to the special event.
   (C)   The chief of police or his/her designee shall seek the advice of other
relevant city staff members when the review and coordination of a specific
special event application is deemed necessary. The applicant may be required,
when notified by the chief of police or his/her designee, to attend the meeting
and participate in the review of the permit application.
   (D)   An application for a permit may be denied if the chief of police or
his/her designee determines:
      1.   The applicant has made any false, material representation in the
application;
      2.   The applicant fails to provide any of the items or information
required by this chapter;
      3.   In the opinion of the chief of police or his/her designee, the
proposed event fails to provide a safe and secure venue or puts at risk the
safety and well being of citizens in the community, or if applicant fails to
gain required licenses, permits, or permissions from the fire chief, parks and
recreation director and chief of police or his/her designee;
      4.   The special event will substantially interfere or conflict with any
other special event for which a permit has already been granted or activity
already scheduled for a park or with the provision of public safety or other
city services in support of such other previously scheduled event;
      5.   The special event will:
         (a)   Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of public
transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of the
special event;
         (b)   Cause irresolvable conflict with construction or development in
public rights of way or at the park or public facility where the special event
is held;
         (c)   Close streets during peak commuter hours on weekdays between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or between four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. so as to cause unsafe conditions for the
public;
         (d)   As a result of the expected attendance at the event, the lawful
capacity of the facility will be exceeded; and
         (e)   The parking available at the facility will be inadequate to
accommodate the expected attendance at the event; or
         (f)   The event coordinator, applicant, promoter, or sponsor failed to
pay for a previously permitted event. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
         (g)   The application packet is incomplete. (Ord. 3092, 3-16-2015)
   (E)   If a permit is denied, or if the permit is approved on conditions with
which the applicant contests, the chief of police or his/her designee shall
provide the applicant with the written decision to deny or approve with
conditions within ten (10) business days. The applicant, within ten (10)
business days after denial or approval with conditions, may appeal the decision
to the city council for a final review based upon the documents and
circumstances presented. The applicant's appeal will be scheduled for
consideration by the city council at a regular meeting within fifteen (15)
business days. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
3-6-6: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police or his/her designee may summarily suspend or revoke a
permit issued under this chapter for violation of any provision of this
chapter, for violation by the applicant of any federal, state or local laws or
ordinances during the special event, for a violation of the conditions of the
permit or for making any material false representation in an application for a
permit or for an exemption certificate. In deciding whether to suspend or
revoke a permit, the chief of police or his/her designee may consult with other
relevant members of the city staff. In the event of a suspension or revocation,
the appeal provisions above shall apply, commencing upon the date of the
suspension or revocation notice. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
3-6-7: PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTIES:
At all special events, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Conduct, present, stage or promote a special event without a permit;
   (B)   Violate any provision of this chapter;
   (C)   Serve or cause to be served alcohol in violation of Idaho Code; and
   (D)   Violate any condition of a special events permit.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned in the Twin
Falls County Jail for a period not exceeding one year, or be both so fined and
imprisoned.
When a large party or gathering otherwise not requiring a special events permit
occurs at a premises and a police officer at the scene determines that there is
a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person in
charge of the premises and the person responsible for the event, or if either
of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor, will
be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing police personnel
on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided by
the department. If police department personnel respond to a second disturbance
call to the same premises within twenty four (24) hours, the person or persons
in charge of the premises and the persons responsible for the event, or if
either of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of said
minors shall be jointly and severally liable for a civil penalty in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for said incident. The city reserves its
legal options to elect any other legal remedies when such costs or damages
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The accounting and billing procedures
are set forth above. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
3-6-8: ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPANT GOOD FAITH ESTIMATE:
The attendance and participant good faith estimate provided by the applicant,
promoter, or sponsor shall accompany the special event application. The
applicant shall provide a short written statement explaining the basis upon
which the estimate is made. The statement shall include all the relevant
factors known at the time, including, without limitation, past attendance at
similar functions having the same and similar performers, both in Twin Falls
and comparable communities, the price of admission and the extent of
advertising and promotion contemplated. (Ord. 2986, 6-21-2010)
CHAPTER 7
BEER
SECTION:
3-7-1: Intent Of Chapter
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: Application And Qualifications For License
3-7-5: Procedure For Processing And Acting On Applications For Beer Licenses,
Transfers Or Renewals
3-7-6: Inspection; Display And Transfer Of License
3-7-7: Termination Date Of License And Fees
3-7-8: Hours Of Sale
3-7-9: Minors, Sales Restricted
3-7-10: Determination To Revoke, Suspend Or Refuse Removal Of License
3-7-11: Notice Of Council Determination To Revoke
3-7-12: Keg Beer In The City Parks
3-7-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This Chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the City for
the protection of the public health, peace and morals, and all of its
provisions shall be liberally construed for the attainment of that purpose.
(1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 15)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used herein shall have the same definitions and meanings as said
terms are set forth in chapter 10 of title 23, Idaho Code. (1958 Code, ch. VI,
art. 15)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to sell, trade, barter or dispose of beer
without first having obtained a license therefor from the Board of
Commissioners as hereinafter provided. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 15)
3-7-4: APPLICATION AND QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Applications for a beer license shall be in writing, signed and sworn
to by the applicant upon application forms furnished by the City Clerk. Such
application shall be filed by the City Clerk and presented to the Mayor and
Council at the next meeting of the Council for their approval, or rejection or
further consideration.
   (B)   The applicant for a beer license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the Director of the
Department of Law Enforcement of the State, as prescribed by the laws of the
State, and maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such
license is issued. The possession of licenses regularly issued by the
Department of Law Enforcement and the County shall be prima facie evidence of
the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder. (Ord. 2540, 11-
18-1996)
3-7-5: PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING AND ACTING ON APPLICATIONS FOR BEER LICENSES,
TRANSFERS OR RENEWALS:
   (A)   The City Council shall grant or deny an application for a new license
or request for transfer of a license within thirty (30) days of the time it is
filed with the City Clerk. The applicant shall provide to the City Clerk a
current copy of the County and State beer license prior to issuance of the
Municipal license.
If the request is for a renewal of a license, the City Clerk's office may
forward a notice of the renewal date of the license to the applicant, informing
the applicant that the license is due to be renewed, along with other relevant
information. Upon the request of the applicant to renew the license and receipt
of the license fee by the City Clerk's office, the City Clerk shall immediately
forward the application to the City Council. The City Council shall either
approve or disapprove the license in accordance with this Chapter. If the City
Council approves the application for the renewal of a license, the license
shall not be issued by the City Clerk until the applicant shall provide to the
City Clerk a current copy of the County and State beer license.
Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing
according to section 23-1016, Idaho Code. Whenever the Mayor and City Council
denies an application, they shall specify in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 2194, 12-15-1986)
   (B)   In all cases where the city council is considering applications for
licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable, verbatim record of
the proceeding shall be made. If the applicant for a license, transfer or
renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the
matter.
Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention of the
record, any person may have a record transcribed at his expense. The city
council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the proceedings.
Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law.
   (C)   Retailers' licenses shall be granted only for a certain room or
building designated in said license, which said room or building shall be well
lighted and the view thereof not obstructed by any curtain, blind or partition,
and the place of business shall not be changed or moved without the consent of
the city council in regular session. (Ord. 2089, 12-19-1983)
3-7-6: INSPECTION; DISPLAY AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Every person to whom a license shall be granted to sell, barter, trade or
dispose of beer shall at all times conduct a quiet and orderly place of
business which shall be open to the inspection at all times of any police
officer or officer of the United States, and that the said officers shall have
the right at any and all times to make an examination of the said licensed
premises to ascertain if the licensee of such premises is conforming to the
provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state, or the laws of the United
States applicable thereto, and to check the alcoholic contents of any beer
being kept on said premises; all permits or licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises and kept so posted during the full period for
which said license is issued, and said license shall not be transferred without
the consent of the city council. Transfer may be approved after transferee has
filed an application for beer license as heretofore provided and has paid to
the city a transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00). Transferee shall meet all
requirements for issuance of a beer license as is heretofore provided in this
chapter; no license transferred by process of law or otherwise shall authorize
the transferee, including any executor, administrator or trustee in bankruptcy
of the estate of the licensee, to retail beer thereunder until the transferee
shall have filed under oath applications therefor containing substantially the
same information required of an application for a license, and if the
transferee possesses the qualifications and none of the disqualifications for a
license as herein provided, the city council shall approve such transfer and
amend the licenses to show same. Such transferee shall accompany each such
application for transfer with, and shall pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00).
(1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 15)
3-7-7: TERMINATION DATE OF LICENSE AND FEES:
   (A)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall terminate at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on June 30 of each year. (Ord. 2708, 12-3-2001)
   (B)   Retailers' license fees for the sale of beer shall be as follows:
      1.   Where such retailer sells only bottled or canned beer, none of which
is consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee shall be equal to
twenty five percent (25%) of the license fee exacted under subsection (B)2 of
this section relating to draught beer and bottled or canned beer or draught
beer only; and where such bottled or canned beer is consumed on the premises
where sold, the license fee shall be seventy five percent (75%) of the fee
exacted under said subsection (B)2 of this section. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art.
15)
      2.   Where such retailer sells draught beer and bottled or canned beer,
or draught beer only, the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. (Ord.
2027, 9-8-1981)
3-7-8: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in any place licensed to
sell beer or where beer is sold or dispensed to be consumed on the premises
whether conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell or permit to be consumed on
the premises beer as the same is defined by law, between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 15)
3-7-9: MINORS, SALES RESTRICTED:
   (A)   Controlling Sale To Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years. It shall be
unlawful for any minor under the age of twenty one (21) years to frequent,
loiter in or about or patronize any beer dispensary and it shall likewise be
unlawful for any owner of any such beer dispensary or his employee to permit
any such minor under twenty one (21) years of age to frequent, loiter in or be
employed in such beer dispensary.
   (B)   Procuring For Or Purchase, Consuming Or Possessing Beer Prohibited: It
shall be unlawful for any person to procure beer for any person under twenty
one (21) years of age or for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to
purchase, attempt to purchase or otherwise procure or to consume or to possess
beer. This subsection does not apply to possession by a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years making a delivery of beer pursuant to the order of his
parents or pursuant to his employment, or when said person under the age of
twenty one (21) years is in a private residence accompanied by his parent or
guardian and with such parent's or guardian's consent.
   (C)   False Representation Of Age Prohibited: No person under the age twenty
one (21) years shall by any means represent to any person licensed to sell beer
at retail or to any agent or employee of such retail licensee, that he is
twenty one (21) or more years of age for the purpose of inducing such retail
licensee, his agent or employee, to sell, serve or dispense beer to him.
No person shall by any means represent to any such retail licensee, his agent
or employee, that any other person is twenty one (21) or more years of age when
in fact such other person is under the age of twenty one (21) years, for the
purpose of inducing such retail licensee, his agent or employee, to sell, serve
or dispense beer to such other person. (Ord. 2400, 1-4-1993)
3-7-10: DETERMINATION TO REVOKE, SUSPEND OR REFUSE REMOVAL OF LICENSE:
In the event of a conviction of any licensee under the provisions of this
chapter, or any law of the state or of the United States, or any ordinance of
the city regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale, manufacture,
transportation or possession of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors 1 ,
or if the city council shall determine that any such licensee has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter or any of the regulations of the director of
the department of law enforcement, state of Idaho or of the city council
promulgated under the authority of the laws of the state or ordinances of the
city, the council may, in its discretion, or in addition to any other penalty
imposed, determine to revoke the license of any such licensee, to suspend the
same for a period not in excess of six (6) months, or to refuse to grant a
renewal of such license after the date of its expiration. (1958 Code, ch. VI,
art. 15)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9 of this title.
3-7-11: NOTICE OF COUNCIL DETERMINATION TO REVOKE:
When the city council shall make a determination to revoke, to suspend or to
refuse grant of renewal of license by reason of a licensee's conviction or
violation of any law or regulation referred to in section
3-7-10 of this chapter, the city council shall give the licensee involved
written notice thereof, which shall be served upon such licensee personally, or
by certified mail addressed to such licensee at the premises for which license
was issued. If the council's determination is made upon the basis of the
licensee's conviction, the notice shall refer to and identify the judgment of
conviction, and when made upon any other basis said notice shall contain a
statement of the acts with which the licensee is charged and upon which the
council's determination is based, which statement shall be in ordinary and
concise language so as to enable a person of common understanding to know what
is intended, and, in the case of a determination to suspend license, the period
of such suspension. In cases where the council has determined to revoke or
suspend a license, revocation or suspension shall become effective fifteen (15)
days after notice shall have been personally served on or mailed to such
licensee, and the notice shall so state. In cases where the council has
determined to refuse grant of renewal of license, notice thereof shall be
served or mailed not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the license
shall expire. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 15)
3-7-12: KEG BEER IN THE CITY PARKS:
The use of keg beer in city parks shall be on a permit basis only. Such permit
may be issued upon the deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00). This deposit is
refundable and shall be refunded unless it is determined by the superintendent
of parks that city property was littered or damaged as a result of activity
related to the keg beer, in which case the deposit shall be considered payment
to the city for repairing and/or cleaning up the city property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to possess or use keg beer in city parks without a
permit. (Ord. 2074, 7-18-1983)
CHAPTER 8
WINE
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application For License
3-8-4: Qualifications
3-8-5: License Fee
3-8-6: Issuance Of License
3-8-7: License Restrictions
3-8-8: Consumption On Premises
3-8-9: Possession
3-8-10: Misrepresentation Of Age
3-8-11: Revocation Of License
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of law enforcement of the state of
Idaho.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, copartnership
or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well
as the singular unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed
by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the city council, authorizing a person
to sell wine within the city at retail for consumption off the licensed
premises.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%)
alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of
fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar.
WINE BY THE DRINK LICENSE: A license to sell wine within the city by the
individual glass or opened bottle at retail, for consumption on the premises
only. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail for consumption off
the premises without first having issued to said person a "retail wine license"
as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine by the
individual glass or opened bottle at retail for consumption on the premises
without first having issued to said person a "wine by the drink license" as
herein provided excepting for a person having a liquor by the drink license 1 .
The license or licenses shall be at all times prominently displayed in the
place of business of the licensee. A separate "retail wine license" and "wine
by the drink license" shall be required for each premises, provided nothing
shall prohibit a retailer or wine by the drink licensee from possessing
licenses for more than one premises. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-9-3 of this title.
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for retail wine license and wine by the drink license shall be in
writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant upon application forms furnished
by the city clerk. Such application shall be filed by the city clerk and
presented to the mayor and council at the next meeting of the council for their
approval, rejection or further consideration. (Ord. 2194, 12-15-1986)
3-8-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a retail wine license and wine by the drink license shall
possess all the qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director
of the department of law enforcement of the state, as prescribed by the laws of
the state, and maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which
such license is issued. The possession of licenses regularly issued by the
department of law enforcement and the county, in addition to a city beer
license, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to
receive a license hereunder. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
3-8-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year for each retail wine license and the sum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per year for each wine by the drink license. Such license
year shall be from one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. July 1 through
June 30 of the following year; provided, however, should a license be issued
for less than a full calendar year, the license fee shall be prorated on a
quarterly basis. (Ord. 2708, 12-3-2001)
3-8-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence as
required by section
3-8-4 of this chapter as to the qualifications of the applicant and by the
payment of the required license fee, the city clerk shall, upon approval of the
city council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail or wine
by the drink, as the case may be, within the city for such calendar year or the
remainder thereof. (Ord. 2194, 12-15-1986)
3-8-7: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided by
section
3-7-6 of this title for the assignment or transfer of a beer license. (1958
Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
3-8-8: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Retailers holding valid licenses for the retail sale of liquor by the drink
pursuant to chapter 9, title 23, Idaho Code, may sell wine for consumption on
or off the licensed premises. Persons holding a valid wine by the drink license
may sell wine for consumption on the premises only. Retailers who do not
possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor by the drink, or
retailers who do not have a valid wine by the drink license, shall not permit
consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may sell the wine only in its
original unbroken container. Wine sold for consumption on the licensed premises
may be sold only during hours that beer can be sold pursuant to the laws of
this city 1 . Wine sold by the retailer for consumption off the premises of the
retailer may be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to
the laws of this city 2 . (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-7-8 of this title.
2 2. See section
  3-7-8 of this title.
3-8-9: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a
public highway in this city, have in his possession any wine in an open or
unsealed container of any kind. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
3-8-10: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
   (A)   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may purchase, consume
or possess wine.
   (B)   No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years.
   (C)   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall by any means
represent to any retailer or distributor or to any agent or employee of such
retailer or distributor that he is twenty one (21) years or more of age for the
purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor or his agent or employee to
sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
   (D)   No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or
distributor or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor that any
other person is twenty one (21) years of age, when in fact such other person is
under the age of twenty one (21) years, for the purpose of inducing such
retailer or distributor or the agent or employee of such retailer or
distributor to sell, serve or dispense wine to such other person. (Ord. 2400,
1-4-1993)
3-8-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the mayor and council, and
the mayor and council may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any
license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for any conduct or act of the
licensee or his employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the
premises where such business is conducted, or in connection therewith or
adjacent thereto, tending to render such business or such premises where the
same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety
or general welfare of the city; provided, that revocation or suspension of the
state license by the director of the department of law enforcement shall be
deemed prima facie evidence for revocation or suspension of the license issued
herein. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 21)
CHAPTER 9
LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-9-1: Intent Of Chapter
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: Licensed Liquor Sale
3-9-4: Procedure For Processing And Acting On Applications For Liquor Licenses,
Transfers And Renewals; Fee
3-9-5: Qualifications
3-9-6: License Fee
3-9-7: Form Of License; Authority; Limitations
3-9-8: Unlawful Practices
3-9-9: Closing Hours And Days
3-9-10: Premises Requirements
3-9-11: Police Access To Premises
3-9-12: Right Of Revocation
3-9-1: INTENT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city for
the protection, health, welfare and safety of the people of the city, and for
the purpose of promoting and encouraging temperance in the use of alcoholic
beverages within the city. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 2)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all words and phrases shall be
given the same interpretation as is provided by section 23-902, Idaho Code.
(1958 Code, ch. X, art. 2)
3-9-3: LICENSED LIQUOR SALE:
It shall be lawful within the city to sell liquor by the drink, as provided in
title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code as amended; provided, that a license shall
first be obtained as herein provided, and the rules and regulations and
provisions concerning the license and operation of a place of business for the
sale of liquor by the drink are adhered to as provided. (1958 Code, ch. X, art.
2)
3-9-4: PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING AND ACTING ON APPLICATIONS FOR LIQUOR LICENSES,
TRANSFERS AND RENEWALS; FEE:
Before there shall be a license for the sale of liquor by the drink issued by
the city council, applications therefor by the proposed licensee must be filed
with the city clerk, which application shall be verified by the affidavit of
the person making the same, before a person authorized to administer oaths.
Such application shall provide the name of the applicant, the location of the
proposed business, and such other information to show the qualification of
applicant for a license as hereinafter provided.
The city clerk shall forthwith cause a thorough investigation to be made of the
applicant pertaining to the qualifications for a license and advise the city
council of the application and investigation, and if the city council shall
find that the applicant complies with all requirements of this chapter and that
all qualifications and premises requirements are met, the city council shall
issue a license to the applicant.
The city council shall grant or deny an application for a new license or
request for transfer of a license within thirty (30) days of the time it is
filed with the city clerk. The applicant shall provide to the city clerk a
current copy of the county and state liquor by the drink license prior to
issuance of the municipal license.
If the request is for a renewal of a license, the city clerk's office may
forward a notice of a renewal date of the license to the applicant, informing
the applicant that the license is due to be renewed, along with other relevant
information. Upon the request of the applicant to renew the license and receipt
of the license fee by the city clerk's office, the city clerk shall immediately
forward the application to the city council. The city council shall either
approve or disapprove the license in accordance with this chapter. If the city
council approves the application for the renewal of a license, the license
shall not be issued by the city clerk until the applicant shall provide to the
city clerk a current copy of the county and state liquor by the drink license.
Every application, except a renewal application for the same premises, shall be
accompanied by an application fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which
said fee shall be retained by the city for the investigation and expense for
said license and shall not be returned to the applicant.
The applicant shall also pay to the city clerk the license fee hereinafter
provided at the time of filing the application.
In addition to the requirements herein contained, the application must show the
date of issuance and license number of a retail beer license issued for said
premises by the city. (Ord. 2194, 12-15-1986)
3-9-5: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a liquor license shall possess all of the qualifications
necessary to obtain a license from the director of the department of law
enforcement of the state, as prescribed by the laws of the state, and maintain
such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The
possession of licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement
and the county shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications
to receive a license hereunder. (Ord. 2540, 11-18-1996)
3-9-6: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee hereby imposed and required to be paid to the city clerk shall
be a sum equal to the maximum liquor license fee allowed by state law per
annum; provided, however, that the license fee for any license issued for only
a portion of a year shall be prorated from the date that said licensee
commences to operate to the end of the calendar year, but in no event for less
than six (6) months. All licenses shall expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on
July 1 of the following year. No refund of license fee shall be allowed.
Renewals may be granted upon application duly filed accompanied by a true copy
of the application for the state license and the license issued by the state
for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail if the record of applicant meets
the requirements of this chapter and upon payment of the license fee for the
ensuing year. Any operation under an expired license shall constitute a
violation thereof.
In the event a licensee who has previously been issued a license on a prorated
basis under the provisions hereof desires to have such license renewed for the
same period for the next succeeding year, he shall file his intention to so
apply for such license with the city clerk, accompanied by the required fee and
other requirements for renewals herein provided, on or before June 30 of the
year preceding. (Ord. 2708, 12-3-2001)
3-9-7: FORM OF LICENSE; AUTHORITY; LIMITATIONS:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall set forth the
name of the person to whom issued, the location by street and number, or other
definite designation of the premises. If issued to a partnership, the names of
the persons constituting said partnership shall be set forth. If issued to a
corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the
governing board shall be set forth. Such license shall be signed by the
licensee. Every license issued under this chapter is separate and distinct and
no person except the licensee therein named, except as herein provided
otherwise, shall exercise any of the privileges granted thereunder. A license
may be transferred to another licensee who shall meet all qualifications
hereunder provided. To transfer said license to another person, partnership,
corporation or association, the licensee shall file application therefor, which
application shall contain the same requirements as provided in section
3-9-4 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) and the city council shall make the same investigation and
determination as in this chapter provided for any other licenses, and if all
conditions required of a licensee under this chapter have been met by the
proposed transferee, then consent to said transfer shall be endorsed upon said
license by the city council, and the said transferee shall be entitled to the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter for retail sale of liquor by
the drink under said license transferred. In all other cases if licensee shall
cease to properly supervise, control, conduct and operate said business
described in said license, the same shall be terminated and no part of the fee
paid therefor shall be refunded. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 2)
3-9-8: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as herein provided for any person
to sell, deliver or give away, or cause or permit to be sold, delivered or
given away any liquor to:
      1.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
      2.   Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
      3.   A habitual drunkard.
      4.   An interdicted person as defined by the laws of the state.
   (B)   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or other persons
who, and any person who shall aid or abet such person to knowingly misrepresent
his qualifications for the purpose of obtaining liquor from any licensee shall
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, keep for sale, dispense
or give away or otherwise dispose of any liquor in the original container or
otherwise than by retail sale by the drink.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any room or
premises in or upon which liquor is received or kept, whether owned by such
person or by another, or to which liquor is brought for consumption therein by
the public or by members of any club, corporated or unincorporated, or a
corporation or association unless such person and the premises are licensed
under this chapter.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give away, vend or
deliver any liquor in any way or manner or device except upon the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2400, 1-4-1993)
3-9-9: CLOSING HOURS AND DAYS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, consume or permit or
allow to be consumed, any liquor upon any licensed premises during the
following days and hours:
   (A)   Christmas from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the
following day.
   (B)   On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. (Ord. 3110, 12-14-2015)
3-9-10: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
Every licensee must conform to all regulations and laws of the state of Idaho
and the provisions of this chapter relating to the sale of liquor by the drink.
Liquor by the drink shall not be sold by any person except the one duly
licensed. All premises shall be subject to periodic sanitary inspection. The
general lighting of the interior of every premises shall be a minimum of five
(5) foot-candles. The principal entrance to every room within which liquor by
the drink is sold or served shall have an area of at least one foot (1') square
with a minimum of twelve inches (12") in any direction at approximately eye
level through which an unobstructed view of the interior may be had. All
entrances shall be located on the street side excepting for emergency and
service entrances. No gambling devices shall be maintained thereon. Every
premises shall be maintained and controlled by the licensee so that the
provisions contained in sections
6-2-3 and
6-2-13 of this code shall not be violated. (1958 Code ch. X art. 2)
3-9-11: POLICE ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The police officers, health officers and city officials of the city and their
duly appointed deputies or assistants shall have the right at any time to enter
in and upon any licensed premises for the purpose of police control, regulation
and inspection. (Ord. 2194, 12-15-1986)
3-9-12: RIGHT OF REVOCATION:
The city council shall have the right to revoke the license of any person for
any violation by the licensee or any employee of said licensee of any
provisions of this chapter or for any violation of the laws of the state of
Idaho as contained in title 23, Idaho Code, and any amendments thereto, or if
said licensee shall fail to maintain any of the qualifications for a license or
obtains any of the disqualifications herein provided at any time during the
license period, and upon any written or oral complaint the city council shall
cause notice to be served personally or by mail upon said licensee or by
leaving said notice with an adult person employed or apparently employed in the
premises, requiring said licensee to appear before said board to be heard upon
said complaint and if it shall appear at said hearing that cause exists and
there has been a violation by the licensee or any employee of said licensee, of
any provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereto or said licensee has
failed to maintain any of the qualifications for a license or has obtained any
of the disqualifications, said license shall be revoked without further process
of law, and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee shall be made.
Any revocation by the state of Idaho of the state license for retail sale of
liquor by the drink shall automatically revoke the city license. (1958 Code ch.
X art. 2)
CHAPTER 10
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Definition
3-10-3: Agent
3-10-4: Fare Charged For Services
3-10-5: Taxicab Company And Driver Insurance Requirements
3-10-6: Zero Tolerance For Drug Or Alcohol Use
3-10-7: Taxicab Driver Requirements
3-10-8: No Discrimination; Accessibility
3-10-9: Records
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city council to regulate taxicabs within the city of
Twin Falls to promote safety, reliability and cost effectiveness of taxicab
services, as well as preserve and enhance access to these important
transportation options for residents and visitors. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-2: DEFINITION:
"Taxicabs or motor vehicles used for hire", for the purposes of this chapter,
shall be defined to be any vehicle used for transporting passengers for hire
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-3: AGENT:
All owners of taxicabs must maintain an agent for service of process in the
state of Idaho. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-4: FARE CHARGED FOR SERVICES:
A taxicab operator shall disclose to passengers the fare calculation, and the
option to receive an estimated fare before the passenger enters the taxicab.
(Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-5: TAXICAB COMPANY AND DRIVER INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Taxicab owners and their drivers shall comply with all applicable requirements
for insurance imposed by Idaho statutes pertaining to automobile liability
insurance. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-6: ZERO TOLERANCE FOR DRUG OR ALCOHOL USE:
   (A)   The owner of the taxicab shall implement a zero tolerance policy on
the illegal use of drugs or the use of alcohol while a driver is providing
services, and shall provide notice of this policy on its website, as well as
procedures to report a complaint about a driver whom the passenger reasonably
suspects was under the influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the
trip.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such passenger complaint alleging a violation of the
zero tolerance policy, the taxicab owner shall immediately suspend such driver,
and shall conduct an investigation into the reported incident. The suspension
shall last the duration of the investigation.
   (C)   The taxicab owner shall maintain records relevant to the enforcement
of this requirement for a period of at least two (2) years from the date that a
passenger complaint is received. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-7: TAXICAB DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Prior to permitting an individual to act as a taxicab driver on its
digital platform, the owner shall:
      1.   Require the individual to submit an application to the owner, which
includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license,
driving history, motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance,
and other information required by the owner;
      2.   Conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local and national
criminal background check for each applicant that shall include:
         (a)   Multistate/multijurisdiction criminal records locator or other
similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary source search);
and
         (b)   National sex offender registry database;
      3.   Obtain and review a driving history research report for such
individual.
   (B)   The owner shall not permit an individual to act as a driver who:
      1.   Has had more than three (3) moving violations in the prior three (3)
year period, or one major violation in the prior three (3) year period
(including, but not limited to, attempting to evade the police, reckless
driving, or driving on a suspended or revoked license);
      2.   Has been convicted, within the past seven (7) years, of driving
under the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use of a motor
vehicle to commit a felony, a crime involving property damage, and/or theft,
acts of violence, or acts of terror;
      3.   Is a match in the national sex offender registry database;
      4.   Does not possess a valid driver's license;
      5.   Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle(s) used
to provide TNC services;
      6.   Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the
motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services; or
      7.   Is not at least nineteen (19) years of age. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-
2017)
3-10-8: NO DISCRIMINATION; ACCESSIBILITY:
   (A)   The owner shall adopt a policy of nondiscrimination with respect to
passengers and potential passengers and notify drivers of such policy;
   (B)   Drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding
nondiscrimination against passengers or potential passengers;
   (C)   Drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to
accommodation of service animals;
   (D)   Taxicabs shall not impose additional charges for providing services to
persons with physical disabilities because of those disabilities; and
   (E)   Taxicabs shall provide passengers an opportunity to indicate whether
they require a wheelchair accessible vehicle. If a taxicab cannot arrange
wheelchair accessible service in any instance, it shall direct the passenger to
an alternate provider of wheelchair accessible service, if available. (Ord.
2017-008, 2-13-2017)
3-10-9: RECORDS:
Owners of taxicabs shall maintain:
   (A)   Individual trip records for at least two (2) years from the date each
trip was provided; and
   (B)   Driver records at least until the one year anniversary of the date on
which a taxicab driver's employment has ended. (Ord. 2017-008, 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 11
SOUND TRUCKS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Registration Required
3-11-3: Registration And Identification
3-11-4: Regulations For Use
3-11-5: License Required; Application; Issuance
3-11-6: Appeal Of City Clerk's Decision
3-11-7: Revocation Of License
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the
human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" as used
herein shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used
and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning
devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or other vehicle having mounted thereon, or
attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. (1958 Code ch. VI art. 17)
3-11-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound
amplifying equipment in operation in the city before filing a registration
statement with the city clerk in writing, in duplicate, which shall state the
following:
   (A)   Name and home address of the applicant;
   (B)   Address of place of business of applicant;
   (C)   License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
applicant;
   (D)   Name and address of person who owns the sound truck;
   (E)   Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck;
   (F)   Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound
truck;
   (G)   The purpose for which the sound truck will be used;
   (H)   A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which
the sound truck will be used;
   (I)   The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck;
   (J)   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck;
   (K)   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment to be used in
or on the sound truck. State the following:
      1.   The wattage to be used.
      2.   The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced.
      3.   The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from
the sound truck. (1958 Code ch. VI art. 17)
3-11-3: REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION:
The city clerk shall return to each applicant under section
3-11-2 of this chapter, one copy of the registration statement duly certified
by the city clerk as a correct copy of the application. The certified copy of
the application shall be in the possession of any persons operating the sound
truck at all times while the sound truck's sound amplifying equipment is in
operation and the copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any policeman
of the city upon request. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-11-4: REGULATIONS FOR USE:
Use of sound trucks in the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation
shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
   (B)   Operations are permitted for four (4) hours each day, except Sundays
and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four
(4) hours of operation shall be between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:
30) A.M. and one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M., and between the hours of four
thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.
   (C)   Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound
truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least
ten (10) miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded by
traffic.
   (D)   Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals,
schools, churches or courthouses.
   (E)   No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be
operated in the city except in the business and industrial districts as defined
by the zoning ordinance 1 .
   (F)   The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd,
indecent or slanderous.
   (G)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible
for a distance in excess of one hundred feet (100') from the sound truck and so
that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a
nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. (1958 Code ch. VI art. 17)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
3-11-5: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck in the city for
advertising purposes with sound amplifying equipment in operation unless a
license has been obtained from the city clerk. The fee for the license shall be
five dollars ($5.00) per month or five dollars ($5.00) for a fraction of a
month or twenty dollars ($20.00) per year if for more than a month.
Persons applying for such license shall file with the city clerk an application
in writing setting forth in the application the information required in the
registration statement pursuant to section
3-11-2 of this chapter.
If the city clerk determines that the applicant complies with the requirements
of this section, the application for the license shall be approved. (Ord. 2197,
3-16-1987)
3-11-6: APPEAL OF CITY CLERK'S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk, the applicant
may appeal such decision to the city council within seven (7) days of notice of
the decision of the city clerk. The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the
city council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not be
denied a license. The city council shall set the time and place for a hearing a
reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal.
Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed
postage prepaid to the applicant at his last known address, at least three (3)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of the city council shall be
final. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-11-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may revoke any license issued under this chapter for violation
of any of the provisions of this code or ordinance of the city or laws of the
state of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the city council, the city clerk or city
council shall notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice
shall be personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the
licensee at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
CHAPTER 12
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 14
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, VENDORS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definitions
3-14-2: License Required
3-14-3: Application
3-14-4: Investigation And Issuance; Contents Of License
3-14-5: Service Of Process
3-14-6: Fees, Terms Of License
3-14-7: Bond Requirement
3-14-8: Exhibition Of License
3-14-9: Duty Of Police To Enforce
3-14-10: Records Kept
3-14-11: Letting Of Private Property Restricted
3-14-12: Unlawful Conduct
3-14-13: Appeal Of City Clerk's Decision
3-14-14: Revocation Of License
3-14-15: Penalty
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
PEDDLER: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot,
motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, however propelled, drawn, pushed
or moved, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street,
carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, food or farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to
place shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, vehicle, railroad
car, or any other type of conveyance. The word "peddler" shall include the
words "hauler" and "hucksters".
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not,
traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take, in person, orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future, whether he is collecting advance
payments on such sales or not. Such definitions shall include any person who,
for himself, or for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of
exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: For the purpose of
this Chapter a "transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor" is
defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee,
or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary
business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the City
and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
public or private place, building, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public
room in a hotel, lodging house, apartment, shop or any street or other place
within the City for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
A "temporary business" is one which is expected to be in operation for six (6)
months or less within the City. This definition shall not include nor be
construed to include:
   (A)   Public or private auction for the disposal by an established business
of its assets or an individual for items of personal and household use.
   (B)   Any person, partnership or corporation selling or dealing only with
retail merchants within the City, and being exclusively wholesale sellers and
dealers.
   (C)   Any religious or charitable corporation or organization engaging in
any one or more of the above activities for strictly nonprofit purposes.
   (D)   Any arts or crafts shows or fairs where the items for sale are
exhibited by the person producing the items; and, the exhibitor was invited by
the sponsoring party; the names of participants are accumulated by the
sponsoring party to be made available to the City Council or Clerk.
   (E)   Any sales pursuant to court order.
   (F)   The sale of farm or garden products by the persons producing such
products.
   (G)   The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person
engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper.
   (H)   Political groups seeking funds or memberships.
   (I)   Sales of Christmas trees and wreaths.
The person, partnership or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this Chapter merely by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by
conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the
name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
Any person, partnership or corporation wishing to engage in any one or more of
the activities described above, and not specifically excluded from the
definition of the itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor as set forth above,
may petition the City Council and upon good cause shown, the City Council may
exempt the person, partnership or corporation from application of this Chapter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person or business intending to conduct
business continuously for at least one year in the City, or having conducted
business in the City continuously for the previous year, and can provide proof
by way of a written lease, contract or other proof satisfactory to the City
Clerk, shall be exempt from the application of this Chapter. (Ord. 2431, 12-6-
1993; amd. Ord. 2645, 2-28-2000)
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant
vendor, peddler or solicitor, as defined in Section
3-14-1 of this Chapter, to engage in such business within the City without
first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-3: APPLICATION:
Application for license under this Chapter, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall be made by filing with the City Clerk a written, sworn
application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, and the president if a corporation, showing:
   (A)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed
that it will be carried on in the City; the local address or addresses of such
person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or
addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or
persons will act; (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated.
   (B)   Idaho State sales tax license number and, if applicable, Idaho
corporation license number.
   (C)   The place or places in the City where it is proposed the goods or
property is to be sold, or orders taken for the sale of such goods or property,
the place where such goods are manufactured or produced, where such goods are
located at the time the application is filed, the proposed method of delivery,
and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be
conducted, together with written permission of the property owner, agent or
employee.
   (D)   The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant within six (6) months next preceding the date of the application
conducting the transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the
post office and street address of the location thereof.
   (E)   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares
or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city.
   (F)   A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done
or proposed to be done in order to attract customers.
   (G)   Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or felony, and the place where the conviction occurred, including a
statement as to the nature of the offense, the date, the penalty and punishment
assessed for the crime. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
   (H)   A two inch by two inch (2" x 2") photograph showing the head and
shoulders in a clear and distinguishable manner of the applicant and the person
selling, delivering, conveying, carrying, transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, food or like merchandise of the applicant or offering to perform
services in the present or future for applicant. (Ord. 2203, 6-1-1987)
   (I)   When the applicant proposes to peddle any food or product for human
consumption, a certification by the South Central health district shall be
required prior to issuance of a license.
   (J)   Such other reasonable information as the city clerk may deem proper to
fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the public good.
The city clerk shall prepare a suitable application in compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-4: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Investigation And Issuance: Upon receipt of an application for any
license under this chapter, the application shall be referred to the Twin Falls
police department which shall conduct an investigation to determine the
suitability of the applicant to be licensed. The investigation shall require an
applicant to provide information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal
history information from the Idaho state police and the federal bureau of
investigation pursuant to Idaho Code 67-3008 and public law 92-544 (28 CFR part
20). The Twin Falls police department shall submit a set of fingerprints
obtained from the applicant and the required fees to the Idaho state police
bureau of criminal identification for a criminal records check of state and
national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by
this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state police. The Twin
Falls police department is authorized to receive criminal history information
from the Idaho state police and from the federal bureau of investigation for
the purpose of evaluating the fitness of an applicant for licensure. As
required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the
criminal history information is prohibited. The applicant shall pay, in
advance, the fees required by the Idaho state police bureau of criminal
identification for the criminal records check.
As a result of the investigation, if the applicant's character and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied.
If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business reputation
appear to be satisfactory, the city clerk shall so certify in writing and
license shall be issued if all of the requirements of this chapter have been
met.
   (B)   Record: The city clerk shall keep a full record in his office of all
licenses issued, and each such license shall contain the number of the license,
the date the same was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be
carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the
license, and the place where such business may be carried on under said
license, the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the
same. (Ord. 2016-6, 4-18-2016)
3-14-5: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Before any license herein provided for shall be issued for engaging in the
business of an itinerant merchant, as herein defined, such applicant shall file
with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk his
true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of
notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters
connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license,
which said instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that said
applicant for said license consents and agrees that service of any notice or
process may be made upon said agent. Said instrument shall also contain
recitals to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees
that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so
made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the
person or persons applying for the license under this chapter, according to the
law of this or any other state, and waiving any claim or right of error by
reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon
service or process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk
shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a
copy of said process. (Ord. 1945, 8-20-1979)
3-14-6: FEES, TERMS OF LICENSE:
The license fee for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser, transient, itinerant
merchant or vendor shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00), payable in advance.
This license shall be valid for three (3) months and renewable once for an
additional three (3) months for an additional fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00). Upon the expiration of the initial license or renewed license, a
licensee shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for a period of six
(6) months. (Ord. 2016-6, 4-18-2016)
3-14-7: BOND REQUIREMENT:
Before any license as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the
business of "transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor",
"peddler", "solicitor or canvasser", as defined in this chapter, each applicant
shall file with the city clerk a surety bond or a cashier's check in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The bond is to be conditioned upon saving
the city harmless from any and all liabilities or causes of action or expenses
arising due to any claims which might arise by virtue of a grant of a license
to applicant and conditioned further that no dirt, paper, litter or other
debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private
property. Every business firm, company or corporation, which has one or more
employees or agents acting in the capacity of peddler, solicitor, canvasser or
transient merchant, shall file with the city clerk a surety bond covering all
such employees or agents and running to the city or a cashier's check in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each employee and/or agent.
Every bond for those engaging in a business as a "peddler", "solicitor or
canvasser", or transient merchant as defined in this chapter shall be executed
by the applicant as a principal and at least one surety upon which service of
process may be made in the state of Idaho, said bond to be approved by the city
attorney, conditioned that the said applicant and all of the applicant's agents
and employees, shall comply fully with all of the provisions of this chapter.
Based upon written justification and letters of reference from local citizens,
local business firms, local companies or local corporations, or being licensed
for one year, the above bonding requirements may be waived when specifically
approved by the city council.
Action on the surety bond or cashier's check may be brought directly by any
person damaged by a licensee's violation of any provision of this chapter.
After expiration of a license, the city clerk shall, upon application of the
licensee, return the bond or cashier's check within six (6) months after
receipt of application for return, unless the city clerk has been notified of
the pendency of any claim or cause of action by any person upon the bond or
cashier's check or that any of the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with. (Ord. 2203, 6-1-1987)
3-14-8: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously posted at the
place of business named therein or exhibited in a conspicuous place if
applicant is using a motor vehicle and otherwise kept by applicant and
exhibited upon request by a police officer or citizen. In the event that the
applicant shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city,
separate licenses may be issued for each place of business and shall be
conspicuously posted in each place of business. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-9: DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE:
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all places
of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the
provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with
and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same. (Ord. 1945, 8-20-1979)
3-14-10: RECORDS KEPT:
The city clerk shall deposit a copy of the license with the chief of police who
shall report to the clerk any complaints against any person licensed under the
provisions of this chapter and any conviction for violation of this chapter;
the city clerk shall keep a record of all such licenses and such complaints and
violations. (Ord. 1945, 8-20-1979)
3-14-11: LETTING OF PRIVATE PROPERTY RESTRICTED:
No property owner, nor his agent or employee, shall sublet, lease, sublease or
otherwise permit his property, or property of which he is in charge, to be used
by an itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as herein defined, unless
specifically excluded from application of this chapter or unless the itinerant
vendor or itinerant merchant has obtained a license as provided herein. (Ord.
1945, 8-20-1979)
3-14-12: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder shall:
   (A)   Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that
person's permission is obtained;
   (B)   Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;
   (C)   Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
   (D)   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual
informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy
anything from that solicitor;
   (E)   Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an
endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
   (F)   Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating
"No Peddlers Allowed" or other words to such effect;
   (G)   Knowingly make any false statement on an application for a license
hereunder;
   (H)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-13: APPEAL OF CITY CLERK'S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk, the applicant
may appeal such decision to the city council within seven (7) days of notice of
the decision of the city clerk. The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the
city council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not be
denied a license. The city council shall set the time and place for a hearing a
reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal.
Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed
postage prepaid to the applicant at his last known address, at least three (3)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of the city council shall be
final. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
mayor, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
The city council may revoke any license issued under this chapter for violation
of any of the provisions of this code or ordinance of the city or laws of the
state of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the city council, the city clerk or city
council shall notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice
shall be personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the
licensee at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
3-14-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 15
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: Licenses Required And Exemptions
3-15-3: Uniforms And Emblems
3-15-4: Vehicle Identification
3-15-5: Application For License
3-15-6: Qualifications
3-15-7: Investigation
3-15-8: Standards
3-15-9: Insurance Required
3-15-10: License Fees
3-15-11: License Expiration
3-15-12: License Form
3-15-13: License Revocation
3-15-14: Surrender And Return Of License
3-15-15: Display Of License
3-15-16: Unlawful Display Of License And Prohibited Conduct
3-15-17: Authority
3-15-18: Penalties
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a
license for:
   (A)   Private security service; or
   (B)   Private security officer.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association
or joint stock association.
PRIVATE SECURITY OFFICER: Any person employed by a private security service, or
who performs individually the functions of a private security officer or
private security service.
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE: Any service which purports to furnish, or does
furnish, for a consideration, or otherwise, any watchman or guard, either
uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any district in the city, or to guard or
watch any property, or which employs any person to perform any type of duty to
guard, protect or maintain peace and order at any public function, or any other
place of public business, amusement or entertainment open to and frequented by
the general public. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-2: LICENSES REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain,
or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the
conduct, operation, maintenance or monitoring of, a private security service or
private security officer, unless a valid license therefor has been issued as
provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to offer to act as a
private security officer within the city unless a valid license therefor has
been issued as provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and
effect.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any private security service to employ or
hire the services of a private security officer until and unless said private
security officer has been duly licensed as required by this chapter.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to or include: regularly appointed police
officers of Twin Falls city or to any regularly appointed police officer or law
enforcement agent of the United States and of this state, or any political
subdivision thereof while acting as their agent, or persons who are directly
employed by a business, other than a private security service, and who perform
the functions of a "security officer" or "loss prevention officer" solely on
the premises of their employer.
   (E)   Any owner/operator of a validly licensed private security service may
act as a private security officer for their private security service without
additional bond or fee and be issued a license accordingly. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-
2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-3: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
   (A)   Uniform And Identification Required: It is unlawful for any private
security service, or for any private security officer, to omit the use of a
uniform with insignia, badge, or identification emblem which has stitched,
printed, or screen printed thereon words such as "private security",
"security", "security officer", or other title indicia of security services to
be affixed upon the uniform or clothing worn when engaged in the performance of
private security service duties.
   (B)   Uniform Distinct From City Police Uniform: It shall be unlawful for
any private security service, or for any private security officer, to use or
authorize the use of any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems or shoulder patches
having a color, design and/or shape making any of them individually, or some or
all of them in the aggregate, appear indistinguishable from any uniform,
uniform emblems and/or shoulder patches of the Twin Falls city police
department.
   (C)   Approval Of Uniforms And Emblems: Every private security service and
every private security officer who performs individually the functions of a
private security service, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall
obtain approval and authorization of any color, design or shape of any uniform,
clothing, uniform emblems, badges and/or shoulder patches to be utilized by
such licensee.
Application for such approval shall be made to the chief of police, or his/her
designee. Approval and authorization, if any, shall be made by that officer in
writing, in accordance with guidelines issued by the Twin Falls city police
department. The written approval and authorization shall be attached to the
application for license and shall describe the color, design and shape of the
uniform, patches, badges and/or emblems, as the case may be.
   (D)   Photographs: Every private security service, and every private
security officer who individually performs the functions of a private security
service, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall submit color
photographs of a size no less than three and one-half inches by three and one-
half inches (31/2" x 31/2") depicting the following:
      1.   A full figure view showing:
         (a)   The entire uniform, front side facing without coat to depict
badge, emblem, or other identifying insignia worn.
         (b)   The entire uniform, left side or right side facing without coat
to depict shoulder patches or other identifying insignia worn.
      2.   If a coat or other outer garment is to be worn at any time:
         (a)   The entire uniform, front side facing with coat or garment to
depict badge, emblem, or other identifying insignia worn.
         (b)   The entire uniform, left side or right side facing with coat or
garment to depict shoulder patches or other identifying insignia worn.
      3.   A close up view of each and every badge, patch, or emblem to be worn
by a private security officer, of sufficient clarity and detail to permit
reading all wording on the badge, patch, or emblem from the photograph.
These photographs shall be filed with the application.
   (E)   Frequency Of Approval: Approval and authorization of uniform clothing,
uniform emblems, badges, and/or patches shall be obtained from the chief of
police, or his/her designee, before the addition, deletion, or change of any
previously approved and authorized item, or every three (3) years whichever
comes first.
   (F)   Grandfather Rights: Every private security service, and every private
security officer, licensed and operating within the corporate city limits of
Twin Falls as of December 31, 2007, shall be granted grandfather rights in the
use of only the uniform, patches, badge, and emblems approved for each company
as of that date, and allowed until June 1, 2008, to meet the guidelines set
forth by the Twin Falls city police department.
   (G)   Uniform Requirement Exemption: Any private security service, and every
private security officer, licensed and operating within the city limits of Twin
Falls engaged in a covert or "undercover" private security service in which the
use of a uniform would compromise the operations thereof shall be provided an
exemption from the uniform requirement provided the following provisions are
satisfied:
      1.   All covert or undercover operations shall be reported to the Twin
Falls police department prior to engagement in such operations.
      2.   The report shall include the date(s), location, and hours of such
operation and the names of such private security service personnel, or private
security officer(s), to be engaged in such activity.
      3.   Private security service personnel, or any private security officer,
engaged in a covert or undercover operation shall have identification in his/
her possession at all times while engaged in such operation and shall, upon
demand, surrender the identification into the hands of a peace officer for
inspection. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-4: VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:
   (A)   Vehicle Identification Required: It is unlawful for any private
security service and every private security officer utilizing a vehicle in the
performance of such duties to omit the use of an insignia, label, emblem, or
placard displaying thereon the words "private security", "security", "security
officer", or other title indicia of security services. Such insignia shall be
displayed horizontally, in a minimum font of four inches (4"), of a reflective
material, upon the right, left, and rear side of such vehicle.
   (B)   Vehicle Distinct From City Police Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for
any private security service, or for any private security officer, to use or
authorize the use of:
      1.   Any vehicle having a painted design, insignia, label, emblem, or
placard making any of them individually, or some or all of them in the
aggregate, appear indistinguishable from any vehicle painted design, insignia,
label, emblem, or placard of the Twin Falls city police department.
   (C)   Vehicle Approval: Every private security service, or every private
security officer, prior to being licensed, shall obtain approval and
authorization of any paint design, insignia, label, emblem, or placard to be
utilized by such licensee. Application for such approval shall be made to the
chief of police, or his/her designee. Approval and authorization, if any, shall
be made by that officer in writing, in accordance with guidelines issued by the
Twin Falls city police department. The written approval and authorization shall
be attached to the application for license and shall describe the paint design,
insignia, label, emblem, or placard, as the case may be.
   (D)   Photographs: Every private security service, and every private
security officer who individually performs the functions of a private security
service, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall submit color
photographs of a size no less than three and one-half inches by three and one-
half inches (31/2" x 31/2") depicting the following:
      1.   A full figure view showing:
         (a)   The entire vehicle, left side, or right side facing.
         (b)   The entire vehicle, rear side facing.
      2.   A close up view of each and every insignia, label, emblem, or
placard to be utilized by a private security service, or private security
officer, of sufficient clarity and detail to permit reading of all wording on
the insignia, label, emblem, or placard from the photograph.
These photographs shall be filed with the application.
   (E)   Frequency Of Approval: Approval and authorization of any painted
design, insignia, label, emblem, or placard shall be obtained from the chief of
police, or his/her designee, before the addition, deletion, or change of any
previously approved and authorized design or insignia, or every three (3)
years, whichever comes first.
   (F)   Grandfather Rights: Every private security service, and every private
security officer, licensed and operating within the corporate city limits of
Twin Falls city as of December 31, 2007, shall be granted grandfather rights,
in the use of only the paint design, insignia, label, emblem, or placard
approved for each company as of that date, and allowed until June 1, 2008, to
meet the guidelines set forth by the Twin Falls city police department.
   (G)   Vehicle Identification Exemption: Any private security service, and
every private security officer, licensed and operating within the city limits
of Twin Falls engaged in covert or "undercover" private security services in
which the use of "marked", labeled, or placarded vehicle would compromise the
operations thereof shall be provided an exemption from the vehicle
identification requirement provided the following provisions are satisfied:
      1.   All covert or undercover operations shall be reported to the Twin
Falls police department prior to engagement in such operations.
      2.   The report shall include the date(s), location, and hours of such
operation, vehicle make, model, color, and license plate number, and the names
of such private security service personnel, or private security officer(s), to
be engaged in such activity.
      3.   Private security service personnel, or any private security officer,
engaged in a covert, or undercover operation shall have identification in his/
her possession at all times while engaged in such operation and shall, upon
demand, surrender the identification into the hands of a peace officer for
inspection. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license, whether for private security service or private
security officer, shall be made to the chief of police, or his/her designee.
Applications for such licenses may be made by mail. At the time of filing an
application, a nonrefundable application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be paid to the city of Twin Falls. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-6: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be issued a license who:
   (A)   Is not over eighteen (18) years of age.
   (B)   Has been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony offense, or
equivalent offense, for which the tenth anniversary of the date of conviction
has not occurred before the date of application, unless a full pardon has been
granted for reasons relating to a wrongful conviction.
   (C)   Has been convicted, paid any fine, placed on probation, received a
deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, or completed any sentence of
confinement for a misdemeanor offense, or equivalent offense, involving theft
or dishonesty, for which the fifth anniversary of the date of conviction has
not occurred before the date of application, unless a full pardon has been
granted for reasons relating to a wrongful conviction.
   (D)   Has any outstanding warrants issued for their arrest.
   (E)   Is required by law to register as a sexual offender.
   (F)   Has been found by a court to be incompetent by reason of mental defect
or disease and has not been restored to competency. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-7: INVESTIGATION:
The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall examine all applications and
shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application
and the applicant as it shall deem necessary. An applicant who was not licensed
by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the current application
shall be required to be fingerprinted and photographed by the Twin Falls police
department, or an appropriate agency designated by the chief of police, or his/
her designee. Cost of taking and processing such fingerprints and photographs
shall be borne by the applicant. The chief of police, or his/her designee, is
authorized to perform or request criminal history checks of any applicant,
including a national background check by the federal bureau of investigation.
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008, the chief of police, or his/her
designee, may forward an applicant's fingerprints through the Idaho department
of law enforcement to the federal bureau of investigation identification
division for a national background check. Unless otherwise provided for by law,
criminal history records shall not be disseminated to a private entity. (Ord.
2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-8: STANDARDS:
   (A)   The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall approve the issuance
of a license whenever the chief of police finds that the applicant has complied
with the provisions of this chapter and is otherwise qualified. In the event an
application is denied, the chief of police, or his/her designee, shall notify
the applicant in writing, specifying the reason(s) said application is denied.
   (B)   A provisional license may be issued for a period not to exceed sixty
(60) days pending completion of the required investigation.
   (C)   Denial of license may be appealed to the city council provided the
request for appeal is made, in writing, to the chief of police within sixty
(60) days of denial. The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall submit a
staff report requesting the appeal be placed upon the city council agenda and
shall notify the applicant of the date and time the appeal is to be heard.
(Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-9: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license shall be issued to any applicant:
The applicant shall carry general and personal liability insurance for bodily
injury, sickness, disease or death sustained by persons and arising out of
assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution,
abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference
with property and contract rights. The minimum limits for such insurance shall
be two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per incident or occurrence.
Said policy shall be issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do
business in the state of Idaho, and a current certificate of insurance shall
accompany each application. (Ord. 3071, 5-27-2014)
3-15-10: LICENSE FEES:
The licensing officer, or his/her designee, shall collect, before the
acceptance of an application for a private security service, or private
security officer, the annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant if no license is issued. The license fee
shall not be refunded upon the revocation of any issued license. (Ord. 2924,
12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-11: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the
issuance date of the following year. Any person holding a license under the
provisions of this chapter must renew such license for the following succeeding
year by making payment to the city of Twin Falls for the license fees required
by this chapter on or before the expiration date. (Ord. 3011, 9-19-2011)
3-15-12: LICENSE FORM:
The license for a private security service shall be in the form of a
certificate. The license shall bear the private security service name and
numerals designating the year in which such license is in force and effect. Any
loss, theft, or damage of any license shall be reported immediately to the
chief of police, or his/her designee.
The license for a private security officer shall be in the form of an
identification card which shall contain the words "Private Security Officer"
and shall also bear personal identifying information, a photograph of the
license holder, and numerals designating the year in which such license is in
force and effect. Any loss, theft, or damage of any license shall be reported
immediately to the chief of police, or his/her designee. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-
2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-13: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the chief of police, or
his/her designee, for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Failure to maintain compliance with the qualifications for license.
   (C)   Obtaining the license under any false or fraudulent pretense or
statement.
   (D)   Cancellation or termination of the bond or insurance required by this
chapter, unless the licensee posts a new comparable bond or obtains comparable
insurance and files a certificate of such insurance with the chief of police,
or his/her designee, prior to the original bond or insurance being canceled or
terminated.
Revocation of license may be appealed to the city council provided the request
for appeal is made, in writing, to the chief of police within sixty (60) days
of revocation. Upon receipt of written request for appeal, the chief of police,
or his/her designee, shall submit a staff report requesting the appeal be
placed upon the council agenda and shall notify the applicant of the date and
time appeal is to be heard. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-14: SURRENDER AND RETURN OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Upon cancellation or revocation of a license, the chief of police, or
his/her designee, shall require that the license be surrendered to and be
retained by the Twin Falls city police department.
   (B)   If any person shall fail to return to the chief of police, or his/her
designee, the license as required, the department may direct any peace officer
to secure its possession and return the license to the chief of police, or his/
her designee. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-15: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every private security officer shall have his/her license in his/her immediate
possession at all times when acting in the capacity of a private security
officer and shall, upon demand, surrender the license into the hands of a peace
officer for inspection. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-16: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display any license
required or provided for by this chapter unless such person is duly licensed
therefor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or license holder:
      1.   To display or cause or permit to be displayed or possess any
mutilated or illegible, canceled, revoked, disqualified, fictitious or
fraudulently altered license;
      2.   To lend a license to any other person or knowingly permit the use of
a license by another;
      3.   To display or represent as one's own a license not issued to him/
her;
      4.   To fail or refuse to surrender to the chief of police, or his/her
designee, upon his/her lawful demand, any license which has been revoked,
disqualified or canceled;
      5.   To use a false or fictitious name in any application for a license,
or to knowingly make a false statement, or to knowingly conceal a material fact
or otherwise commit a fraud in any application;
      6.   To permit any unlawful use of an issued license;
      7.   To manufacture, produce, sell, offer for sale or transfer to another
person any document purporting to be a license;
      8.   Use a title, an insignia, a security license, or identification
card, or wear a uniform, or make a statement with the intent to give an
impression that the person is connected with the federal government, a state
government, or a political subdivision of a state government, employed by the
city of Twin Falls; or
      9.   Use a title, an insignia, a security license, or identification card
or wear a uniform containing the designation "police".
Subsection (B)9 of this section does not prohibit private security officers,
private security services, or other persons employed by the federal government,
a state government, or a political subdivision thereof from using a title,
insignia, license, or identification card, wearing a uniform, or making a
statement indicating the employment of that individual by such entity. (Ord.
2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-15-17: AUTHORITY:
The granting or issuance of any license under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed in any manner as granting or providing any additional or
further power of arrest than that granted under the provisions of the statutes
of the state and the provisions of this code, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons
contradictory to the statutes of the state. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
3-15-18: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and shall be assessed a fixed penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) excluding court costs and fees. A second and any subsequent
conviction for a violation of the provisions of this chapter within five (5)
years shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county
jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or by both. Each day such violation is committed, or
permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2924, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
CHAPTER 16
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: License Required
3-16-3: Application of Regulations
3-16-4: Application for License
3-16-5: License Fee, Term and Bond
3-16-6: Appeal of the City Clerk's Decision
3-16-7: Duties of Licensee
3-16-8: Revocation of License
3-16-9: Penalties
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: A person making application for a license or the renewal thereof.
COUNCIL: The City Council of Twin Falls.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALES: A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged
or altered by fire, smoke, water or other like causes or means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand
the business will cease and be discontinued, such sale including but not
limited to the following kinds of sales: adjuster's; adjustment; alteration;
administrator's; assignee's; bankruptcy; benefit of administrator or executor;
benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing;
creditor's committee; creditors; end; executor; final days; force out; forced
out of business; insolvence; insurance; last days; lease expires; liquidation;
loss of lease; mortgage; receivers; trustees; and quitting business.
GOODS: Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS or CLOSING-OUT SALE: A sale held in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will
cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock
of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in
the City or will then continue business from other existing locations in the
City; provided, however, that the sale closing out of a line or type of goods
not resulting in the cessation of the entire business shall not be deemed a
removal of business or closing out sale.
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as to sales under judicial process and prior to obtaining a license to
hold or conduct a sale pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods at a sale to be
advertised or held out by any means constituting any one of the following
kinds:
   (A)   Fire, distress and other altered stock sale;
   (B)   Going-out-of-business sale; and
   (C)   Removal of business or closing out sale. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-87)
3-16-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Except as to an application for a fire and other altered goods sale made within
thirty (30) days from the date such goods were damaged by fire, smoke, water or
other like causes or means.
   (A)   Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least
six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a
license, except that on the death of a person doing business in this City, his
or her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply for a license
hereunder. Proof of ownership may be required before issuance of the license.
   (B)   Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the
location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of
such application shall not be granted a license.
   (C)   Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one
place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or
branch specified in the application and no other store or branch shall
advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way
participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting
the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. (Ord.
2385, 7-6-92)
3-16-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to conduct a sale regulated by this Chapter shall be
made to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to such sale in such form
and manner as prescribed by the City Clerk, but containing at least the
following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the person for which an application is made
and the name and address of the owner or owners (if a partnership or
corporation, the names and addresses of partners, officers and managers) of the
goods to be the object of the sale;
   (B)   The length of time the person has been in business in the City of Twin
Falls and the length of time the person has been in business at the address at
which the sale is to be held;
   (C)   Whether, and when, any sales enumerated by this Chapter have
previously been held by the applicant including the date and location of such
sales;
   (D)   A statement explaining the reason for the urgent and expeditious
disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted;
   (E)   The dates of the period of time within which the sale is to be held;
   (F)   A description of the place where said sale is to be held; and,
   (G)   An inventory describing generally the goods to be offered for sale at
the sale. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of
conducting a sale regulated hereunder, and any goods purchased within thirty
(30) days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to have
been goods ordered in contemplation of a sale regulated by this Chapter.
3-16-5: LICENSE FEE, TERM AND BOND:
   (A)   An applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the City Clerk
with his application a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   (B)   The license, if the application is approved by the City Clerk, shall
authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than
sixty (60) consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, following the date
of issuance thereof.
   (C)   Upon payment of an additional license fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00), the City Clerk may renew or extend a license for one period of time
only, such period to be in addition to the period of time permitted in the
original license, and such renewal shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive
days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when the City Clerk finds:
      1.   That the facts existing justify the license renewal;
      2.   That the licensee filed an application for renewal;
      3.   That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a
revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining
unsold and not listing any goods not included on the original application and
inventory.
      4.   The license or renewal thereof shall authorize only the type of sale
described in the application at the location named therein.
      5.   The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the
inventory attached to the application.
      6.   The applicant for a license hereunder shall tender with the
application a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned
upon the observance of this Chapter and for the indemnification of any
purchaser at such sale who suffers a loss by reason of misrepresentation.
3-16-6: APPEAL OF CITY CLERK'S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk, the applicant
may appeal such decision to the City Council within seven (7) days of notice of
the decision of the City Clerk. The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the
City Council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not be
denied a license. The City Council shall set the time and place for a hearing a
reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal.
Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed
postage prepaid to the applicant at his last known address, at least three (3)
days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of the City Council shall be
final.
3-16-7: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall have the duty to:
   (A)   Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed sale to
the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for
license.
   (B)   Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising, and conduct the licensed sale in conformity with any advertising
or holding out incident thereto.
   (C)   Keep available at the place of sale a copy of the inventory submitted
with the application and shall present such duplicate to the City Clerk, his
representative or any police officer upon request.
   (D)   Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the
filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction to the
public by placing tags on all the inventoried goods in and about the place of
sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. Combining any
additional or other goods with the goods inventoried shall cause the goods
inventoried to lose its identity for the purpose of the sale and any such
license issued shall cause to apply to the sale of such goods.
3-16-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council may revoke any license issued under this Chapter for violation
of any of the provisions of this Code or Ordinance of the City or laws of the
State of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the City Council, the City Clerk or City
Council shall notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice
shall be personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the
licensee at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
3-16-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more
three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the City jail for not
more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2197, 3-
16-87)
CHAPTER 17
DAYCARE FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Purpose
3-17-3: Application, Inspection, Issuance Of Licenses
3-17-4: International Building Code And International Fire Code
3-17-5: Fire Safety Standards
3-17-6: Revocation Of License
3-17-7: Penalties
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
given herein:
CHILD: Any person less than twelve (12) years of age.
DAYCARE: Care and supervision provided for compensation during part of a twenty
four (24) hour day, for a child or children not related by blood or marriage to
the person or persons providing the care, in a place other than the child's or
children's own home.
DAYCARE FACILITY: A place or facility providing daycare for compensation for
more than six (6) children. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988)
3-17-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety of children cared for in
daycare facilities while, at the same time, relieving daycare facilities from
certain potentially prohibitive requirements of the international building code
which are not related to life safety issues. This chapter is not intended to
replace the state daycare license law contained in Idaho Code section 39-1101
et seq., but is intended to supplement that law and to exempt certain daycare
facilities from certain provisions of the international building code that are
not related to life safety issues. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988; amd. Ord. 2765, 11-10-
2003)
3-17-3: APPLICATION, INSPECTION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
   (A)   Application For License: Applications for licenses issued hereunder
shall be made upon forms prepared and made available by the public safety
department.
   (B)   Inspections: Upon receipt of a completed application, the public
safety department shall inspect the facility for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and shall issue such license upon establishing
compliance and upon payment of a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   (C)   Continued Compliance: Daycare facilities shall at all times maintain
compliance with the requirements identified in this chapter, and shall consent
to reinspection at any time during any license period.
   (D)   Renewal: The license shall be valid for two (2) years and shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at the main entrance of the daycare facility.
   (E)   Appeal Of Denial Of License: If an applicant is denied a license under
this chapter, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by
filing an appeal in writing with the city of Twin Falls, setting forth the
basis for the appeal. The city council, upon receipt of the written notice of
appeal, shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal, which notice
shall be served personally on the applicant or mailed postage prepaid to the
applicant at the last known address, at least three (3) days prior to the
hearing. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988)
3-17-4: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
   (A)   New Construction: New construction for use as a daycare facility shall
comply with all requirements of the international building code and
international fire code as adopted by the city of Twin Falls.
   (B)   Existing Approved Daycare Facilities: All daycare facilities in
existence on January 1, 2003, with prior approved fire inspections issued by
the city of Twin Falls shall comply with all codes under which they were
approved. (Ord. 2765, 11-10-2003)
3-17-5: FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS:
In addition to the fire safety standards set forth in Idaho Code section 39-
1109, and regulation 55 promulgated by the state fire marshal pursuant to Idaho
Code section 39-1111, the following additional items will be inspected and
shall be complied with by daycare facilities:
   (A)   If there is a private garage attached to the facility, the common wall
between the garage and the facility shall be protected by at least one hour,
fire resistive materials on the garage side; and any door within the same wall
shall be self-closing, tight fitting, solid wood core, and a minimum of one and
three-eighths inches (13/8") in thickness or equivalent. For daycare use in
conjunction with other occupancy classifications, consult the international
building code for specific occupancy separation. (Ord. 2765, 11-10-2003)
   (B)   Oil and gas unvented room heaters are not permitted. All fuel burning
appliances are to be vented.
   (C)   Chimneys and heating equipment are to be in good condition and
installed properly.
   (D)   If a stove or combustion heater is installed, it shall be so located
that it will not block escape in case it malfunctions.
   (E)   Flammable liquids storage is prohibited except for quantities not
exceeding ten (10) gallons for maintenance purposes and operation of equipment
if stored in a private garage or other approved locations in approved
containers.
   (F)   All electrical appliances, fixtures, panel boxes, receptacle outlets,
switches, and wiring shall appear to be in good condition. All electrical
violations shall be reported to the state electrical inspector.
   (G)   Extension cords are permitted only with short term use and shall not
be used as a substitute for permanent wiring.
   (H)   The facility shall be free of an excess of readily combustible
materials such as oily rags, wastepaper, boxes, rubbish, or other waste
materials.
   (I)   The landing on required exits shall not be more than four and one-half
inches (41/2") lower than the threshold of the doorway.
   (J)   The occupant load of the facility shall be posted along with a
statement that daycare is prohibited on any upper floor beyond the first floor
or on a story below the level of exit discharge (basement) unless there is an
exit directly to the outside. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988)
3-17-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may revoke any daycare license issued under this chapter for
violation of any of the provisions of this code or chapter or laws of the state
of Idaho. Prior to revocation, the licensee shall be notified in writing,
setting forth the grounds for the revocation and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed
postage prepaid to the licensee at his last known address at least three (3)
days prior to the date set for hearing. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988)
3-17-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be a separate violation and punishable as
such. (Ord. 2229, 3-7-1988)
CHAPTER 18
COMMERCIAL VENDING
SECTION:
3-18-1: Purpose
3-18-2: Definitions
3-18-3: License Required
3-18-4: General Regulations
3-18-5: Commercial Vending On Public Property
3-18-6: Commercial Vending On Private Property
3-18-7:    License Issuance Process
3-18-8:    License Revocation Process
3-18-1: PURPOSE:
The creation and intent of this chapter is to promote and ensure the public
health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Twin
Falls. Specifically, this chapter provides proper regulations and best
practices for operating and maintaining a safe, clean, and appealing temporary
business operation within the City. (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words are defined as follows for this chapter only:
                          Any property immediately adjacent to the Vending
ADJOINING PROPERTY:       Area, as measured from the right-of-way centerline
                          towards shall be the dividing line in determining
                          adjacency.
                          Peddling, vending, selling, displaying, or offering
                          an item or items for sale from a temporary location.
COMMERCIAL VENDING:       "Parking lot sales" approved per Twin Falls City
                          Code, and temporary children's vending stands are
                          excluded from this definition.
                          The location where graywater/wastewater from the
DISCHARGE LOCATION:       vending cart/vehicle is taken to for discharge or
                          treatment.
FOOD PREPARATION AREA:    Any area or location where food is prepared for human
                          consumption.
PRIVATE PROPERTY VENDING: Commercial vending where all aspects of the activity
                          take place on property that is not public property.
                          Parks, parking lots, rights of way, and sidewalks
PUBLIC PROPERTY:          owned or maintained by the State of Idaho, the City
                          of Twin Falls, or any political subdivision thereof.
                          Commercial vending from a vending cart or vending
SIDEWALK VENDING:         area to persons on the public right-of-way, any
                          sidewalk, or pedestrian access.
                          Commercial vending from a vending vehicle situated on
STREET VENDING:           the public right-of-way between the curb lines, or
                          edges of pavement, to persons within the right-of-way
                          or the public sidewalk.
                          Any area used or anticipated to be used for
VENDING AREA:             commercial vending, including preparation, display,
                          transactions, customer queuing, customer seating
                          areas, and other associated activities.
VENDING CART:             A movable push-cart that is operated by a vendor
                          standing on public property.
VENDING VEHICLE:          A vehicle operated by a vendor standing on or within
                          the frame of the vehicle.
 
(Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any commercial vendor, or licensee, agent, or employee of
that Vendor to operate in an unauthorized location; without a City license;
without a valid health department permit; and/or in violation of health
department regulations. A violator of any section of this chapter may be
subject to criminal prosecution, revocation of the license, and/or denial of a
future license for a period of up to three (3) years. (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-
2020)
3-18-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Exclusive Rights: No commercial vendor shall have exclusive right to
any location on public property. Special event permits, or any other permit
issued by the City, for the use of any public property will take precedence for
the duration of The event, or time, associated with the use of public property.
   (B)   Location And Site Restrictions:
      1.   Commercial vending is prohibited within fifty (50) feet of
residential uses, unless otherwise permitted within this city code.
      2.   Commercial vending activities are prohibited in any congested area
where their operations might impede or inconvenience the public
      3.   Commercial vending activities are prohibited on public property
adjacent to Main Avenue between Fairfield Street and Idaho Street, unless
approved through the special event permit process.
      4.   Commercial vending activities shall not be located in the following
areas:
         (a)   Where clear pedestrian passage on the public sidewalk is five
(5) feet wide or less;
         (b)   Crosswalk areas;
         (c)   Within the clear vision triangle area (TFCC 9-9-16) on corners
of intersections, alleyways or driveways;
         (d)   Within ten (10) feet of any doorway, except that this distance
may be decreased to five (5) feet with written consent of property owner or
agent of the affected permanent business or residence.
         (e)   In any area which obstructs the movement or visibility of
vehicles or bicycles using the appropriate public right-of-way, access
easement, or drive aisle.
         (f)   Within five (5) feet of utility boxes and/or vaults, handicap
ramps, emergency call boxes, or fire hydrants
         (g)   Within any area that impedes, endangers, or interferes with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      5.   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, or through a special
event permit obtained under Twin Falls City Code, vending areas shall be spaced
a minimum of ten (10) feet apart.
      6.   Vendors shall not use or attach any items to public amenities
(trees, street lights, street furniture, railings, etc.) for any reason,
without prior authorization.
      7.   The area within twenty-five (25) feet of the vending area shall be
kept free of discarded beverages, debris, food, and trash at all times.
      8.   All food vendors shall operate in such a manner that prevents the
spilling or splattering of grease, water, food, or trash on any public
property. The food vendor shall be responsible for the cleaning and/or repair
of any public property which is soiled, stained, or damaged by the placement or
operation of the commercial vending business.
   (C)   Operating Hours And Other Time Limitations:
      1.   Permitted operating hours shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
         (a)   Commercial vendors associated with special event permits may be
open for the approved hours of the event.
         (b)   Commercial vendors on private property may be open for the
approved hours of the primary business, including locations with extended hours
approved through the special use permit process.
      2.   No vending area shall be unattended for more than fifteen (15)
consecutive minutes.
      3.   All items associated with commercial vending shall be removed from
public property when not in operation. Special event permit holders may request
for this requirement to be waived during multi-day events.
   (D)   General Operation Restrictions And Requirements:
      1.   Each person or entity intending to engage in commercial vending
shall submit a site plan and/or declaration of operation location meeting the
requirements of a license application provided by the City Clerk.
      2.   Drive-thru operations shall not be permitted.
      3.   City water and sewer service connections are not permitted.
      4.   Audio amplification of any kind is prohibited, unless otherwise
permitted within this City Code.
      5.   Overhead electrical lines are not permitted. Electrical lines shall
not lay across any pedestrian access portion of the sidewalk. Any permanent
electrical fixtures shall be approved prior to use by the City Electrical
Inspector.
      6.   Each food preparation area shall be required to contain a fire
extinguisher approved by the Fire Marshal.
      7.   Each vending cart/vehicle containing a food preparation area shall
provide a discharge location approvable by the City Engineer.
      8.   Commercial vendors shall display, in a readily visible location, the
following items at all times when in operation:
         (a)   City license
         (b)   Health permit
         (c)   "Open Sign" no smaller than 4x6 inches and no larger than 12x12
inches.
      9.   Signage: Vendors may receive a permit for one (1) temporary sign,
with a maximum size of four (4) square feet. Temporary signage shall be wholly
located within the vending area. All other signage is subject to regulations
found in Title 10.
      10.   The dumping of any ice, trash, gray or wastewater, or any other
items associated with commercial vending, into public waste receptacles,
private dumpsters, public planter boxes, gutters, or the street is prohibited
without prior authorization from the City or private property owner.
      11.   Each commercial vendor shall provide proof of liability insurance
in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), with
expiration no less than one (1) year from the date of application approval, and
shall agree in writing to hold the City harmless from any injury or damage
resulting from the operation of the commercial vending operation. Additionally,
each commercial vendor shall carry workers' compensation insurance as required
under Idaho law.
      12.   The use of any tent, structure, or building, whether permanent or
temporary, may require separate licenses or permits from a separate authority
(i.e. tents over 400 square feet require a tent permit from the Fire
Department). (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-5: COMMERCIAL VENDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The following regulations apply to all commercial vending operations which take
place on public property.
   (A)   Each commercial vendor operating on public property shall receive
written permission from the appropriate governing authority. For public
property owned by the City of Twin Falls, the City Manager or its designee
shall make decisions on authorization.
   (B)   Each commercial vendor operating on public property shall carry a
commercial general liability policy naming the City as an additional insured
entity for any damage to public property. The policy shall be in the minimum
amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Expiration shall be no
less than one (1) year from the date of application approval.
      1.   If the damage exceeds this amount the City may use any and all means
to collect the amount needed to clean, repair, or replace the damaged property.
   (C)   In addition to the general regulations set forth in CC 3-18-4, the
following regulations shall also apply:
      1.   Sidewalk And Street Vending:
         (a)   Each commercial vending operation shall obtain written consent
of each adjoining property owner or agent of the owner (business manager,
property manager) prior to operation.
      2.   Street Vending:
         (a)   Vending vehicles shall follow all traffic regulations, including
but not limited to: speed limits, parking locations, parking time limits,
obstructing traffic, and noise limitations.
         (b)   Vending vehicles shall carry additional insurance coverage for
the vehicle in case of accident or damage to property. The policy shall be in
the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). Expiration
shall be no less than one (1) year from the date of application approval. (Ord.
2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-6: COMMERCIAL VENDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Commercial vendors may operate on private property under the following
conditions and are subject to the following standards:
   (A)   Commercial vending on private property is not permitted in residential
zones, or on residential property.
   (B)   Each applicant intending to establish a private property vending
operation shall provide to the City written permission from the property owner
or authorized agent prior to beginning operation. (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-7: LICENSE ISSUANCE PROCESS:
   (A)   All licenses shall be issued on an annual basis. Application for such
license shall be made upon a form supplied by the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall charge the appropriate fee identified on the City fee schedule.
   (B)   Licenses shall be issued or denied within ten (10) business days after
receipt of a complete application. (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
3-18-8: LICENSE REVOCATION PROCESS:
Any public safety officer, city licensing officer, or other city staff member
authorized by the City Manager is authorized to enforce this chapter.
Prior to the revocation or denial of any license, or renewal thereof, written
notice of the reason(s) therefor shall be served on the applicant or licensee
in person or by certified mail at the address on the license application.
Revocation shall become final within ten (10) days of service unless the
applicant or licensee appeals the action to the City Council. The applicant or
licensee shall make his appeal in writing to the City Council within ten (10)
days of receipt of the notice.
Should the applicant or licensee request an appeal within such ten (10) day
period, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the City Clerk of the
time and place of the public meeting where the appeal will be heard. Should an
emergency exist that constitutes an immediate danger to life or health, a
license may be summarily revoked pending the notice and public meeting herein
provided. (Ord. 2020-017, 10-19-2020)
CHAPTER 19
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CATERING PERMITS
SECTION:
3-19-1: Permit; Application
3-19-2: Filing Of Application; Approval
3-19-3: Winery License
3-19-1: PERMIT; APPLICATION:
An alcohol beverage catering permit is a permit issued pursuant to this section
which authorizes the permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and
wine, or beer, or wine, at a party or convention, and not to exceed five (5)
consecutive days, with an option to request one permit extension on the same
terms and conditions as the original permit, which extension may be issued or
denied at the sole and absolute discretion of the original issuing entity, or
at a party for a time period not to exceed two (2) consecutive days. An alcohol
beverage catering permit shall be limited to authorization to sell liquor or
beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of license which
the applicant possesses. Applications for such permit shall be made to the city
clerk, on such form as prescribed by the city, which shall contain at a
minimum, but not limited to, the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and the number of his state
liquor, beer or wine license.
   (B)   The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not to
exceed five (5) consecutive days.
   (C)   The names of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the
event.
   (D)   The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served, and if
a public building, the rooms in which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served.
A catering permit will not be issued without written approval of the premises
by the fire inspector.
The application shall be verified by the applicant and filed with the city
clerk. A filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day the
permit is to be effective shall be paid to the treasury of the city which shall
not be refunded in any event. Any alcohol beverage catering permit shall be
valid only within the city. (Ord. 2017-002, 1-9-2017)
3-19-2: FILING OF APPLICATION; APPROVAL:
Upon the filing of an application for an alcohol beverage catering permit, the
city clerk receiving the application shall, upon the advice and recommendation
of the chief of police, approve or disapprove the application and indicate the
determination on the face of the application by endorsement signed by the
clerk. Copies of the application with signed endorsements thereon shall be
mailed or delivered immediately to the chief of police and the applicant, and a
signed copy retained by the clerk. An application approved in this manner shall
constitute a permit. (Ord. 2617, 6-21-1999, eff. 7-1-1999)
3-19-3: WINERY LICENSE:
Any person who is the holder of an Idaho winery license shall be eligible to
obtain an alcohol beverage catering permit. (Ord. 2617, 6-21-1999, eff. 7-1-
1999)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Adoption Of Codes
4-1-2: Amendments
4-1-3: Exemptions
4-1-4: Project Site Maintenance
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
The latest editions of the following documents are adopted as the official
building codes of the city:
International building code, including all rules promulgated by the Idaho
building code board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the Americans
with disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the federal fair housing act
accessibility guidelines, but excluding all appendices except as referred to by
rules promulgated by the Idaho building code board to provide equivalency with
accessibility codes, and excluding all references to the international
electrical code, international plumbing code, and international property
maintenance code.
International residential code, parts I-VI and part IX, and including
appendices A, B and G.
International energy conservation code.
International existing building code.
Uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings. (Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
4-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following amendments shall be applicable to the codes adopted:
Table 1607.1 of the international building code is amended to require a minimum
uniform live load of 40 psf in item 25 for habitable attics and sleeping rooms.
Section 1608 of the international building code is amended to include that the
minimum uniformly distributed roof design snow load shall be 25 psf. The live
load of 10 psf in uninhabitable attics without storage of residential buildings
need not be simultaneously applied with this minimum roof snow load.
Section R102.7 of the international residential code is amended to delete the
words "the international property maintenance code or".
Section R105.2, of the international residential code, delete the entire
paragraph titled "Electrical"; and delete the last two paragraphs beginning
with "The stopping of leaks..." and "The clearing of stoppages..." in their
entirety.
Section R301.2.3 of the international residential code is amended to include
that the minimum uniformly distributed roof design snow load shall be 25 psf.
The live load of 10 psf in uninhabitable attics without storage need not be
simultaneously applied with this minimum roof snow load.
Table R301.5 of the international residential code is amended to require a
minimum uniformly distributed live load in sleeping rooms of 40 psf.
Section R403.1.1 of the international residential code is amended to add the
subsection R403.1.1.1, "Foundations With Stemwalls. Foundations with stemwalls
shall be provided with a minimum of one no. 4 bar at the top of the wall and
one no. 4 bar at the bottom of the footing. Where a construction joint is
created between a concrete footing and stem wall, a minimum of one no. 4 bar
shall be provided at not more than 6 feet on center. The vertical bar shall
extend to 3 inches clear of the bottom of the footing and extend a minimum of
14 inches into the stem wall."
Table R404.1.1(2) of the international residential code is amended as follows:
Add footnote reference "f" after the word concrete in the title. Add footnote
"f. One no. 4 bar horizontal reinforcement is required at 4 feet on center,
with the top bar to be placed 3" to 6" below the top of the wall. One no. 4 bar
is required horizontally and vertically around formed openings, extending 2
feet beyond the opening. One no. 4 bar shall be placed diagonally at corners of
openings subject to cracking".
(Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
4-1-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein but
shall remain subject to placement requirements established by zoning
regulations. (Ord. 2742, 12-30-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
4-1-4: PROJECT SITE MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Throughout all phases of construction, including suspension of work,
and until the final acceptance, the property owner and/or the property owner's
representative shall keep construction rubbish and debris from blowing onto
adjacent properties. Construction rubbish and debris shall be confined to the
construction site. Storage of construction rubbish and debris on adjacent
properties is prohibited. Temporary fences may be constructed to contain loose
material from blowing off site.
   (B)   The property owner and/or the property owner's representative shall
not engage in construction/repair of buildings, including site excavation,
grading, and landscape installation, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. without prior permission from the Building
Official, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety.
   (C)   Failure of the property owner and/or the property owner's
representative to comply with this section may result in an order to suspend
work until the condition is corrected. (Ord. 2473, 12-5-1994; amd. Ord. 2024-
011, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Adoption Of Code
4-2-2: Supervision Of Electrical Installations
4-2-3: Definitions
4-2-4: Application And Permit
4-2-5: Inspection Of Work
4-2-6: Correction Of Work; Condemnations
4-2-7: Removal Of Obstructions
4-2-8: Connection To Power Lines
4-2-9: Authority Of Electrical Inspector
4-2-10: Fees
4-2-11: Liability
4-2-12: Violation; Misdemeanor
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The 1981 edition of the national electrical code published by the National Fire
Protection Association, as now or hereinafter amended, is adopted as the
official electrical code of the city, together with all subsequent editions of
said code. The most current edition, along with amendments or revisions
thereto, as adopted by the Idaho electrical board, shall prevail. One copy of
said current edition of the national electrical code shall be kept at the
office of the building official. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-2: SUPERVISION OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS:
The city shall appoint a qualified electrical inspector for the city and the
inspector shall be responsible for the inspection of all electrical
installations hereinafter installed within the corporate limits of the city and
the area of impact, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Electrical public utilities companies in the installation and
maintenance of their own lines and equipment.
   (B)   All communication circuits, wires and apparatus. (Ord. 3002, 3-21-
2011)
4-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
"Basic wiring" shall consist of all wiring from the point of attachment to the
power supplier's service drop to all lighting and power outlets throughout a
building, structure, dwelling or premises. It includes meter bases, all fusing,
circuit breakers, switches and disconnecting equipment, and all branch or
feeder circuits for energizing machinery, apparatus or appliances of a fixed or
semifixed nature. It does not, however, apply to extension cable for energizing
readily portable small appliances or to the appliances themselves. (Ord. 2890,
12-11-2006)
4-2-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT:
New basic wiring shall be covered by an application for a wiring permit at the
city building department. Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive
a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He
shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and
the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection
therewith. The administrative authority may require plans, specifications or
drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary.
If the administrative authority determines that the plans, specifications,
drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the applicant is in
compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment
of the required fee as hereinafter fixed, pursuant to the currently adopted fee
schedule located in the city building department.
Such application shall be made and permit secured before any basic wiring is
energized, and "rough in" installations are covered.
Should the electrical inspector discover any electrical wiring installed but
not covered by a permit as specified above, he may instruct the power supplier
to disconnect their service drop to the premises, issue a warrant charging
violation of this chapter, or both.
Every electrical permit issued by the city shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of such permit,
or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time
after work has commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. A
permit may be renewed for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days upon
request and the payment of a forty dollar ($40.00) renewal fee. (Ord. 2890, 12-
11-2006)
4-2-5: INSPECTION OF WORK:
Upon receiving a request for inspection of installations covered by a wiring
permit, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to make such
inspection within forty eight (48) hours Monday through Friday, holidays
excepted, applying such tests as he shall deem necessary. Notice of approval
shall be posted only on installations meeting the regulations standards as set
forth in the laws of the state and the special regulations set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-6: CORRECTION OF WORK; CONDEMNATIONS:
An owner or electrical contractor who shall be notified by the electrical
inspector to make changes in any installation so that the same shall comply
with the provisions of this code, shall within three (3) days, unless the
electrical inspector for good cause shown shall consent in writing to a longer
period of time, make all changes necessary as so instructed.
Failure to comply with such a condemnation notice shall result in
discontinuance of electrical service, issuance of a warrant charging violation
of this chapter, or both. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-7: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS:
For the purpose of inspection of any electrical work, the electrical inspector
is hereby authorized to order removal of flooring, drywall, sheet metal or any
other material which may conceal such basic wiring at the cost of the person
causing such concealment before securing the electrical inspector's approval.
No person shall interfere or prevent said inspector from removing any
obstruction, matter or thing which may prevent his making a thorough inspection
of any electrical work. It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause
to be concealed any electrical wiring or installations mentioned in this code
without the written permission of the electrical inspector. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-
2006)
4-2-8: CONNECTION TO POWER LINES:
No person engaged in the business of furnishing electricity for lighting,
power, heating or cooking purposes shall connect or permit to be connected to
its lines any service entrance conductors until such wiring has been inspected
by the electrical inspector and an approval notice posted as provided in
section
4-2-5 of this chapter. An exception will be allowed in the event of after hours
emergencies provided the power supplier shall notify the inspector of any
emergency connections when the city building department is reopened. (Ord.
2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-9: AUTHORITY OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The electrical inspector shall have the authority and it is hereby made his
duty to enter in and upon any premises at reasonable hours and examine and
inspect any and all electrical wiring installed in said premises with such
frequency as he shall deem necessary, and if he finds that any electrical
wiring is installed in a defective or dangerous manner, he shall notify the
owner, occupant or agent of owner of the premises to correct such defect or
danger within a specified time limit. Failure to comply may result in penalty
or penalties specified in section
4-2-6 of this chapter.
The electrical inspector does not design electrical systems nor train
homeowners on how to do their own wiring. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-10: FEES:
Fees shall be in accordance with the electrical permit fee schedule which may
be obtained at the city building department. Fees are due upon commencement of
the work and must be paid prior to inspection. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
4-2-11: LIABILITY:
Nothing contained in this code shall be deemed or construed to relieve any
person owning, operating, constructing or installing any electrical work from
any liability for damages to any person injured by the construction,
installation or operation of the same, nor shall the city be deemed to have
assumed any liability by reason of the inspection hereinbefore authorized, or
by any failure of the electrical inspector to make such inspection. (Ord. 2890,
12-11-2006)
4-2-12: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any person, or a firm, copartnership, association or corporation by and through
a member, representative or agent, who shall engage in the business, trade,
practice or work of electrical work without a certificate of competency or
without registration, or perform work without a permit as provided by this
chapter, or who shall violate any provision of this code, or who shall refuse
to perform any duty lawfully enjoined upon him by the building official within
the prescribed time, or who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any lawful
order given or made by the building official shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or to
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Each
such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2890, 12-11-2006)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Adoption Of Code
4-3-2: Permits Required
4-3-3: Permit Fee
4-3-4: Violation; Misdemeanor
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The Idaho plumbing code, and as it shall be amended, revised, compiled and
published from time to time and as such amendments or revisions shall be
adopted by the Idaho plumbing board, is hereby adopted as the official plumbing
code for the city of Twin Falls. (Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
4-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation to do, or cause or permit to be done, whether acting as principal,
agent or employee, any construction, installation, improvement, extension or
alteration of any plumbing system in any building, residence or structure, or
service lines thereto without first procuring a permit from the city of Twin
Falls authorizing such work to be done.
Provided, a licensed plumber is hereby authorized, after making application for
permit and pending receipt of permit, to proceed and complete improvements or
alterations to plumbing systems, when the cost of said improvement or
alteration does not exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Inspection of such work shall be the responsibility of the permit holder
pending an official inspection, which shall be made within sixty (60) days
after notification of inspection. (Ord. 2880, 10-30-2006)
4-3-3: PERMIT FEE:
The applicant shall pay to the city at the time of application, a permit fee in
accordance with the schedule fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
2880, 10-30-2006)
4-3-4: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any person, or a firm, copartnership, association or corporation by and through
a member, representative or agent, who shall engage in the business, trade,
practice or work of plumbing without a certificate of competency or without
registration, or perform work without a permit as provided by this chapter, or
who shall violate any provision of this code, or who shall refuse to perform
any duty lawfully enjoined upon him by the building official within the
prescribed time, or who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any lawful order
given or made by the building official shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or to
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Each
such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2880, 10-30-2006)
CHAPTER 4
HOUSING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2576, 3-9-1998)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Adoption Of Code
4-5-2: Permits Required
4-5-3: Permit Fee
4-5-4: Violation; Misdemeanor
4-5-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The international mechanical code as published by the International Code
Council, the international fuel gas code as published by the International Code
Council, and parts V and VI of the international residential code as published
by the International Code Council, applicable to the industry and amendments as
adopted by the Idaho heating, ventilation and air conditioning board, and as
they shall be amended, revised, compiled and published from time to time and as
such amendments or revisions shall be adopted by the Idaho heating, ventilation
and air conditioning board, is hereby adopted as the official mechanical code
for the city of Twin Falls.
   (A)   The following amendments shall be applicable to the codes adopted:
Section M1801.1 of the international residential code is amended to delete the
words "except appliances listed and labeled for unvented use."
   (Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
4-5-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation to do, or cause or permit to be done, whether acting as principal,
agent or employee, any construction, installation, improvement, extension or
alteration of any heating, ventilation or air conditioning system in any
building, residence or structure without first procuring a permit from the city
of Twin Falls authorizing such work to be done. (Ord. 2889, 12-11-2006)
4-5-3: PERMIT FEE:
The applicant shall pay to the city at the time of application, a permit fee in
accordance with the schedule fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
2889, 12-11-2006)
4-5-4: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any person, or a firm, copartnership, association or corporation by and through
a member, representative or agent, who shall engage in the business, trade,
practice or work of heating, ventilation or air conditioning without a
certificate of competency or without registration, or perform work without a
permit as provided by this chapter, or who shall violate any provision of this
code, or who shall refuse to perform any duty lawfully enjoined upon him by the
building official within the prescribed time, or who shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to obey any lawful order given or made by the building official shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or to imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6)
months, or both. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2889, 12-11-2006)
CHAPTER 6
DWELLING CONSTRUCTION
(Rep. by Ord. 2576, 3-9-1998)
CHAPTER 7
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2576, 3-9-1998)
CHAPTER 8
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Permits Required
4-8-2: Notice To Public Utility Companies
4-8-3: Utilities Cooperation
4-8-4: Adjustment Of Expenses
4-8-5: Applicability To City Apparatus
4-8-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Before any person shall use any street or alley for the removal of any
building, such person shall obtain permission from the Building Inspector.
The application for said permission shall be signed by the person desiring to
use said street or alley for such purpose and shall state the route over which
such building is to be moved and the final destination thereof and said
application shall have attached thereto written acknowledgment of notice of
removal from all public utility companies.
Any person removing such building shall be liable to the City for any and all
damages to the streets thereof, and to any person or public utility company
whose property is injured by reason of such removal. (1958 Code, ch. V, art. 9)
4-8-2: NOTICE TO PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES:
Any person who desires to move any building through or along the streets or
alleys along a route which crosses or in any manner interferes with the line of
any gas pipes, telegraph, telephone, electric light or other electric wire
line, before obtaining such permit from the Building Inspector, shall give at
least seventy two (72) hours' written notice to the owner or manager of any
such gas pipes, telegraph, telephone, electric light or other electric wire
line of said application for such permission, and such notice shall contain all
the information set forth in said application for said permission, and said
applicant shall also pay in advance or tender to such owner or manager the
amount of the cost and expense of cutting, repairing, moving, raising, and
replacing such wires, cables or other apparatus, as will be cut or interfered
with by moving such building. (1958 Code, ch. V, art. 9)
4-8-3: UTILITIES COOPERATION:
It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of the apparatus in any street
referred to in Section
4-8-2 of this Chapter, that shall be affected by the removal of any such
building, upon receiving notice as herein provided and being tendered or paid
the cost and expense as set forth in Section
4-8-2 of this Chapter, to remove and clear away all such apparatus in time to
permit the passage of such building upon the streets without unnecessary delay.
(1958 Code, ch. V, art. 9)
4-8-4: ADJUSTMENT OF EXPENSES:
Whenever the cost and expense incurred by the removal of any building has
exceeded the monies paid to the owner of the apparatus, the permittee shall be
liable for the difference, and in case the cost and expense is less, the
permittee shall be entitled to a repayment of the difference thereof. (1958
Code, ch. V, art. 9)
4-8-5: APPLICABILITY TO CITY APPARATUS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to apparatus owned by the City.
(1958 Code, ch. V, art. 9)
CHAPTER 9
WRECKING YARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 10
TRAILER COURTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 11
GAS TRANSMISSION LINE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Definitions
4-11-2: Adoption of American Standard Code
4-11-3: Adoption of General Order No. 98
4-11-4: Engineering Department Jurisdiction
4-11-5: Unlawful Construction and Installation
4-11-6: Work Stoppage
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
GAS: The word "gas" as used in this Chapter shall be construed to mean natural
gas, manufactured gas, hydrocarbon gas or any mixture of gases produced,
transmitted, distributed or furnished by any gas utility or agency, including
liquefied petroleum gas as defined and regulated under Section 39-2201, Idaho
Code.
GAS INSTALLATIONS: The term "gas installations" as used herein, shall be
construed to mean the installation of all facilities for producing,
transmitting and distributing gas and all accessory equipment, appurtenances
and appliances necessary for the control and utilization of gas.
4-11-2: ADOPTION OF AMERICAN STANDARD CODE:
Section 8 of the American Standard Code for Pressure Piping, designated as ASA
B31.1.8-1955 (Second Edition), of the American Standards Association for Gas
Transmission and Distribution Piping Systems, which shall hereafter be
designated as ASA B31.1.8-19552 being of a general and permanent character
printed in book form, as shown by three (3) copies thereof now on file in the
office of the City Clerk, is hereby ratified and adopted (except as altered or
amended by Rules 3 and 4, Section 11, Idaho Public Utilities Order No. 98, as
shown in Section
4-11-3 hereof) as part of this Chapter regulating such construction and
maintenance of such gas line and system in the City.
4-11-3: ADOPTION OF GENERAL ORDER NO. 98:
General Order No. 98 of the Idaho Public Utilities Commission is hereby
followed as nearly as practicable as part of the regulations of the City
relating to the installation and maintenance of gas transmission pipe lines,
the said general order being followed, with alterations pertaining to the City,
as follows:
SUBSECTION I.
GAS PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT
Rule 1. COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED: Plans for installation of such facilities
as the total or partial supply of a piped utility system, subject to the
jurisdiction of the Idaho Public Utilities Commission, must bear the approval
of the Commission.
Rule 2. QUALIFIED PERSONNEL: In the interest of safety, it is required that
those employed in the operation of such plants understand the properties of
these gases, and that they be thoroughly trained in safe practices for
handling, distribution and operations.
SUBSECTION II.
CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES FOR TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF GAS
Rule 3. MINIMUM STANDARDS: The applicable portions of the ASA B31.1.8-19552
adopted by Section
4-11-2 hereof with exceptions and conditions as noted below, shall constitute
the minimum standard applying to the construction of gas transmission and
distribution system.
EXCEPTIONS:
In place of Item 845.51 the following shall be substituted:
If the maximum actual operating pressure of the distribution system is between
2 psig and 60 psig, a service regulator having the characteristics listed below
shall be used:
         (a)   A pressure regulator capable of reducing distribution line
pressure (pounds per square inch) to pressures recommended for household
appliance (inches of water column).
         (b)   Single port valve with orifice diameter no greater than that
recommended by the manufacturer for the maximum gas pressure at the regular
inlet.
         (c)   The valve seat shall be made of resilient material designed to
withstand abrasion of the gas, impurities in gas, cutting by the valve, and to
resist permanent deformation when it is pressed against the valve port.
         (d)   Pipe connections to the regulator shall not exceed two (2)
inches in diameter.
         (e)   The regulator must be of a type that is capable under normal
operating conditions of regulating the downstream pressure within the necessary
limits of accuracy and of limiting the build-up of pressure under no-flow
conditions to 50% or less of the discharge pressure maintained under flow
conditions.
         (f)   A self-contained service regulator with no external static or
control lines.
         (g)   Suitable protective devices shall be installed to prevent
accidental over-pressuring of the customer's appliances should the service
regulator fail. Some of the suitable types of protective devices to prevent
overpressuring of customer's appliances are:
            (1)   A monitoring regulator
            (2)   A relief valve
            (3)   An automatic shut-off device
These devices may be installed as an integral part of the service regulator or
as a separate unit, and shall be capable of limiting the pressure on the
consumers lines to such pressures as are allowable for low pressure
distribution systems as defined by 845.43.
Item 845.52 not applicable.
CONDITIONS.
Item 861. It shall be interpreted that odorant shall be added where gas does
not naturally possess a distinctive odor to the extent that its presence in the
atmosphere is readily detectable at gas concentration over 20 percent of the
concentration at the lower limit of combustibility.
Rule 4. MAPS AND RECORDS: In addition to the plans and records as required in
compliance with Rule 3 above, the following shall also be kept:
         (a)   A suitable map or maps shall be kept on file in the gas
company's office in the City, duplicate maps to be furnished City Engineer's
office, which maps shall at all times show the size, character, location and
date of installation of each street main, district regulator, street valve and
drip, and when practicable, each service connection in the corresponding
territory served. In lieu of showing service locations on maps, a card report
or other suitable means may be used.
SUBSECTION III.
INSTALLATIONS ON CUSTOMERS PREMISES
(Note: Rule 5 not adopted as part of this Chapter)
Rule 6. METER CONNECTIONS: The gas company shall inspect the customer's
installation prior to the connection of a meter to ascertain that such
installation conforms to the provisions contained in Rule 5 of the Idaho Public
Utilities Commission and to the ordinances of the City.
If the installation on the customer's premises does not meet the requirements,
the Company shall refuse to connect the meter and shall advise the customer in
writing the reasons for such refusal.
   SECTION IV.
Note: Rules 7 to 19 relate to powers solely in the Public Utilities Commission
and are not adopted as part of this Chapter.
4-11-4: ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT JURISDICTION:
The installation, construction and maintenance of such gas distribution and
transmission lines being for the purpose of connections to buildings, the
enforcement of all ordinances relating thereto is hereby placed within the
Engineering Department. The excavation for such lines, opening of streets and
alleys, reconstruction of streets and alleys, and matters appurtenant thereto,
shall be under the jurisdiction of the Engineering Department.
4-11-5: UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION:
It shall be unlawful to install, construct and maintain any gas distribution
and transmission lines for the distribution of gas unless the said
installation, construction and maintenance shall be done in accordance with
this Chapter.
4-11-6: WORK STOPPAGE:
A violation of the minimum standards as prescribed by this Chapter shall
subject the person in violation thereof to an immediate work stoppage order by
the City Engineer and the revocation of any permits granted hereunder or under
any other ordinances regulating gas. 1  (1958 Code, Ch. V, Art. 10)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 4-12-3 of this Code
TITLE 6
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
6-1-1: Adoption Of Code
6-1-2: Enforcement
6-1-3: Modifications Of Requirements
6-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The International Fire Code as now or hereinafter amended, is adopted as the
official code of the city together with the following amendments. The most
current addition adopted by the State of Idaho shall prevail.
One copy of the fire code shall be kept in both the Fire Chiefs and Fire
Marshal’s office.
A.   Department of fire prevention, Section 103.2 Appointments, International
Fire Code
   Delete the following language in Section 103.2 of the International Fire
Code “... and the fire official shall not be removed from office except for
cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges
by and before the appointing authority.”
B.   General Authority and Responsibility, Section 104.1, International Fire
Code.
   Add the following second paragraph to Section 104.1, General, International
Fire Code.
   1.   Fire Marshal’s Authority. The Fire Marshal is authorized to administer
and enforce this code. Under the Fire Marshal’s direction, the fire department
is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to:
      a)   The prevention of fires.
      b)   The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires.
      c)   The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials.
      d)   The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual, and other
private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishment equipment.
      e)   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
      f)   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire
hazards on land and in buildings, and other property, including those under
construction.
      g)   The maintenance of means of egress; and
      h)   The investigation of cause, origin and circumstances of fire and
unauthorized release of hazardous materials, for authority related to control
and investigation of emergency scenes see Section 104.11.
C.   Permits Requisite, Section 105.1.1, International Fire Code.
   Delete “required permit” from the last sentence of Section 105.1.1 of the
International Fire Code and add “a permit if required by the authority having
jurisdiction.”
D.   Violation Penalties, Section 110.4 International Fire Code.
   In the first sentence of Section 109.4 of the international Fire Code,
delete “[SPECIFY OFFENCE], punishable by a fine of not more than [AMOUNT]
dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or both such fine
and imprisonment” and add the word “misdemeanors”.
E.   Section 202 International Fire Code.
   1.   Driveway. Add “Driveway. A vehicular ingress and egress route that
services no more than four (4) single family dwellings, not including accessory
structures.” Four would allow contractors to build two duplexes or a triplex
using the less resistive fire access road requirements. I feel 5 could allow
for fire access that is too long and could cause issues in gaining access to
all the buildings.”
   2.   Fire Station. Add “Fire Station, A building, or portion of a building
that provides, at a minimum, all weather protection for fire apparatus.
   Temperature inside the building used for the purpose need to be maintained
at or above thirty-two (32) degrees.”
F.   CHAPTER 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURES. Make the following changes within Chapter
5 of the International Fire Code
   1.   Section 501
      a)   To Section 501.3 after the phrase, Construction documents for
proposed, add the word “driveways”.
      501.3 Construction documents for the proposed fire apparatus access,
including driveways, location of fire lanes, security gates across fire
apparatus access roads and/or driveways and construction documents and
hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the fire
department for review and approval prior to construction.
      b)   To Section 501.4 Where fire apparatus access roads, add the words
“and/or driveways.”
   2.   Section 502. Definitions
      a)   To section 502, add the following word “DRIVEWAY and the word Fire
Station.”
   3.   Section 503
      a.   To section 503, add the following definition, “FIRE STATION, A
building, or portion of a building that provides, at a minimum, all weather
protection for fire apparatus. Temperatures inside the building used for this
purpose must be maintained at above thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit.”
      b.   To section 503 add the words, “AND DRIVEWAYS” to the section
heading.
      c.   Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads and Driveways.
         i.   To section 503.1.1 add the following sentence, “Driveways need to
be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through
503.1.3.”
            503.1.1 Buildings and Facilities. Approved fire apparatus access
roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building
within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the
requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet of all
portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first
story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of
the building or facility. Driveways need to be provided and maintained in
accordance with Section 503.1.1 through 503.1.3.
      d.   Add the following section, “503.7 Driveways. Need be provided when
any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of a building is located
more than 150 feet (45720mm) from a fire apparatus access road. Driveways will
provide a minimum unobstructed width of 20 feet (3658mm) and a minimum
unobstructed height of 13 feet 6 inches (4115mm). Driveways in excess of 150
feet (45720mm) in length need to be provided with turnarounds. Driveways in
excess of 200 feet (60960mm) in length and less than 20 feet (6096mm) in width
may require turnouts in addition to turnarounds.”
      e.   Add the following section, “503.7.1 Limits. A driveway cannot serve
in excess of four single family dwellings or a combination thereof.
         a.   Example two duplexes or a triplex and a single-family dwelling.
      f.   Add the following section, “503.7.2 Turnarounds. Driveway
turnarounds need to have an inside turning radius of not less than 35 feet
(9144mm) and an outside turning radius of not less than-50 feet (13716mm).
Driveways that connect with an access road or roads at more than one point may
be considered as having a turnaround if all changes of direction meet the
radius requirements for driveway turnarounds.”
      g.   Add the following section, “503.7.3 Turnouts. Where line of sight
along a driveway is obstructed by a man-made or natural feature, turnouts need
to be located as may be needed by the fire code official to provide for safe
passage of vehicles. Driveway turnouts will be of an all-weather road surface
at least 12 feet (3048mm) wide and 40 feet (9144mm) long.”
      h.   ADDRESS NUMBERS
         a.   Buildings shall have approved address numbers, or approved
building Identification placed in a position that is plainly legible, visible
from the street or frontage road fronting the property and of a contrasting
color, Light on Dark, or Dark on Light. (IFC 505.1).
         b.   Address size is based on distance from center of the street to
the building: up to 50 ft. is 4 in., 51 to 100 ft. is 6 in., 101 to 150 ft. is
8 in., 151 to 200 ft. is 10 in. and greater than 200 ft. is 12 in.
         c.   If 12 in. letters are not visible from the street or frontage
road an address sign shall also be installed at the entrance from the street or
frontage road. The sign shall be white with 4" Black numbers.
         d.   In an effort to be consistent with other buildings being built in
‘the area, address numbers must be placed on the upper right side of the
building that faces the street, or as agreed upon by the City of Twin Falls
Fire Marshal.
         e.   4" suite lettering (of a contrasting color) shall be placed at
the top of the main entry door. Suite numbers shall start on the left (as you
look at the store front) and increase as you move right.
         f.   A fully visible temporary address sign shall be posted on all
construction sites and remain in place until the permanent address is in place.
         g.   Add the following section, “503.7.7 Security Gates. Where
security gates are installed, they need to have an approved means of emergency
operation. The security gates and emergency operation will be maintained
operational at all times.”
         h.   Add the following section, “503.7.8 Surface. “Driveways need to
be designed and maintained to support 75,000 pounds and will be surfaced to
provide all weather driving capabilities.”
G.   Reference to Appendix, International Fire Code.
   1.   When this code references the appendix, the provisions of the appendix
shall not apply unless specifically incorporated by reference. The following
appendixes of the International Fire Code are incorporated by reference:
      a)   Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings.
      b)   Appendix C, Hydrant Location and Distribution.
      c)   Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
         I.   To Section DI01.1 Scope, add the following sentence “Driveways as
described in section 503.7 through 503.11 are not subject to the reequipments
of this appendix.
         II.   To Section DI03.2 add the words and/or Driveways after the word
road.
      d)   Appendix E, Hazard Categories.
      e)   Appendix F, Hazard Ranking.
      f)   Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids Weight and Volume Equivalents.
      g)   Appendix I, Fire protection systems- Noncompliant conditions. (Ord.
2022-002, 3-7-2022)
6-1-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The power and duties of the bureau of fire prevention wherever mentioned in
said fire code shall be vested in the Fire Marshal of the city. (Ord. 2022-002,
3-7-2022)
6-1-3: MODIFICATIONS OF REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Authority To Grant Modification: The city council may authorize in
specific cases such modification of the terms of the international fire code as
adopted as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the code would result in
unnecessary hardship. Modifications shall not be granted on the grounds of
inconvenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of
the international fire code as adopted would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (B)   Hearing Requirement: The city council, prior to modifying the
requirements of the international fire code as adopted, shall conduct a hearing
at which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. Property
owners adjoining the parcel under consideration shall be notified of the time
and place of the hearing, along with a summary of the proposal, at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing unless such notice is waived by all such
adjoining property owners.
   (C)   Application: A modification of the terms of the international fire
code as adopted shall not be granted by the city council unless and until a
written application for a modification is submitted to the city council
containing:
      1.   Name, address, and phone number of applicants.
      2.   Legal description of the property.
      3.   Description of modifications requested.
      4.   A narrative statement, documentation, and technical support data
demonstrating that the building site conforms to all the following standards:
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures, or buildings.
         (b)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of the international
fire code as adopted would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties under the terms of the international fire code as adopted.
         (c)   Granting the modification requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by the international fire code
as adopted to other lands, structures or buildings.
A modification shall not be granted unless the city council makes specific
findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it
which support conclusions that the above-mentioned standards and conditions
have been met by the applicant.
   (D)   Modifications Limited: A resolution of the city council modifying the
requirements of the international fire code as adopted is not and shall not be
construed as modifying any requirements imposed by the state or federal
governments.” (Ord. 2022-002, 3-7-2022)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Air Guns, Weapons
6-2-2: Assemblages; Unlawful, Disturbing (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-2-3: Disorderly Conduct, Houses
6-2-4: Cruelty To Animals
6-2-5: Minors; Tobacco, Intoxicants
6-2-6: Intoxicants
6-2-7: Resisting, Impersonating Officers
6-2-8: Prostitution, House Of
6-2-9: Public, Private Property Prohibitions
6-2-10: Trespass
6-2-11: Vagrancy (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-2-12: Deposit, Storage Of Combustibles
6-2-13: False Reports
6-2-14: Littering
6-2-15: Explosives
6-2-16: Impersonation Of Police
6-2-17: Recreational Use Of Canals
6-2-18: Serial And Identification Numbers
6-2-19: Public Nudity
6-2-1: AIR GUNS, WEAPONS:
   (A)   Air Guns And Slingshots: No person shall discharge any air gun,
flipper or other contrivance which propels a missile or missiles by use of
compressed air, springs or any elastic substance.
   (B)   Reserved.
   (C)   Unlawful Discharge Of Guns And Firecrackers 1 : It shall be unlawful
for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or
firearm of any description, or fire, explode or set off any firecracker or
fireworks of any description, except as provided by ordinance.
   (D)   Permits: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city
council may grant permits to persons or businesses permitting the discharge of
air guns, flippers, bows and arrows, pistols or firearms within the city
limits, subject to any specific conditions that the council may require. (1958
Code § 10-1-27; amd. Ord. 2277, 7-17-1989; Ord. 2021-018, 11-8-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9 of this title.
6-2-2: ASSEMBLAGES; UNLAWFUL, DISTURBING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-2-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT, HOUSES:
   (A)   Disorderly Conduct: Ever person who wilfully causes loud or unusual
noise or engages in tumultuous or offensive conduct or threatens, traduces,
quarrels, challenges to fight, or who does anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to or disturbs the peace or quiet of any person, persons or
neighborhood, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and upon conviction shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Construction Noise: Every person who engages in the construction/
repair of buildings, including site excavation, grading, and landscape
installation between the hours often o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. shall be guilty of an infraction. This prohibition against
construction noise shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Emergency work or cases of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety,
      2.   A government agency acting within the scope of its functions, and
      3.   Other work activities as may be previously authorized by the
Building Official, Public Works Director, or the City Manager.
   (C)   Public Intoxication: Every person, who is in public and intoxicated at
a level that presents a danger to others or creates a disturbance of the peace,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Fighting: Every person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
fights with another person in a public place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Public Urination: Every person who excretes human waste, including
urine or feces, upon the ground, into a body of water, or upon anything
attached or setting upon said surfaces, except for toilet facilities used as
receptacles for human waste, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (F)   Disorderly House: No person shall keep a disorderly house or place of
business or shall permit or suffer any drunkenness, fighting, quarreling,
unlawful games or riotous or disorderly conduct or breach of the peace in any
house, place or building owned, kept, used or occupied by him. (Ord. 3112, 1-
25-2016; amd. Ord. O-2024-011, 8-19-2024)
6-2-4: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   (A)   Cruelty To Animals: No person shall torture or cruelly beat or
otherwise ill treat any animal. (1958 Code §
10-1-5)
   (B)   Careless Driving Of Animals: No person shall recklessly or carelessly
drive or ride any horse or animal on any street, alley or other public place.
(1958 Code §
10-1-10)
   (C)   Prohibited Traps: It shall be unlawful for any person to set a leg-
hold trap, conibear or body trap, or snare trap designed to injure or kill an
animal. This subsection shall not apply to those authorized by the Idaho
Department of Fish and Game, pursuant to Idaho Code, title 36, chapter 11, to
set such a trap. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this
subsection shall pay an infraction penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 2018-023, 11-26-2018)
6-2-5: MINORS; TOBACCO, INTOXICANTS:
   (A)   Tobacco To Minors: No person shall sell or give away, directly or
indirectly, any tobacco to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(1958 Code §
10-1-6)
   (B)   Liquor Or Beer To Minors: No person shall sell or give or in any way
supply any vinous, malt or spirituous liquors to any minor. (1958 Code § 10-1-
26)
6-2-6: INTOXICANTS:
   (A)   No person shall have in his possession or on his person while
occupying, riding in, riding on, or driving a motor vehicle whether upon a
highway, street, or bridge or upon public property or private property open to
public use, excluding public parks, any bottle, can, or other receptacle which
is open, has been opened or the seal of which has been broken, and which
contains any alcoholic beverage. The transportation of an alcoholic beverage in
a vehicle outside of the passenger compartment shall not be a violation of this
section.
   (B)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in any motor vehicle when
such vehicle is traveling upon a highway, street, or bridge or upon public
property or private property open to public use.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess with the intent to
inhale, or be under the influence of, inhalants. It shall be unlawful for any
person to possess with intent to use, paraphernalia for the inhalation of
inhalants. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in a place where
he/she knows inhalants are used or are being held for use. For the purposes of
this section, the term "inhalants" means anything capable of causing a
condition of intoxication or impairment as a result of the inhalation of its
smoke, fumes or vapors. (Ord. 3027, 5-29-2012)
6-2-7: RESISTING, IMPERSONATING OFFICERS:
   (A)   Resisting An Officer: No person shall molest, interfere with, resist
or threaten any officer engaged in the exercise of his official duties. (1958
Code § 10-1-16)
   (B)   Impersonating An Officer: No person shall falsely represent himself to
be an officer of the City, or shall impersonate or attempt to impersonate such
officer, or shall without authority perform or attempt to perform any official
act for or on behalf of such officer. (1958 Code § 10-1-18)
6-2-8: PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF:
   (A)   Prostitution: No person shall pursue or advertise in any manner her
vocation as a prostitute, and no person shall advertise the vocation of a
prostitute or solicit for her. (1958 Code § 10-1-20)
   (B)   House Of Ill Fame: No person shall either keep or assist in keeping a
house of ill fame resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, or
to be employed in such house in any capacity, or reside therein; nor shall any
person resort to any house of ill fame for the purpose of prostitution or
lewdness. (1958 Code § 10-1-21)
6-2-9: PUBLIC, PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   Obstructing Public Way: No person shall obstruct, or cause to be
obstructed, any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place without
permission therefor applied for and obtained.
   (B)   Jumping From Trains: No person, except employees of the company owning
the same, shall jump on or from or ride upon any train of railroad cars, or any
car or engine or part of such train, while the same is in motion, without the
permission of those in charge thereof.
   (C)   Unlawful Markings: It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or
stencil with paint or in any other manner or to write or print with paint or in
any other manner on any sidewalk, curbing, street, avenue or alley within the
limits of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
marking of or writing, stenciling or printing upon curbs, streets, avenues and
alleys within the city limits for the purpose of guiding and controlling
traffic therein, if such markings adhere to the following restrictions:
      1.   Numbers only (No larger than four inches (4") by six inches (6"))
using stencil or similar;
      2.   Stenciling length can be no longer than twenty-four inches (24"):
      3.   Black numbering on white background or white numbering on black
background; and
      4.   No painting on sidewalk above curb nor gutter below curb.
      The City of Twin Falls will not maintain painted/stenciled curb address.
   (D)   Destruction Of Shrubs And Flowers: It shall be unlawful for any person
to injure, destroy, disfigure, or maim any tree, shrubbery or flower bearing
plant growing or maintained in or upon any public parks or grounds within the
city 1 .
   (E)   Malicious Injury To Property: No person shall maliciously injure or
destroy any real or personal property, not his own, within the city.
   (F)   Glass Containers: The use of glass containers shall be prohibited in
public parking lots or private parking lots open to public use.
   (G)   Parking Lot Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, or remain in or upon any public parking lot or any private
parking lot open to public use between the hours of nine thirty o’clock (9:30)
P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. when such parking lot is posted with
appropriate signs or notices at the points of access. (Ord. 2101, 5-7-1984;
amd. Ord. 2023-003, 3-6-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-4-7 of this code for enforcement provisions.
6-2-10: TRESPASS:
Every person, except under landlord-tenant relationship, who, being first
notified in writing or verbally by the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of real property, to immediately depart from the same and not to return, and
who refuses to so depart or thereafter returns after being so notified, shall
be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 2697, 7-2-2001)
6-2-11: VAGRANCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-2-12: DEPOSIT, STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLES:
   (A)   Depositing Ashes: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any
ashes, cause the same to be deposited or placed, or to permit or suffer the
same to be or remain in any wooden vessel, or receptacle, or any vessel or
receptacle composed or made of combustible material, but said ashes shall be
placed and kept in some safe depository or receptacle of galvanized iron or
other noncombustible material, and not less than two inches (2") from any
woodwork or structure, or deposited on the ground not less than ten feet (10')
from any wood building or structure. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 1, sec. 30)
   (B)   Disposal Of Combustibles: Any person making, using or having the
charge and control of shavings, hay, straw, sacks, bags, litter or any other
combustible material or fragments, shall at the close of each day cause the
same to be securely deposited, disposed or removed so as to be safe from fire.
All receptacles for waste, rags, paper and other substances liable by
spontaneous combustion or otherwise to cause fire, must be made of
noncombustible material. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 1, sec. 31)
   (C)   Storage Of Explosives: No explosive of inflammable compound or
combustible material of any kind shall be kept, stored or placed near the
doorway or stairway of any building or used in such a place or manner as to
obstruct or render egress hazardous in the case of fire. (1958 Code, ch. X,
art. 1, sec. 32)
6-2-13: FALSE REPORTS:
   (A)   False Fire Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
report, start or spread any false alarm of fire within the city to the fire
department or to any other person which results in a report or call to the fire
department. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 1, sec. 38)
   (B)   False Reports Of Law Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly make a false report of any law violation within the city to the
police department or to any other person which results in a report or call to
said police department. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 1, sec. 39)
6-2-14: LITTERING 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit to remain upon any roof
any accumulation of paper, hay, moss or any other inflammable material or
combustible rubbish of any description. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 1, sec. 33)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1-16 of this code.
6-2-15: EXPLOSIVES:
   (A)   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess
or have under his control for any unlawful purpose, any explosive, bomb,
incendiary device, Molotov cocktail or other destructive device.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following words
shall have the following meanings:
BOMB: An explosive compound or mixture with a detonator and/or initiator.
DESTRUCTIVE DEVICE: Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade,
mine, rocket, missile or similar device and includes the unassembled components
from which such a device can be made.
EXPLOSIVE: Gun powder, powders used for blasting, all forms of high explosives,
blasting materials, fuses, detonators and other detonating agents, smokeless
powders and any chemical compounds, mechanical mixture or device that contains
any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion
or detonation of the compound, mixture or device or any part thereof may cause
an explosion.
INCENDIARY DEVICE: Any flammable material or container containing a flammable
liquid or material whose ignition by fire, friction, concussion, detonation or
other method produces destructive effects primarily through combustion rather
than explosion.
MOLOTOV COCKTAIL: A breakable container containing an explosive or flammable
liquid or other substance, having a wick or similar device capable of being
ignited and may be described as either an explosive or incendiary device. A
Molotov cocktail is not intended to mean a device commercially manufactured
primarily for the purpose of illumination or other such uses.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and may
be imprisoned for a period of time of not more than six (6) months; or by a
combination of such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-2-16: IMPERSONATION OF POLICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a law enforcement officer to
impersonate or hold himself or herself out to be a police officer or an
employee of the city, county or state law enforcement agency; nor shall any
such person wear any uniform, badge, shoulder patch, chevron or other emblem or
insignia similar to or in imitation of those worn by members of any city,
county, or state law enforcement agencies; nor shall any such person operate or
permit to be operated any motor vehicle equipped with a siren or flashing blue
or red lights; or which shall display the word "Police", or the name of any
city, county or state; or which shall display any star, shield, emblem,
insignia or color scheme similar to or in imitation of those displayed on
vehicles used by city, county or state law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 2261, 5-
1-1989)
6-2-17: RECREATIONAL USE OF CANALS:
   (A)   Definitions:
CANAL: Any body of water used for the purpose of holding or conveying water for
manufacturing, agricultural, mining or domestic purposes. This definition
includes channel, coulee, ditch, lateral and reservoir.
RECREATIONAL USE: The recreational use of water including, but not limited to,
swimming, wading, floating, diving or playing within water.
   (B)   Unlawful Use Of Canals: It is unlawful for any person to use a canal
within the city for any recreational use. Any person found to be in violation
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2390, 8-3-1992)
6-2-18: SERIAL AND IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS:
   (A)   Any person who knowingly buys, sells, receives, disposes of, conceals,
or has in his or her possession any personal property from which the
manufacturer's serial number, identification number or any distinguishing
number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or
destroyed, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   When property described above comes into the custody of a police
officer, it shall be considered stolen property and subject to state law
relating to disposal of stolen, lost or abandoned property; provided, however,
that prior to being disposed of, such property shall have an identification
mark imbedded, engraved or permanently affixed. (Ord. 2590, 8-17-1998)
6-2-19: PUBLIC NUDITY:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following words
shall have the following meanings:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the
exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples
and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the
realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places occupied by or open to the
general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants,
clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to
specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether
or not an admission charge is levied.
   (B)   Violations: It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a public place, appear in a state of nudity.
   (C)   Exclusions: This prohibition shall not apply to any child under the
age of ten (10) years, or any person exposing a breast in the process of
breast-feeding.
   (D)   Construction And Severability: It is the intention of the city of Twin
Falls that the provisions of this section be construed, enforced and
interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible infringement of
the constitutional rights of free speech, free expression, due process, equal
protection or other fundamental rights consistent with the purposes of this
section. Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that any part of
this section, or any application or enforcement of it is excessively
restrictive of such rights or liberties, then such portion of this section, or
specific application of this section, shall be severed from the remainder,
which shall continue in full force and effect.
   (E)   Penalty: Violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6)
months in jail, or both. (Ord. 2699, 7-23-2001)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Prohibited Animals
6-3-2: Prohibited Area (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-3-3: Animals In Prohibited Areas (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-3-4: Permits Required
6-3-5: Schedule Of Permit Fees
6-3-6: Nuisances (Rep. by Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
6-3-7: Conditions Of Premises
6-3-8: Qualifications For Issuance Of Animal Permit
6-3-9: Appeal Of City Chief Of Police Or His Designee's Decision
6-3-10: Revocation Of Permit
6-3-11: Loading Pens And Sales Yard
6-3-12: Application To Annexed Areas
6-3-13: Animal At Large
6-3-1: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pigs, hogs, or
rooster chickens within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 2018-12, 4-16-
2018)
6-3-2: PROHIBITED AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-3-3: ANIMALS IN PROHIBITED AREAS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-3-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any horses, mules, donkeys, cows,
sheep, goats, poultry (more than 4 hen chickens) or rabbits (more than 3
rabbits), or any other animals except dogs, cats or other animals kept inside a
residence or place of business at all times in the City limits without first
obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Coordinator, which permit shall be
granted subject to the applicant meeting the following specifications:
   (A)   To maintain or keep poultry or more than three (3) rabbits, the
applicant must have at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of real property
for each twenty five (25) fowl or for more than three (3) and up to twenty five
(25) rabbits and in no event shall the fowl or poultry or rabbit run or
enclosure be less than forty feet (40') from a dwelling other than that of the
applicant. The City Council may, at the request of the applicant, grant a
variance from the minimum five thousand (5,000) square feet of real property
requirement for the maintenance or keeping of each twenty five (25) fowl.
   (B)   To maintain or keep one cow, one horse, one llama, or any other
similarly sized animals except dogs and cats, the applicant must have at least
one acre of real property. Within that property there must be at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of real property or pasture land devoted
exclusively for the use of each animal. Fences enclosing such animals must be
so constructed so as to prevent the animals from going upon the property of
adjoining property owners in any manner whatsoever. Applicants not in
compliance with this section prior to its amendment shall be given a period of
five (5) years to come into compliance with the minimum square footage
requirements. Each animal must have access to a three-sided roofed structure
for purposes of shelter. The structure shall be maintained at least forty (40)
feet from the house of any adjoining homeowners.
   (C)   To maintain one sheep, one goat, one alpaca or similarly sized animal
except dogs and cats, the applicant must have at least one half acre of real
property. Within that property there must be at least five thousand (5,000)
square feet of real property or pasture land devoted exclusively for the use of
each animal. Fences enclosing such animals must be so constructed so as to
prevent the animals from going upon the property of adjoining property owners
in any manner whatsoever. Applicants not in compliance with this section prior
to its amendment shall be given a period of five (5) years to come into
compliance with the minimum square footage requirements. Each animal must have
access to a three-sided roofed structure for purposes of shelter. The structure
shall be maintained at least forty (40) feet from the house of any adjoining
homeowners.
   (D)   All premises used in accordance with this code section 6-3-4 shall be
subject to approval and inspection by Code Enforcement for each new applicant.
(Ord. 2408, 6-7-1993; amd. Ord. 2018-12, 4-16-2018; Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-
2023)
6-3-5: SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES:
Refer to the city's Master Fee Schedule for current permit fees. (Ord. 2408, 6-
7-1993; amd. Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-2023)
6-3-6: NUISANCES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987)
6-3-7: CONDITIONS OF PREMISES:
   (A)   Animal locations, structures, pens, corrals and any other premises or
structure used for the keeping of and maintaining of horses, cows, sheep,
goats, rabbits, chickens, doves and pigeons or any other animals must be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, free from obnoxious odors and substances.
All persons who keep or maintain any horses, cows, sheep, goats, rabbits,
chickens, doves or pigeons or any other animals shall keep them confined at all
times in enclosures strong enough or staked out or picketed on the premises, or
in such a manner as to prevent the said animals or fowl from going upon the
premises or property of another. It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or
maintaining any of said animals or fowl to allow the same to create a
disturbance to the residents in the particular locality by creating any noise,
odor or damage to the adjacent property, and the keeping and maintaining of
said animals and fowl shall not interfere with the peaceful and quiet enjoyment
of such property by such adjacent owners or residents.
   (B)   All other animals found in city limits, including pets and service
animals, must be kept in sanitary conditions with sufficient access to shelter,
food, and water so as to maintain the health of the animal. (1958 Code ch. VII
art. 1; amd. Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-2023)
6-3-8: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF ANIMAL PERMIT:
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Coordinator shall issue a permit to keep or
maintain animals in the City only after the recommendation of the City Chief of
Police or his designee. The Chief of Police or his designee shall inform the
Code Enforcement Coordinator that the requirements of this chapter have been
complied with before the Code Enforcement Coordinator shall issue such permit.
The Chief of Police or his designee may deny the issuance of a permit if
fraudulent or untrue representations are made by the applicant or the applicant
is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before being issued a permit, the applicant shall circulate a petition
among all those households located within three hundred feet (300') of the
applicant's property. The petition shall state the number and type(s) of
animals the applicant wishes to keep and shall give the location of the
property on which the applicant wishes to keep the animals. The applicant must
obtain an acknowledgment from every household within three hundred feet (300')
whether the household resident approves or disapproves of the application, and
must receive the approval of seventy five percent (75%) of the households
located within three hundred feet (300') of his property before an animal
permit will be issued. If the applicant is unable to obtain an acknowledgment
from a household within three hundred feet (300'), the applicant may substitute
a statement for the household excluded, explaining the attempts made to obtain
the acknowledgment, and the results of those attempts.
      The Chief of Police or his designee shall not issue a permit if
acknowledgment and approval, as described above, has not been met.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or his designee, prior to the issuance of a
permit, may inspect places and premises where any of the animals are kept or
housed and, if a violation of this chapter is found to exist, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall deny issuance of the permit to the applicant.
(Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987; amd. Ord. 3018, 10-24-2011; Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-2023)
6-3-9: APPEAL OF CITY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS DESIGNEE’S DECISION:
If the applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police or his
designee the applicant may appeal such decision to the City Council within
seven (7) days of notice of the decision of the Code Enforcement Coordinator.
The applicant must, in writing, appeal to the City Council and set forth the
reasons therefor why the applicant should not be denied a license. The City
Council shall set the time and place for a hearing a reasonable period of time
subsequent to applicant's written notice of appeal. Notice of such hearing
shall be personally served upon the applicant, or mailed postage prepaid to the
applicant at his last known address, at least three (3) days prior to the date
of the hearing. The order of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-
1987; amd. Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-2023)
6-3-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Recommendation Of Revocation: The Chief of Police or his designee may
recommend to the City Council the revocation of any permit upon evidence that
any of the conditions set forth in this chapter are a prerequisite to the
issuance of a permit have been violated, or that the permit was issued upon
fraudulent or untrue representations by the applicant, or seventy five percent
(75%) of the households located within three hundred feet (300') of the
premises where any of the animals are being kept or maintained, file a petition
for such revocation, or that the person holding the permit has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter or title 7 of this Code.
   (B)   Inspection: All places and premises upon which any of the animals are
kept or housed shall be open at all times for inspection by the Chief of Police
or his designee. If, upon inspection, there is found to exist any violation of
any provision of this chapter, the Chief of Police or his designee shall give
the person responsible for such violation a written notice specifying the
violation in particular and requiring such offender to abate or correct the
same within a period of twenty four (24) hours. If the violation is not abated
or corrected within the twenty four (24) hour period, the Chief of Police or
his designee shall recommend to the City Council that the permit of such person
be revoked.
   (C)   Revocation Of Permit: The City Council may revoke any permit issued
under this chapter for violation of any of the provisions of this Code or
ordinance of the City or laws of the State of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the
City Council, the Chief of Police or his designee or City Council shall notify
the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
personally served upon the permittee, or mailed postage prepaid to the
permittee at his last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987; amd. Ord. O-2023-017, 12-18-2023)
6-3-11: LOADING PENS AND SALES YARD:
For the purpose of selling, loading and shipping any horses, cows, pigs, hogs,
goats, sheep or chickens, it shall be lawful to keep the same in loading pens
provided for said purpose, but no such animals shall be kept in such pens
within the corporate limits of the City for a period of more than thirty six
(36) hours except by written permission of the Chief of Police or his designee.
(1958 Code ch. VII art. 1; amd. Ord. 2197, 3-16-1987; amd. Ord. O-2023-017, 12-
18-2023)
6-3-12: APPLICATION TO ANNEXED AREAS:
This chapter shall apply to all animals and poultry now within the City and to
those subsequently brought into the City; provided, however, that the
provisions of sections
6-3-1,
6-3-4 and
6-3-5 of this chapter shall not become effective for areas annexed into the
City after the effective date hereof for a period of two (2) years after
annexation into the City. The provisions of subsection
6-3-8(B) of this chapter requiring the circulation of a petition before
issuance of an animal permit shall not apply to animals on property annexed
into the City for such time as the same number and type of animals continue to
be kept or maintained on the property. (Ord. 2966, 4-13-2009)
6-3-13: ANIMAL AT LARGE:
Any person, who, after having been warned in writing by Code Enforcement,
willfully or negligently permits any animal, excluding domestic cats, owned or
possessed or harbored by him to be, or run, at large without a competent and
responsible attendant or master, within the limits of the city, or who
willfully or negligently fails, neglects or refuses to keep any such animal
securely confined within the limits of his own premises when not under the
immediate care and control of a competent and responsible attendant or master,
shall be guilty of an infraction punishable with a fine of three hundred
dollars ($300.00). (Ord. O2023-017, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 4
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: License And Registration Required
6-4-3: Licensing Requirements; Fees
6-4-4: License Term
6-4-5: License Exemptions
6-4-6: Owner's Certificate; Dog Collar And Tag
6-4-7: Antirabies Vaccination Required
6-4-8: Impounding Dogs; Procedure For Redemption
6-4-9: Kennel Regulations
6-4-10: Provisions Regulating Suspected Or Actual Rabid Animals
6-4-11: City Animal Shelter
6-4-12: Duties Of Animal Control Officer, Police Department And Animal Shelter
Director
6-4-13: Right To Enter Premises
6-4-14: Prohibited Acts
6-4-15: Penalty
6-4-16: Destruction Of Vicious Animals
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context
that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: That person or persons who are charged with the primary
responsibility for the immediate enforcement of the provisions contained in
this chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER DIRECTOR: Persons contracted with the city of Twin Falls to
operate the city animal shelter in accordance to the rules and regulations
(ordinances) of the city of Twin Falls.
AT LARGE: Any dog which is not confined within a fenced or completely enclosed
area or on a chain or leash.
DOG: Any male, female, spayed female or neutered male dog of any age.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE: Any dog which has attained the age of six (6) months.
IMPOUNDED: Having been received into the custody of the animal shelter or into
the custody of the animal control officer or police department or any
authorized agent or representative thereof.
KENNEL: Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where more than
four (4) dogs and four (4) cats over the age of four (4) months are raised,
kept, housed, or boarded for a fee, or for a period of more than thirty (30)
days, excluding licensed veterinary offices.
OWNER: When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall mean any person or
persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
SHELTER: An animal shelter, lot, premises or building maintained by the city
for the confinement and care of dogs seized either under the provisions of this
chapter or otherwise.
UNLICENSED DOG: A dog for which the license for the current year has not been
paid, or to which the tag provided for in this chapter is not attached.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that has bitten, clawed or otherwise harmed, or constitutes
a physical threat, or a dog whose temperament or habits endanger or menace any
person or other animal without provocation by such person or animal. This term
shall not include a dog that bites, attacks or menaces a person or other animal
that has tormented or injured the dog. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2931,
3-10-2008)
6-4-2: LICENSE AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All dogs six (6) months of age or older, kept, harbored, or maintained by any
person in the city shall be licensed and registered. Dog licenses shall be
issued by the animal shelter upon payment of a license fee as herein provided.
Payment of the license fee shall be made to the animal shelter. (Ord. 2882, 11-
6-2006)
6-4-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   (A)   The owner, possessor or keeper of any dog six (6) months of age or
over shall make application for and obtain a license and registration tag for
such dog.
   (B)   At the time of making application the owner, possessor or keeper of
any dog shall:
      1.   State his name and address and the sex, breed and color of each dog
owned or kept by him.
      2.   Pay a license fee for each dog licensed. A standard fee shall be set
by resolution of the city council and shall be used by the shelter to reimburse
its costs of operation. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-4: LICENSE TERM:
   (A)   All dogs six (6) months and older shall be licensed on an annual
basis.
   (B)   All licenses shall expire January 31 of the following year as stamped
on the dog tag issued. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-5: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   The following dogs need not be licensed:
      1.   Any dog not yet six (6) months of age.
      2.   Any dog whose owner, keeper or possessor is a nonresident of the
city and who is temporarily within the city for thirty (30) days or less.
      3.   Any dog brought into the city for the sole purpose of participating
in any dog show or dog contest.
   (B)   Any dog which has been duly or properly trained to assist the blind,
physically or mentally disabled and is now acting in that capacity shall be
licensed without fee. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-6: OWNER'S CERTIFICATE; DOG COLLAR AND TAG:
Upon payment of the license fee, the animal shelter shall issue to the owner a
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The tag shall have
stamped thereon the words "Twin Falls Dog Tag" and the license number
corresponding with the tag number of the certificate. Every owner shall be
required to provide each dog with a collar or harness to which the license tag
must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. Show
dogs during showings are exempted from wearing the collar and tag.
   (A)   Duplicate dog tags shall be issued upon payment of one dollar ($1.00)
for each tag so issued to replace the original tag that was lost or destroyed.
   (B)   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason whatsoever.
   (C)   The original certificate shall be retained by the owner or harborer of
the licensed dog for inspection by the animal control officer or police
department. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-7: ANTIRABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
Every dog shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with antirabies
vaccine by the time that any dog reaches the age of six (6) months and
boostered as according to the manufacturer's recommendation thereafter and
according to veterinarian records. Upon vaccination the veterinarian shall
issue to the owner a certificate or tag showing the date of vaccination and
said rabies tag must be affixed to the collar of the dog and worn at all times.
(Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-8: IMPOUNDING DOGS; PROCEDURE FOR REDEMPTION:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and police department to see
that a licensed or unlicensed dog found running at large is taken up and
impounded in the municipal animal shelter, and such dog may be so taken up
without the necessity of filing a complaint, and shall be impounded and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (A)   Record Of Impounded Animals: The animal shelter shall keep a
record of each animal impounded by it, the date of receipt of such animal, the
date and manner of its disposal; and if redeemed, reclaimed or sold, the name
of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed or purchased, the address of such
person and the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of the
impounding, reclaiming or purchasing thereof, together with the number of any
tag and the date of any tag exhibited or issued upon the redemption or sale of
any such animal.
         (B)   Redemption Of Impounded Dogs; Fees:
      1.   Any dog impounded as a licensed or unlicensed dog may be redeemed
and taken from such pound by the owner or any authorized person who:
               (a)   Exhibits to the supervisor or person having charge of said
animal shelter a certificate of registry as provided in section
6-4-2 of this chapter showing that the license in said section imposed has been
paid for such dog or verified by animal shelter records.
               (b)   Pays the person in charge of said animal shelter an
impounding fee which fee shall be set by the operator of the animal shelter and
shall be used by the shelter to reimburse its costs of operation.
               (c)   Pays a board fee, which shall be set by the director of
the animal shelter and shall be used by the shelter to reimburse its costs of
operation.
               (d)   Presents a current certificate showing that said dog has
been vaccinated with antirabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian or
verification can be ascertained by animal shelter staff from the licensed
veterinarian office records. In the event a current rabies certificate is not
available, the redemptioner shall deposit a fee to cover the cost of a rabies
inoculation. The redemptioner shall next cause the animal to be vaccinated
against rabies. The animal shelter will transmit from the deposit an
appropriate sum to the veterinarian providing for the vaccination. The city
council shall, by resolution, set a uniform rabies inoculation fee.
      2.   Licensed dogs shall be held in impoundment for a maximum period of
seven (7) days from the date of initial impoundment during which time
reasonable efforts shall be made to notify the owner, keeper or possessor of
such impounded dog. All impounded dogs which are licensed shall be redeemed by
the owner, keeper or possessor thereof within seventy two (72) hours of
notification of impoundment. Any licensed dog not redeemed within said seventy
two (72) hour period or held for seven (7) days if notification is not able to
be made shall become the property of the animal shelter and the animal shelter
may offer for sale any such dog, with all monies generated from said sale going
to the animal shelter.
      3.   All impounded, unlicensed dogs not redeemed within forty eight (48)
hours from the time of impoundment shall become the property of the animal
shelter and the animal shelter may offer for sale any of said dogs and monies
generated from said sale shall be payable to the animal shelter.
      4.   The adoption fee for any dog so impounded shall be set by the
operator of the animal shelter and shall be used by the shelter to reimburse
the costs of the adoption program.
      5.   All dogs that are not sold or redeemed may be destroyed in a humane
manner. It shall be unlawful to destroy or allow to be destroyed any dog
impounded until the expiration of the time limits herein specified. The animal
shelter senior supervisory staff may destroy any dog prior to the expiration of
said time limits when:
               (a)   Ordered by the court.
               (b)   The animal shelter senior supervisory staff impounds or
receives any dog which is severely injured or infected by a contagious disease
other than rabies, and, in the animal shelter senior supervisory staff's sound
judgment, the recovery of said dog is doubtful.
      6.   All licenses, fees and charges are payable to the animal shelter.
(Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-9: KENNEL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Kennel Fees: Any person conducting, operating or maintaining a
"kennel" as herein defined shall pay to the city of Twin Falls, for the
privilege of conducting, operating or maintaining such kennel an annual license
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). All license fees are renewable each year
on March 1, and a license may be obtained for a fraction of a year, but the fee
shall remain the same for any fraction of a year.
   (B)   Qualifications For Issuance Of Kennel License:
      1.   Permit: A kennel must have a current valid kennel license, obtained
by application; approved through the code enforcement officer and subsequently
inspected by a Twin Falls animal control officer. Such kenneling permits are
required to be displayed and readily available for inspection by any authorized
person.
      2.   Residentially Zoned Areas: No person shall harbor or possess more
than four (4) dogs and four (4) cats within residential zones within the city
of Twin Falls. Kennels shall be permitted only in commercial or industrial
zones within the city of Twin Falls.
      3.   Records: A kennel record must be kept available for inspection. Such
record to show: the name, current address, and telephone number of the owner of
the dog/cat, the date entered the kennel, the reason for its being in the
kennel, i.e., for boarding, sale, breeding, grooming, etc., the description of
the dog/cat (age, breed, sex, color, etc.). On any dog/cat over four (4) months
of age, a current valid rabies certificate shall be maintained as a part of
this record, as long as the dog/cat is maintained in the kennel.
      4.   Purpose: The basic intent of these regulations is to see that all
animals receive proper care, that they are being treated kindly, properly fed,
and that their surroundings are being kept in a sanitary condition.
      5.   Animal Rooms; Dogs: Cage length and width shall exceed the animal's
length from the base of the tail to the tip of the nose by at least six inches
(6"). Cage height shall exceed the animal's height by at least four inches
(4"). Small puppies may be caged together using their combined length according
to the above formula. Cages shall be so constructed and be of nonporous
material and such that is to be maintained in a sanitary condition. Animals
shall be removed from and be provided with an exercise yard for their use for
such periods as determined by the size, age, and condition of the animal.
Diseased animals must be maintained apart from healthy animals in suitable and
separate quarters.
               (a)   General: Walls and floors shall be of material easily
cleaned and kept in a sanitary condition. The room shall be properly screened,
insect and vermin proof. It shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and
remove odors. Heating and cooling should be provided as required, with
sufficient light (preferably natural) to allow observation of animals, and
sanitation.
      6.   Animal Rooms; Cats: Similar to dogs except allowance for increased
respiratory disease and increased climbing agility. (Cages need roofs and
sneeze barriers.) Cat kennels should have a double door system to prevent
escape. Runs should not be built facing each other as cats become anxious when
in view of other cats. Cat cages should be of correct size, contain a cat bed,
toys, water and food bowls, and litter trays.
      7.   Outdoor Facilities: Outdoor facilities shall be provided with
windbreaks, roofing, and shelter adequate to protect the animals from the
weather. They shall be adequately drained and maintained in a sanitary manner.
Adequate and sanitary means of disposing of droppings shall be provided. Kennel
runs shall have a minimum free and clear area of ten (10) square feet per dog.
Indoor shelter, except where animals are caged, shall have a minimum of six (6)
square feet per dog. When the minimum area is provided it should be
supplemented with exercise yards for dogs which are maintained for extended
periods. For purposes of this subsection, an "exercise yard" is defined as an
area enclosed by a fence of at least six feet (6') in height wherein dogs are
allowed to run and exercise. Unless otherwise authorized, fencing shall be
constructed of commercial chainlink, carried on solid posts set in concrete.
Suggested minimums for fencing include 11-gauge wire, two inch (2") steel posts
set on no greater than ten foot (10') spans. Kennels shall not be left
unattended for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours. All animals shall
be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and fresh water as the
feeding habits of such animals require.
      8.   Sick Animals: Sick animals shall be separated from those appearing
healthy and normal. Sick animals shall be removed from display or sale and kept
in isolation quarters with adequate ventilation to keep from contaminating well
animals.
      9.   Sale Of Animals; Open Store Hours: If the operation of the kennel
includes the sale of animals, then there shall be an employee or owner on duty
at all times during the hours any store is open whose responsibility in that
shop or department shall be the care and welfare of the animals held for sale
or display.
      10.   Sale Of Animals; Closed Store Hours: If the operation of the kennel
includes the sale of animals, then an employee or owner shall come in to feed,
water and do necessary cleaning of animals on days the store or shop is closed.
      11.   Selling Sick Or Injured Animals Prohibited: No person, persons,
association, firm or corporation shall knowingly sell a sick or injured dog or
cat.
      12.   Misrepresentation Prohibited: No person, persons, association, firm
or corporation shall knowingly misrepresent a dog or cat to a customer in any
way.
   (C)   Revocation Of License:
      1.   The animal control officer may recommend to the code enforcement
officer the revocation of any kennel license upon evidence that any of the
conditions set forth in this chapter as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
license have been violated.
      2.   All areas of kennel runs, yards, food storage, and auxiliary
buildings shall be subject to inspection of authorized persons. The code
enforcement officer or designee, animal control officer or authorized city
official, fire department and the police may at reasonable hours, inspect or
cause to be inspected, any structure or premises and issue any such order as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section and to enforce
state statutes pertaining to neglected or abused animals. An emergency name,
address, and phone number must be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of
the property for use by authorized persons.
      3.   The code enforcement officer may revoke any kennel license issued
under this chapter for violation of any of the provisions of this code or
ordinance of the city or laws of the state of Idaho. Prior to revocation by the
code enforcement officer, the animal control officer or administrator shall
notify the applicant in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
personally served upon the licensee, or mailed postage prepaid to the licensee
at his/her last known address at least three (3) days prior to the date set for
the hearing.
   (D)   Appeal Of Code Enforcement Officer's Decision: If the applicant is
aggrieved by the decision of the code enforcement officer, the applicant may
appeal such decision to the city council within fifteen (15) days of notice of
the decision of the code enforcement officer. The applicant must, in writing,
appeal to the city council and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant
should not be denied a license. The city council shall set the time and place
for a hearing a reasonable period of time subsequent to applicant's written
notice of appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be personally served upon the
applicant, or mailed postage prepaid to the applicant at his/her last known
address, at least three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing. The order of
the city council shall be final. (Ord. 3085, 1-5-2015)
6-4-10: PROVISIONS REGULATING SUSPECTED OR ACTUAL RABID ANIMALS:
   (A)   Reports Required: Anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts of an
animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the fact
immediately to the animal control officer or police department. The animal
control officer or police department shall likewise be notified of any person
or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal.
It shall be the duty of the physician, upon treatment of any person bitten by
any animal to report immediately the name and address of such person to the
animal control officer or police department.
   (B)   Quarantine Of Animal: It is hereby made the duty of the owner of a dog
or other animal showing symptoms of rabies or which has bitten or otherwise
attacked any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to surrender the dog or
animal for confinement at the city animal shelter or a veterinarian hospital
for a period not less than ten (10) days. Any dog or animal showing the
symptoms of rabies or which has bitten or otherwise attacked any person causing
an abrasion of the skin shall be placed in confinement as provided in this
section. Any animal of a species subject to rabies shall in like circumstances
be confined as herein provided. If a dog or other animal is determined to be
free of rabies, the dog or animal shall be returned to the owner upon payment
of the regular impoundment fee and board as provided in this chapter. If such
fee is not paid, the dog or animal shall be subject to disposal as provided by
this chapter. At the discretion of the animal control officer, the quarantine
of a dog or animal may be upon the premises of the owner or the person in
charge of the same if securely confined, kept from contact with other animals
and submitted to a veterinarian for examination at the owner's expense to
determine if rabid. If an animal dies or has been killed, its head shall be
removed and immediately taken to the state health laboratory to be examined for
rabies.
No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the city animal control
officer to make an inspection or examination at any time during this period. No
dog or animal shall be removed from the place of quarantine without written
permission of the animal control officer.
   (C)   Contact With Rabid Animal: Any animal of a species subject to rabies
which has been bitten by a known rabid animal or has been in intimate contact
with a rabid animal shall be isolated in a suitable place approved by the
police department for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or destroyed.
(Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-11: CITY ANIMAL SHELTER:
   (A)   The city shall provide suitable premises and facilities to be used as
the city animal shelter. It shall be maintained in some convenient location and
shall be sanitary, heated, ventilated and lighted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false information or
statement concerning the owner, keeper or harborer of any animal or concerning
any animal brought into the city animal shelter or impounded therein. (Ord.
2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-12: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER, POLICE DEPARTMENT AND ANIMAL SHELTER
DIRECTOR:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and the police
department:
      1.   To carry out and enforce all the provisions of this chapter, and any
amendments hereto, any other ordinance later enacted relating to dogs and as
permitted by law.
      2.   To enforce the licensing and the control of all dogs in the city as
hereinbefore provided.
      3.   To file complaints in a court of competent jurisdiction against any
person failing to license any dog as hereinbefore provided, or who otherwise
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   To capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to
the provisions of this chapter and to remove such dogs in a humane manner to
the animal shelter.
      5.   To be responsible for posting notices concerning impounded dogs as
herein provided.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the animal shelter director to hold all dogs
delivered to him by the city animal control officer and to provide suitable
bedding, food and water for such dogs for the period impounded, to destroy all
dogs remaining in the city animal shelter unclaimed, not redeemed or adopted at
the expiration of the time limits set forth in section
6-4-8 of this chapter in a humane manner approved by the Idaho department of
veterinary medicine. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-13: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
In the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, any police officer and
the animal control officer or his assistants are authorized to enter the
premises of any person to take possession of licensed or unlicensed, fierce,
dangerous or vicious dogs when in fresh pursuit of such dog at the time the dog
goes onto private property. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
6-4-14: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to remove or cause to be removed the collar or metallic
tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner, keeper or harborer
thereof.
   (B)   For any person to harbor or keep within the city any lost or stray
dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it
shall be the duty of the finder to notify the city animal control officer or
police department who shall impound said dog and dispose of the same as herein
provided for. If there shall be attached to such a dog a license tag said
animal control officer or police department shall notify the person to whom
such license was issued at the address given in such license.
   (C)   For any owner, possessor, keeper or harborer of any female dog, when
in season, to fail to keep said dog penned or enclosed in such a manner as to
preclude other dogs from attacking such female dog or being attracted to such
female dog so as to create a public nuisance.
   (D)   For the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control
of any female dog to cause, permit or allow the same to stray or run, or in any
other manner to be at large while such female dog is in the copulating season.
If any female dog cannot be controlled by the owner, possessor or keeper of
such dog during the copulating season, the female dog may be declared a
nuisance and impounded by the animal control officer or police department.
   (E)   For any person to let to a bitch dog, any dog, or let to any female
any male animal, except within an enclosure so arranged as to obstruct such
animal completely from the view of all persons who have no proprietary interest
in the breeding of such animals. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
   (F)   For any person to operate or maintain a kennel without first obtaining
a license from the city clerk as herein provided. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006; amd.
Ord. 2931, 3-10-2008)
   (G)   For any dog to be found running at large. The person or persons who
own, control, possess, provide care to or who are in charge of any such dog
found running at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      1.   Procuring a license tag shall not authorize the running at large of
said dog.
      2.   A violation of the provisions of this subsection (G) is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the public health and safety, and in
addition to the criminal punishment provided for, said dog or dogs shall be
taken up and impounded as provided herein.
   (H)   For any person to own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud, continued
or frequent barking, howling or yelping shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood
or person. This subsection shall not apply to the animal shelter or veterinary
hospitals.
   (I)   For any person to own, have custody of or control of any dog or any
other animal which is vicious or dangerous. A person violating the provisions
of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to one
hundred twenty (120) days in jail and/or a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00)
fine. In addition to this penalty, a civil penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) may be assessed.
   (J)   For any person keeping or harboring a dog for which a license is
required by this chapter to fail or to refuse to exhibit the registration
certificate or license tag upon demand by the animal control officer or a
police officer.
   (K)   For any person to maltreat or torture any dog or to wilfully and
maliciously administer or cause to be administered poison of any sort
whatsoever to any animal, the property of another, with the intent to injure or
destroy such dog, or to wilfully or maliciously place any poison or poisoned
food where the same is accessible to any such animal.
   (L)   For any person to hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct an animal
control officer or any police officer while engaging and capturing, securing or
taking to the animal shelter any dog liable to be impounded, and for any person
to break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel or advise
the breaking open of any animal shelter or ambulance, animal control vehicle or
any vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs to the animal shelter,
or for any person lawfully discharging the duties herein specified. (Ord. 2882,
11-6-2006)
   (M)   For any person to leave or confine in any unattended motor vehicle
under conditions that may endanger the health or well-being of an animal due to
heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or under
such other circumstances as could reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability, or death to the animal.
City police officers, animal control officers and Code compliance officers may
use reasonable force under the above circumstances to enter a vehicle and
remove the animal after first making a reasonable attempt to contact the
animal's owner. The officer removing the animal shall use reasonable means to
contact the owner of the animal to arrange for its return home. Absent contact
with the owner, the animal will be taken to a veterinary clinic if emergency
care is needed and after a reasonable amount of time to an animal shelter.
(Ord. 2017-14, 5-22-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-014, 8-1-2022)
6-4-15: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise herein provided, any person violating the provisions of
this chapter, upon conviction, shall pay an infraction penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). The court may also order, upon conviction or plea of guilty
of the defendant for the crime of dog at large or vicious dog, the surrender of
the dog to the animal control officer or police officer immediately for
disposal, or the court may order that the violator post a bond or certificate
of insurance in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 2882,
11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2022-014, 8-1-2022)
6-4-16: DESTRUCTION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
In any case where a person has been charged or cited with the offense of owning
or having custody of a vicious or dangerous dog or other animal pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the City Attorney may file a motion requesting
destruction of the animal prior to a final adjudication of the criminal
charges. The animal shall remain confined at the animal shelter pending a final
decision on the motion. The court may order the destruction of the animal upon
making a finding that the animal is "vicious", as defined in this chapter, and
that it poses a danger to the public if allowed to be released from
confinement. (Ord. 2882, 11-6-2006)
CHAPTER 5
WRECKED, ABANDONED VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Vehicles, Equipment Prohibited On Property
6-5-3: Impounding Property
6-5-4: Towing And Storage Lien On Impounded Motor Vehicles
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words contained in this chapter are defined as follows:
HOUSEHOLD GOODS AND EQUIPMENT: All articles usually referred to as household
goods and articles used in housekeeping including, but not limited to, chairs,
tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves, washers, driers, furnaces,
appliances, grease, oil, paint and their containers.
MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or equipment,
any and all metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment, tools or property.
MISCELLANEOUS PROPERTY: All other property including, but not limited to, old
rope, iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rubber, rags, baggage, bottles, scrap,
toys, bicycles or boats.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power designed to travel on the ground by wheels, treads, runners or slides and
to transport persons or property or pull machinery including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies or wagons.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation or partnership. (1958 Code ch. VII art. 9)
6-5-2: VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED ON PROPERTY:
   (A)   No person shall place, allow, discard, maintain, park or store any
dismantled, abandoned, nonoperating, junked, damaged or destroyed household
goods or equipment, "motor vehicles", "machinery" or "miscellaneous property"
as herein defined upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
property within the city. (1958 Code ch. VII art. 9)
   (B)   No person, whether he be owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise
of any private property or premises shall place, allow, discard, maintain,
park, store or permit to be placed, allowed, discarded, maintained, parked or
stored upon said property or premises for a period of time exceeding forty
eight (48) hours any dismantled, abandoned, nonoperating, junked, damaged or
destroyed "household goods and equipment", "motor vehicles", "machinery" or
"miscellaneous property" as herein defined; provided, however, that the
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any property or premises where
said household goods and equipment, motor vehicles, machinery or miscellaneous
property is housed within an enclosed building thereon or to any property or
premises lawfully operated as a business where the same is a part of said
business enterprise and necessary to the operation of said business on said
property or premises if kept within an area completely enclosed by a screening
fence so that the property enclosed is not visible to the public or to
neighboring property owners. (Ord. 2465, 11-7-1994)
   (C)   The city, through its employees, may issue warning notices for any
violation of this section. If the violation is not corrected by the
reinspection date set on the warning notice, a civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) may be assessed for the first violation, two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the second violation, and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the
third and subsequent violations during the same calendar year. (Ord. 3047, 2-
25-2013)
   (D)   In addition to the civil penalties enumerated in Paragraph (C),
violation of this Section is a misdemeanor punishable by up to sixty (60) days
in jail and/or a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine. Economic costs incurred
by the city or another party expended to bring the property into compliance
with this section may be charge as restitution in the criminal case. (Ord.
2022-014, 8-1-2022)
6-5-3: IMPOUNDING PROPERTY:
Any property or goods upon public or private property within the city in
violation hereof may be impounded and removed by the police department and sold
at public or private auction by said police department as is provided in this
code for the disposal of abandoned property. The cost of removal of said
equipment shall be included in any fine imposed for violation of the provisions
of this chapter. (1958 Code ch. VII art. 9)
6-5-4: TOWING AND STORAGE LIEN ON IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES:
Costs and expenses of taking and keeping, including the towing and storage of
any motor vehicle which is impounded or taken into custody and control by the
police department under the authority of any law of the state or ordinance of
the city, shall be assessed by the police department against such motor vehicle
and shall constitute a lien in favor of the city and against such vehicle;
provided, however, that the amount for storage shall be four dollars ($4.00)
for the first day and one dollar ($1.00) for each day thereafter.
Any person claiming possession of any such motor vehicle shall pay to the city
all costs including storage assessed against such vehicle prior to the time of
receiving possession of the same. (1958 Code ch. VI art. 22)
CHAPTER 6
TRUANCY, RUNAWAYS, CURFEW AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Truancy
6-6-3: Runaways And Incorrigibles
6-6-4: Curfew
6-6-5: Parental Responsibility
6-6-6: Enforcement Procedures
6-6-7: Penalties And Treatment
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
EMANCIPATED: Any person either eighteen (18) years of age or older, or if under
the age of eighteen (18), any person who is married or has been married; or any
person who is in active military service; or any person who is both self-
supporting and neither resides with nor is subject to parental control.
EMERGENCY: Includes any unforeseen health, accident or crime related exigency
calling for immediate action.
INCORRIGIBLE: Any juvenile who is uncontrollable.
JUVENILE: Any person less than the age of eighteen (18) and who has not been
duly emancipated.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: a) as a natural or
adoptive parent; b) as a legal guardian; c) as a person who stands in loco
parentis; or d) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of
court.
REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting juveniles) totaling
four (4) or more persons in which any juvenile involved would not be using the
streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home.
RUNAWAY: A juvenile under the age of eighteen (18) who has physically removed
himself from the supervision and control of his parents with the intent to
remain beyond the control of his parents.
STREET: A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel. The term "street" includes
the legal right of way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic
lanes, sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds
found within the legal right of way of a street. The term "street" applies
irrespective of what it be called or formally named, whether alley, avenue,
court, road or otherwise. The term "street" shall also include shopping
centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, public buildings and similar areas
that are open to the public.
TIME OF NIGHT: Referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard of
time, whether Mountain Standard Time or Mountain Daylight Savings Time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the City, prima facie the time
then observed in the Emergency Dispatch Center.
TRUANCY: As defined in the school regulations.
YEARS OF AGE: Continues from one birthday, such as the sixteenth to (but not
including the day of) the next, such as the seventeenth birthday. (Ord. 2573,
2-23-1998)
6-6-2: TRUANCY:
   (A)   Goals: The City of Twin Falls area recognizes the importance of school
attendance. Children must be taught in order to live in an ordered society.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts: Any person between the ages of seven (7) years and
sixteen (16) years of age, living in the City who is deemed truant from school
or class, under the attendance regulations of the school, without the consent
of the student's parent/guardian or school officials is guilty of a status
offense.
   (C)   Responsibility For Instruction: The parent or guardian of any child
resident in this State who has attained the age of seven (7) years at the time
of the commencement of school in his/her district, but not the age of sixteen
(16) years, shall cause the child to be instructed in subjects commonly and
usually taught in the public schools for the State. Unless the child is
otherwise comparably instructed, the parent or guardian shall cause the child
to attend a public, private, or parochial school during a period in each year
equal to that in which the public schools are in session; they are to conform
to the attendance policies and regulations established by the Board of
Trustees, or other governing body, operating the school attended, or the
attendance requirements of the parents in home schools.
   (D)   Exceptions: Any exceptions to the requirement as codified by any
school district contained in Idaho Code, title 33, chapter 2 are hereby
recognized and given full force and effect. (Ord. 2573, 2-23-1998)
6-6-3: RUNAWAYS AND INCORRIGIBLES:
   (A)   Goals: The City Council of the City recognizes the importance of the
family as crucial to a child's development.
   (B)   Specifics: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18), living or found in the jurisdiction, to attempt to run away or
to run away from his parents, guardian or other legal custodian, or to be or
remain a person who has run away from his parents, guardian or other legal
custodian, or who commits or has committed any act or acts which render him
incorrigible or places him beyond the control of his parents, guardian or other
legal custodian. (Ord. 2573, 2-23-1998)
6-6-4: CURFEW:
   (A)   Age And Hour Restrictions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to be or remain in or upon the streets within the City, at night, during
the period ending at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and beginning at eleven fifty
nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on Friday and Saturday nights, and at eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. on all other nights.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16)
years to be or remain in or upon the streets within the City, at night, during
the period ending at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and beginning at ten fifty nine
o'clock (10:59) P.M. on Friday and Saturday nights, and at ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. on all other nights.
   (B)   Exceptions: In the following exceptional cases, a juvenile on a City
street during the nocturnal hours shall not, however, be considered in
violation of these curfew provisions:
      1.   When accompanied by a parent or guardian of said juvenile.
      2.   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of said
juvenile.
      3.   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly. The juvenile shall evidence the bona fides of such
exercise by first delivering to the person designated by the Chief of Police to
receive such information, at the Police Station, a written communication,
signed by the juvenile and countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of the
juvenile with their home address and telephone number, specifying when, where
and in what manner the juvenile will be on the streets at night (during hours
when this Section is otherwise applicable to said juvenile) in the exercise of
a First Amendment right specified in such communication.
      4.   When the juvenile is on the sidewalk of a place where said juvenile
resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor not communicating an
objection to law enforcement.
      5.   When returning home, by direct route from (and within 1 hour or
reasonable travel time after the termination of) any legitimate activity
consented to by the parent, school, or community sponsored activity or any
activity of a religious or other voluntary association such as night classes,
library study, dances, proms, church, socials, religious midnight masses or
other late night religious services, political activities including City
Council meetings, athletic events, concerts and cultural or contemporary music
events.
      6.   When the juvenile carries a certified letter of employment,
renewable each calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or
reissued not more than forty five (45) days previously, and briefly identifying
the juvenile, the addresses of his home and of his place of employment, and his
hours of employment.
      7.   When the juvenile is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle.
This contemplates normal travel. It is the intention of this provision to
clearly exempt bona fide interstate movements along major routes through Twin
Falls County and interstate travel beginning or ending in the City.
      8.   In the event of an emergency.
      9.   Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations such
as provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided, and are
hereby reemphasized. These exceptions will be considered by the Council as
warranted by future experience illuminated by the views of student government
associations, school personnel, citizens, associations, parents, officers, and
persons in authority concerned positively with juveniles as well as with
juvenile delinquency. (Ord. 2573, 2-23-1998)
6-6-5: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Parental Control: It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal
custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow
the juvenile to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter under
circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise, beyond the scope
of this Chapter. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the activities, conduct or
whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to
continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community
standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall,
therefore, be no defense that a parent was indifferent to the activities. (Ord.
2573, 2-23-1998)
6-6-6: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Contacting Parents: If a police officer reasonably believes that a
juvenile is in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, the officer
shall notify the juvenile that he/she is in violation of this Chapter, and
shall require the juvenile to provide his/her name, address and telephone
number and how to contact his or her parent or guardian.
   (B)   Determining Age Of Juvenile: In determining the age of the juvenile,
and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police
officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his/her best judgment
in determining age.
   (C)   Questioning Of Juvenile/Parents: The normal procedure shall then be to
immediately notify the parent or guardian. The juvenile and/or parents or
guardian shall then be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment,
under constitutional safeguards of relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility in the person designated there and then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making
available experienced personnel and access to information and records. If the
parent or guardian cannot be contacted, the juvenile shall be taken to the Safe
House or the Shelter Care Facility.
   (D)   Release Into Custody Of Parent Or Guardian: When a parent or guardian
immediately called, has come to take charge of the juvenile, then and the
appropriate information has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to
the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to take
charge of the juvenile, then the juvenile shall temporarily be entrusted to an
adult relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending the
availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
   (E)   Written Acknowledgement Of Status Offense: Upon release of the
juvenile to his/her parent, the juvenile and parent shall sign a written
acknowledgement of the City's curfew, runaway, incorrigible, and truancy
regulations which notice shall be presumptive evidence of knowledge of this
Chapter.
   (F)   Status Offenders: Status offenders shall not be placed in any jail
facility, but instead may be placed in juvenile shelter care facilities, except
in the case of runaways, when there is specific detention request from a
foreign jurisdiction or hold the child pending transportation agreements. (Ord.
2573, 2-23-1998)
6-6-7: PENALTIES AND TREATMENT:
   (A)   Status Offense: Any juvenile who violates any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a status offense punishable by the provision
according to State Code of the Juvenile Corrections Acts of 1994.
   (B)   Violations By Parents Or Guardian: Any parent or guardian who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
may be punished by jail time of up to six (6) months, and a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Said parent or guardian may also be required to
attend class instructions on parenting provided through the County Juvenile
Probation Office. The purpose of the instruction is to provide the parents with
more ideas and support in raising their children.
   (C)   Misdemeanor: Upon a first offense of any of the provisions of this
Chapter by the juvenile or parent, the prosecuting attorney may request a
preliminary inquiry from the Department of Juvenile Probation for screening and
assessment according to the Department of Juvenile Probation's designated and
authorized procedures.
   (D)   Repeat Offender: Any child who has been adjudicated for commission of
two (2) status offenses within twelve (12) months may be charged, petitioned
and adjudicated as a habitual status offender for the third status offense
committed within that twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 2573, 2-23-1998)
CHAPTER 7
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-7-1: Unclaimed Property; Sale of
6-7-2: Disposition of Proceeds
6-7-1: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; SALE OF:
   (A)   Right to Sell: Any personal property which is unclaimed and which
remains in the custody of the City for more than thirty (30) days may be sold
by the City at public auction as provided herein.
   (B)   Notice of Sale: Before holding such public sale, the City shall
publish notice of such sale in a daily paper for five (5) days and post a
notice of such sale in three (3) public places in the City for a like period.
Said notice shall contain a list of the property to be sold and briefly
describe each article or piece of personal property to be sold and give the
time and place of hold such sale, which time must be at least seven(7) days
after the date of the last daily publication of the said notice in the
newspaper.
   (C)   Sale: The City may ask for written bids, or sell the property at
auction to the highest bidder, and shall have the right to reject any and all
bids and sell all the property at any one sale to one individual; and it may do
that which it deems to be most advantageous and of the greatest financial
benefit to the City in selling the said personal property. (1958 Code, Ch. VI,
Art. 18)
6-7-2: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
Immediately after such sale, all proceeds of the sale shall be delivered to the
City Treasurer and shall be credited by such City Treasurer to the General Fund
of the City. (1958 Code, Ch. VI, Art. 18)
CHAPTER 8
ADVERTISEMENTS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Manner of Advertising Restricted
6-8-2: Unlawful Advertising
6-8-3: License for Certain Advertising (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-4: License Application (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-5: Exceptions from License Fee (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-6: Noise Devices
6-8-1: MANNER OF ADVERTISING RESTRICTED:
   (A)   Unlawful Posting: It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post,
paint, print or nail any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any
kind upon any tree, lamppost, telegraph pole, electric light pole, telephone
pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door, gate or fence, without the
consent of the owner, agent or occupant of the same.
   (B)   Illegal Distribution: The throwing or placing of any form of
advertising matter, such as dodgers, handbills, circulars, samples or like
matter, on any lawn, sidewalk, parking, street, alley or in or on any vehicle
is strictly prohibited. All such advertising matter must be placed inside the
screen or immediately under the door, or in the jamb of the door, or any
receptacle designed for the receiving of such advertising.
6-8-2: UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, bear, or support, or cause to be
carried, borne or supported on any public street, sidewalk, park or avenue any
banner, device, sign or emblem, solely for the purpose of advertising. (1958
Code, ch. X. art. 5)
6-8-3: LICENSE FOR CERTAIN ADVERTISING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-5: EXCEPTIONS FROM LICENSE FEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
6-8-6: NOISE DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any bellman or bellmen, or use or
cause to be used any bell, horn, bugle or other sounding instrument, or use or
employ any loud noise, or any device offensive to the senses, or any
performance of any kind, as a means of attracting people, or for any other
purpose whatsoever, without obtaining written permission from the City Council.
(Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
CHAPTER 9
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Regulating And Restricting Fireworks
6-9-2: Definitions
6-9-3: Permits
6-9-4: Application For Permits
6-9-5: Requirements For Application For Permits
6-9-6: Permit Conditions
6-9-7: Insurance
6-9-8: Authorized Dates Of Sale And Hours Of Use
6-9-9: Regulations For Fireworks Stands
6-9-10: Records
6-9-11: Short Term Storage
6-9-12: Duty To Comply
6-9-13: Revocation Of Permits
6-9-14: Confiscation Of Illegal Fireworks
6-9-15: Penalty
6-9-1: REGULATING AND RESTRICTING FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to import, export, offer for
sale, give away, sell, possess, keep, store or permit the keeping or storing of
any fireworks or to fire, discharge or display any fireworks except as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
   (A)   Skyrockets and bottle rockets, including all similar devices employing
any combustible or explosive material which rise in the air during discharge;
   (B)   Roman candles and similar devices, including cakes, repeaters and
multiple tube devices loaded in such a way as to propel pyrotechnic effects
into the air;
   (C)   Aerial display shells containing pyrotechnic effects or salutes
producing displays or reports in the sky generally fired or propelled from a
cylindrical or spherical shell casing;
   (D)   Snakes or other effects which are ignited or burn containing
bichloride of mercury;
   (E)   Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/
4") in diameter;
   (F)   Sky lanterns, fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning
material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath to
propel them.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
Fireworks include items classified as common or special fireworks by the United
States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulations of the United
States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN 0336
1.4G.
The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy guns,
toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy guns or toy cannons,
party poppers, or other devices which contain twenty five hundredths (0.25) of
a grain or less of explosive substance.
Fireworks shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines and their
components which are designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models.
Fireworks shall not include flares, noisemakers or signals designed and used
for the purpose of protecting the public.
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following "nonaerial" common
fireworks:
   (A)   Any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains, sparklers, smoke
devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and not to travel
outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit sparks or other burning
material which land outside a twenty foot (20') diameter circle or above a
height of twenty feet (20'). Nonaerial common fireworks do not include
firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products;
   (B)   Cylindrical fountains with inside tube diameter not exceeding three-
fourths inch (3/4");
   (C)   Sparklers and "dipped sticks" not more than ten inches (10") in length
or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter with pyrotechnic composition not
exceeding four grams (4 g) each. Sparklers or "dipped sticks" described in this
section shall be burned individually and shall not be conjoined, banded,
attached or affixed to additional sparklers or "dipped sticks" while ignited;
   (D)   Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury;
   (E)   Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the
ground during discharge containing no picric or gallic acid. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-
2012)
6-9-3: PERMITS:
   (A)   Dangerous Fireworks Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person in the
city to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store or permit
the keeping or storing of any dangerous fireworks for any use or purpose,
except that a person holding a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this chapter may use dangerous fireworks for a
safely supervised and conducted public display of fireworks. Said fireworks may
be stored for a period not exceeding ten (10) days immediately preceding the
date of said public display, provided the fireworks are to be used exclusively
for the public display.
   (B)   Safe And Sane Fireworks Permit: No person, without having a valid safe
and sane fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth
in this chapter, shall import, export, sell, or offer for sale any fireworks. A
short term storage facility as defined by Idaho Code 39-2608(2) may be used for
the storage of safe and sane fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days prior
to, and fifteen (15) days after, any authorized dates of sale provided within
this chapter. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
   (A)   Safe And Sane Fireworks Application: Any reputable person in
reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or
charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of safe and sane fireworks
within the city shall first make written application to the Twin Falls fire
department for a safe and sane fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to
the Twin Falls fire department a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the
time the application is filed. The applicant shall pay to the Twin Falls fire
department a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for inspection of temporary
fireworks stands.
   (B)   Dangerous Fireworks Application: Any reputable person in reasonable
pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or charitable
purpose desiring to make a public display of dangerous fireworks shall first
make written application to the Twin Falls fire department for a dangerous
fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the Twin Falls fire department a
fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) at the time the application is
filed. No permit fee shall be refunded. The applicant shall also reimburse the
city for all reasonable expenses incurred in investigating to determine whether
the permit should be granted. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks
permit shall file his application with the Twin Falls fire department. Each
application shall show the following:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant.
   (B)   The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for
which it was organized.
   (C)   The names and addresses of the officers, trustees and/or directors, if
any, of the applicant.
   (D)   The location where the applicant requests permission to sell safe and
sane fireworks or display dangerous fireworks.
   (E)   When and where the applicant was organized and established, or, if a
natural person, the applicant's age.
   (F)   The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting place
or places.
   (G)   If applicant is storing safe and sane or dangerous fireworks,
applicant must apply to the planning and zoning administrator, and the planning
and zoning administrator must forward written approval and the special use
permit (if required) to the fire department, and building department,
indicating that the permit request is in compliance with all zoning
requirements for an H-1 occupancy pursuant to title 10 of this code. The
written approval and special use permit (if required) must be submitted to the
fire department, and building department prior to approval of the fireworks
permit.
   (H)   Two (2) complete plot plans, indicating where the building is located
in relationship to property lines and any other buildings, and two (2) complete
floor plans of the building, indicating all proposed uses, must be submitted to
the Twin Falls fire department. The drawings shall be to scale.
   (I)   The maximum amount of safe and sane fireworks to be stored shall be
indicated on the application. Such amount shall be specified in pounds.
   (J)   The applicant's state sales tax permit number.
   (K)   If the applicant is an entity other than sole proprietorship, the name
and general description of the business activities of each parent or subsidiary
company, business or entity, and a general description of the ownership
organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any.
   (L)   Such other information as the Twin Falls fire department may require
on a standard form submitted to all applicants and which is reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-
2012)
6-9-6: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Investigation And Recommendation For Permits: The Twin Falls fire
department may cause an investigation to be made of each application and
applicant.
   (B)   Grant Or Denial Of Permits: The Twin Falls fire department shall have
the power in its discretion to grant or deny any application, subject to such
reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe so long as the denial of
the application or any conditions imposed on the granting of the application
are reasonably necessary for protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (C)   Terms Of Permits: A safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous
fireworks permit, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be valid only within
the calendar year in which issued. A permit shall be valid only for the
specific premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to
reasonable conditions necessary for protection of the public health, safety and
welfare, an applicant may be granted permits for more than one premises or
location within the city. No permit shall be transferable or assignable.
   (D)   Time Of Application For Safe And Sane Fireworks Permit: Each
application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks at retail shall be
filed with the Twin Falls fire department, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior
to a date on which the retail sale of safe and sane fireworks is authorized
under this chapter.
   (E)   Appeal Of The Twin Falls Fire Department Decision: If the applicant is
aggrieved by the decision of the Twin Falls fire department, the applicant may
appeal such decision to the Twin Falls fire department administration, within
seven (7) days of notice of the decision of the Twin Falls fire department. The
applicant must, in writing, appeal to the Twin Falls fire department
administration, and set forth the reasons therefor why the applicant should not
be denied a license. The Twin Falls fire department administration shall set
the time and place for a hearing a reasonable period of time subsequent to
applicant's written notice of appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be
personally served upon the applicant, or mailed postage prepaid to the
applicant at his/her last known address, at least three (3) days prior to the
date of the hearing. The order of the Twin Falls fire department administration
shall be final.
   (F)   Miscellaneous Permit Conditions For The Storage Of Safe And Sane And
Dangerous Fireworks:
      1.   Minimum occupancy separation shall be required pursuant to the
international building code.
      2.   Exits shall comply with the international building code.
      3.   Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the building as
required by the international fire code.
      4.   Automatic fire extinguisher systems shall be in accordance with the
international building code.
      5.   License or permit holders shall maintain records of all transactions
involving safe and sane fireworks regarding the sale and acquisition of such
fireworks.
      6.   Conspicuous signs shall be placed and posted at intervals not less
than fifty feet (50') inside and outside of the building with the language:
   Warning - No Smoking
      7.   All provisions as currently adopted by the city pursuant to the
international building code and international fire code shall be required.
(Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-7: INSURANCE:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or for a dangerous
fireworks permit shall have filed with the clerk, prior to the issuance and
validity of any permit, a policy, or certified copy thereof, of public
liability insurance, including both accident and occurrence coverage. The
insurance coverage limits for public liability coverage shall be at least five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person per occurrence bodily injury,
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence aggregate bodily
injury and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence aggregate
property insurance. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and substance
acceptable to the city and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the
policy of the city, all officials, elected and appointed, of the city in
performance of official functions regarding all operations under or pertaining
to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and all vendors of
the fireworks covered by the permit to be issued to the applicant. Said policy
of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be canceled without at least
thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city from the underwriting
insurance company. Cancellation of a policy is a basis for revocation of the
permit. A copy of said policy shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2223, 12-7-1987)
6-9-8: AUTHORIZED DATES OF SALE AND HOURS OF USE:
Safe and sane, "nonaerial common fireworks" may be sold at retail beginning at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23, and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight July 5 and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 26
and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1. The authority having
jurisdiction may at its discretion extend each period of sales by not more than
five (5) days. Safe and sane, "nonaerial common fireworks" shall only be used
or discharged within the city of Twin Falls between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23 through July 5 and
December 26 through January 1.
Exception: In addition to the hours of use specified in this chapter, safe and
sane, "nonaerial common fireworks" may be used or discharged within the city of
Twin Falls between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. on January 1. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-9: REGULATIONS FOR FIREWORKS STANDS:
Temporary fireworks stands from which safe and sane fireworks are to be sold
shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only
from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building
or structure is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The stand in which the fireworks will be stored or sold shall not be
located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building or within one
hundred feet (100') of any gasoline station or flammable liquid dispensing
device or installation.
   (C)   All such stands shall meet the requirements of the building code 1  of
the city and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet
the requirements of the electrical code of the city 2 .
   (D)   The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at
both ends of the structures and one additional door for each twenty five feet
(25') of rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open
outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all
supplies and materials at all times.
   (E)   Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) fire
extinguishers with a 2A minimum rating, in good working order and easily
accessible for use in case of fire, which shall be kept in immediate proximity
to the location where the fireworks are retailed.
   (F)   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age
or older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away
from any kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location
which is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public in capacities
other than as legal customers.
   (G)   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
of any stand when it is not open for business.
   (H)   "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and
outside the stand. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within
twenty five feet (25') of the stand.
   (I)   No temporary stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The
premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and
debris not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on July 27.
   (J)   No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25')
of any fireworks stand.
   (K)   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any
fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist.
   (L)   Fireworks shall not be left in the stand when it is not open for
business unless the stand is locked or secured. If fireworks are not stored in
the stand they shall be stored in compliance with section 39-2608, Idaho Code.
   (M)   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
2 2. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
6-9-10: RECORDS:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said
premises are open, and at his principal place of business for a year thereafter
copies of all invoices, receipts and orders evidencing the source from which he
acquired the fireworks which he handled. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
6-9-11: SHORT TERM STORAGE:
A short term storage facility may be used for the storage of safe and sane,
"nonaerial common fireworks" for a period of sixty (60) days prior to, and
fifteen (15) days after, any authorized retail sales date. The Twin Falls fire
department shall be notified of the address or location of all short term
storage facilities when fireworks will not be stored in a temporary fireworks
stand. If the short term storage facility is not within the boundaries of the
jurisdiction having issued the retail sales permit the permittee shall notify
the authority having jurisdiction where the storage is to take place.
Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it is locked or
otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand, truck, trailer, or other
vehicle. A truck, trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage must
remain at least twenty five feet (25') from the stand during any time the stand
is open for business, but may abut the stand when it is closed. A truck,
trailer or vehicle used for short term storage must be at least twenty five
feet (25') from any other inhabited building. Short term storage may occur in a
locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container
which is detached from an inhabited building and contains no open flames,
including heating and lighting sources. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-12: DUTY TO COMPLY:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with
all the provisions of the Idaho state fireworks act of 1997 1  and this
chapter. The conviction of violation of the aforesaid Idaho state fireworks act
or any of the provisions of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its
agents, employees or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to
deny any subsequent application for a permit. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. IC 39-2602 et seq.
6-9-13: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
Any permit issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation by the city council
for violation by the holder, his agents or employees, of any of the provisions
contained herein or of any law of the state of Idaho or United States
pertaining to fireworks, provided that at least one day notice of hearing upon
said revocation shall be given to said holder by personal service or by leaving
a copy of notice at the place of business of the holder. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-
2012)
6-9-14: CONFISCATION OF ILLEGAL FIREWORKS:
The chief of police, or his agents, or employees, may confiscate any fireworks
that are imported, exported, sold, offered for sale, given away, possessed,
stored, displayed, or discharged in a manner violating any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
6-9-15: PENALTY:
The possession or discharge of dangerous fireworks without a dangerous
fireworks permit shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
The use or discharge of safe and sane fireworks outside the designated dates of
sale and hours of use specified within this chapter shall be an infraction
punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
All other violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and imprisonment for a period of
time not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 3042, 12-17-2012)
CHAPTER 10
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-10-1: Purpose
6-10-2: Definitions
6-10-3: Silencing Alarm Systems
6-10-4: Alarm Systems Maintenance
6-10-5: Reimbursement for False Alarm
6-10-6: Maintaining a Public Nuisance Alarm
6-10-7: Compliance
6-10-8: Prohibited Alarm Systems
6-10-9: Violations
6-10-10: Penalties
6-10-11: Enforcement
6-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce the number of false alarms thereby
enhancing response time on other critical calls for service. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-
94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and
derivations thereof, shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely
directory.
ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the
installation, maintenance, repair, service, response to or summoning others to
respond to an alarm system. When the alarm system is the sole responsibility of
the user and no contractual agreements with another company exist for the
maintenance of alarm equipment, the user shall be considered the alarm agent
for purposes of this Chapter.
ALARM OFFICER: The Chief of Police of the City of Twin Falls or his designee.
ALARM SUBSCRIBER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise
obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or maintenance of an
alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or other device which is designed or
used for the detection of a trespass, burglary or robbery within a building,
structure or facility, or for alerting others to a hazard or to the commission
of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or which emits a
sound or transmits a signal or message when activated and which is designed to
elicit a response from the Police Department. Alarm systems include, but are
not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor
alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms are audible,
visible or perceptible outside the protected building, structure or facility
are not included within this definition. An alarm system includes all the
necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of a trespass,
burglary, robbery or other hazard in a single building, structure or facility,
or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act within a building,
structure or facility.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or
presence on certain premises when it is activated.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that
the alarm system is designed to detect.
EMERGENCY: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and
which results in a response of police personnel. An emergency is a situation or
condition which involves the imminent potential for serious injury, death,
violent crime, serious public hazard or a felony crime in progress.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal or communication which is
activated from an alarm system which is responded to by personnel of the Police
Department for which no emergency situation exists or existed as determined by
the responding police personnel. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by
natural occurrences such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other
extraordinary circumstances determined by the alarm officer to be clearly
beyond the control of the alarm subscriber.
PENALTY STATUS: That status achieved by more than two (2) false alarms within
the calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or organization
of any kind, or any governmental entity or political subdivision thereof.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Twin Falls City Police Department.
PROPRIETOR ALARM: An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm agent. (Ord. 2463,
11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-3: SILENCING ALARM SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Upon notification by the alarm officer or his designee that an alarm
system is activated, the alarm subscriber, or the representative or alarm agent
of the alarm subscriber, shall immediately proceed to silence the alarm. The
silencing shall be completed within fifteen (15) minutes after notification
when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure or within thirty
(30) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or industrial
structure.
   (B)   An alarm system may be equipped with an automatic shut-off device
which shall silence the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes after activation when
the alarm system is protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30)
minutes of activation when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or
industrial structure. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-4: ALARM SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm system in good working
order, and provide the necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an alarm subscriber to allow, permit or use
an alarm system which is not in good working order, or has fallen into
disrepair, or has malfunctioned. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-5: REIMBURSEMENT FOR FALSE ALARM:
   (A)   An alarm subscriber shall reimburse the City for the cost of City
services, including, but not limited to, responding police personnel and
equipment utilized in responding to a false alarm of the alarm subscriber's
alarm system.
   (B)   Any person who wilfully maintains, operates, uses or attempts to use,
an alarm system which signals a false alarm shall reimburse the City for the
cost of City services as provided.
   (C)   Any person who wilfully or negligently causes a false alarm shall
reimburse the City for the cost of City services as provided. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-
94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-6: MAINTAINING A PUBLIC NUISANCE ALARM:
   (A)   No person, whether or not an alarm subscriber, shall maintain,
operate, use or attempt to use, an alarm system which generates more than two
(2) false alarms in a calendar year.
   (B)   Any alarm system maintained, operated, used or attempted to be used,
in violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance. In addition to
reimbursement or any other remedy available to the City, the City may impose a
penalty fee for each and every false alarm after the two (2) within the
calendar year as determined by following the schedule below:
 
3rd false alarm within the calendar year $ 25.00
4th false alarm within the calendar year 50.00
5th false alarm within the calendar year 75.00
6 and more within the calendar year 100.00
 
   (C)   Where the alarm system is deemed a public nuisance as provided in this
Chapter, the alarm officer shall provide the alarm subscriber written notice
informing the alarm subscriber of the penalty status and the finding of public
nuisance.
   (D)   Review:
      1.   The alarm subscriber may request the alarm officer to review and
reconsider the determination of public nuisance by submitting a written request
to the alarm officer within ten (10) days upon receipt of the notice of penalty
status and nuisance. Failure to submit a written request in compliance with
this Section is deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
      2.   The alarm officer shall review the determination and send the alarm
subscriber his findings as to whether the alarm system is a public nuisance in
writing to the alarm subscriber by certified mailing within fifteen (15) days.
   (E)   Appeal: The alarm subscriber may request a hearing before the City
Council after filing a notice for hearing in writing to the City Clerk no later
than ten (10) days upon receipt of the alarm officer's finding of public
nuisance. Any finding by the City Council is appealable to the District Court
of the Fifth Judicial District provided filing and fees are submitted in
accordance to Idaho law. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-7: COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   An alarm subscriber who has notice of his/her alarm system being
deemed a public nuisance shall be assessed a penalty fee in accordance to these
provisions.
   (B)   An alarm subscriber who has notice of the assessed penalty or for any
amount due in reimbursement, shall remit within fifteen (15) days the amounts
due to the City. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-8: PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS:
No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device or any device
programmed to initiate and deliver a message or signal to any telephone number
belonging to the City. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-9: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any alarm system as herein
defined in this Chapter for any purpose other than reporting such trespasses,
burglaries, robberies or other crimes involving potential serious bodily injury
or death.
   (B)   No person shall operate or use a public safety alarm system for any
purpose other than that for which it is installed, or for any purpose other
than detecting and reporting a trespass, burglary, robbery or other permitted
purpose. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-10: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined or
imprisoned in the County jail in an amount not exceeding that permitted by law.
   (B)   Each and every false alarm over two (2) within the calendar year shall
be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
6-10-11: ENFORCEMENT:
The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of
this Chapter shall not release such person from paying any business taxes,
charges, fees, license fees or reimbursement for false alarms due and unpaid at
the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any fee or reimbursement for
false alarms prevent the criminal prosecution for violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one
or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided
by law. (Ord. 2463, 11-7-94, eff. 1-1-95)
CHAPTER 11
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
6-11-1: Defined
6-11-2: Judgment; Bond
6-11-3: Bond Forfeiture
6-11-4: Evidence
6-11-1: DEFINED:
Any person who knowingly maintains a place to which persons habitually go for
the purpose of committing acts in violation of any State law or of this Code
maintains a "nuisance". (Ord. 2624, 7-26-1999)
6-11-2: JUDGMENT; BOND:
   (A)   A suit to enjoin and abate a nuisance may be brought by the City
Attorney in the name of the City.
   (B)   If judgment is in favor the City, the court may grant an injunction
ordering the defendant to abate the nuisance and to enjoin the defendant from
maintaining or permitting the nuisance. The judgment may order that the place
where the nuisance exists be closed for one year after the date of judgment
unless the defendant or the real property owner, lessee, or tenant of the
property posts bond.
   (C)   The bond must be payable to the City in the penal sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) by sureties authorized to do business in Idaho,
conditioned upon the property not being used or permitted to be used for the
violation of any State law or of this Code. (Ord. 2624, 7-26-1999)
6-11-3: BOND FORFEITURE:
If a condition of a bond filed or an injunctive order entered under this Code
is violated, the City may apply to the court for an order forfeiting the bond
and closing the premises for one year from the date of the bond forfeiture.
(Ord. 2624, 7-26-1999)
6-11-4: EVIDENCE:
   (A)   Proof that law violations are frequently committed at the place
involved is prima facie evidence that the proprietor or owner knowingly
permitted the act or acts.
   (B)   Evidence that persons have been convicted of law violations at the
place involved is admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant
that the act occurred. Copies of judgments of convictions are admissible to
show that the offenses for which a person was convicted were committed at the
place involved.
   (C)   Evidence of the general reputation of the place involved is admissible
to show the existence of the nuisance. (Ord. 2624, 7-26-1999)
CHAPTER 12
GAS DRIVE OFFS
SECTION:
6-12-1: Jurisdiction
6-12-2: Payment In Advance
6-12-3: Penalty
6-12-1: JURISDICTION:
The regulations set forth herein shall apply to all business establishments
with self-service gasoline and/or diesel fuel pumps located thereon, engaged in
the selling of gasoline and/or diesel fuel, and located in the corporate limits
of the city. (Ord. 2810, 11-8-2004)
6-12-2: PAYMENT IN ADVANCE:
   (A)   All business establishments with gasoline and/or diesel fuel pumps
located thereon must require full payment in advance for any quantity of self-
service gasoline or diesel fuel sold at any time.
   (B)   This requires the business establishment and its representatives to
receive payment in full prior to activating the self-service gasoline or diesel
fuel pumping device.
   (C)   Payment includes purchase by any legal means: cash, credit card, debit
card, checks or otherwise.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to transactions involving established
charge account customers. (Ord. 2810, 11-8-2004)
6-12-3: PENALTY:
Any person or business establishment who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
each offense. (Ord. 2810, 11-8-2004)
CHAPTER 13
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
6-13-1: Prohibited
6-13-2: Removal Required
6-13-3: Notice To Remove
6-13-4: City Abatement Option
6-13-5: Penalty
6-13-1: PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be unlawful for any person to
place or put, by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, or mark
of any type commonly known as graffiti on any public or private property
without the permission of the owner of the premises on which the surface is
located, or upon any natural surfaces such as rocks or trees, or any other
surface whatsoever. (Ord. 2016-8, 6-27-2016)
6-13-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
Any person found to be in violation of section
6-13-1 of this chapter may be required to remove or cause to be removed the
graffiti from the surface on which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not
possible to determine the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it
may be the duty of the owner or person in control of the premises on which the
graffiti has been applied to promptly remove the graffiti after notice as
hereinafter set forth.
The chief of police or his designated representative shall attempt to enlist
partner agencies and organizations to aid in the removal of graffiti from
private property, with the consent of the private property owner. (Ord. 2016-8,
6-27-2016)
6-13-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
   (A)   Whenever the chief of police or his designated representative
discovers graffiti on any public or private property or any surfaces visible to
persons utilizing public rights of way within the city, he may, whenever
seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, cause a notice
to be issued to the owner or person in control of the premises to abate the
nuisance and remove the graffiti or cover it with paint or other suitable
substance.
   (B)   Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected
premises, as shown on the last property tax assessment rolls of Twin Falls
County, Idaho, with a copy to the occupant of the premises. If there is no
known address for the owner, the notice shall be served at the property
address. Service of the notice may be accomplished through personal service on
the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property or by
certified mail.
   (C)   Notice shall be in writing and shall clearly state that the owner or
person in charge or control of the property is required by this chapter to
remove from public view or paint over the graffiti within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the notice; that failure to so abate will cause the city to abate
the nuisance and may assess the costs to the owner; that failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of receipt of billing shall result in an
assessment against the property, collectible with the property taxes; that the
owner or person served may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice,
deliver in writing to the chief of police his objections to the removal
requirement and request a hearing before the city council. (Ord. 2016-8, 6-27-
2016)
6-13-4: CITY ABATEMENT OPTION:
Nuisances which remain unabated after notice may, at the option of the city, be
removed, abated or destroyed by the city or its agents, after the following
steps have been taken:
   (A)   If after fifteen (15) calendar days from the date a written notice is
personally delivered to the property owner, or mailed to the property owner's
address as shown in current official Twin Falls County assessor records, no
abatement of the nuisance has occurred, the designated enforcement officer
shall provide a second ten (10) day notice to be delivered to the property
owner by certified mail or personal service, which shall indicate the
following:
      1.   That if the property owner fails to abate the nuisance, the city
shall take steps to abate the same.
      2.   That the property owner may contract with the city to abate the
nuisance and pay costs of the same.
      3.   That if the city abates the nuisance, all costs and expenses of
abatement may be billed and assessed against the property owner, and if unpaid,
shall become collectable as a special assessment with property taxes.
      4.   That the property owner has a right to appear before the city
council to show cause as to why he or she should not be forced to abate or pay
for abatement of the nuisance; furthermore, that if the property owner desires
such a hearing, a request for hearing, in writing, shall be given to the
designated enforcement officer prior to expiration of the ten (10) day notice,
and that abatement by the city will proceed if the property owner has not
exercised this option to request a hearing.
      5.   If said certified notice is returned as undeliverable, or is
unclaimed by the property owner, nothing shall preclude the city from
exercising its abatement option as specified herein.
   (B)   When the ten (10) day notice has expired without a request for
hearing, the mayor's designated enforcement officer is authorized to remove,
abate or destroy the nuisance. The designated enforcement officer is authorized
to utilize city personnel to abate the nuisance or to contact the mayor or
chief of police in regard to contracting for an outside party to abate the
nuisance.
   (C)   If the city abates any nuisance under the provisions of this chapter,
a statement of charges billed to the property owner may be mailed or personally
delivered to the property owner.
   (D)   If payment is not received from the property owner within thirty (30)
days, the amount billed shall, in accordance with state law, be assessed as a
special assessment collectable against the subject property as other state,
county and municipal taxes.
   (E)   If the property owner requests a hearing to show cause before the city
council, the hearing shall, if feasible, be placed on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled city council meeting. The decision of the city council
shall be final. A ten (10) day period shall be given the property owner after
the council decision so that the property owner shall have additional
opportunity to abate the nuisance or to pursue any legal remedies or defenses
at the district court level. (Ord. 2016-8, 6-27-2016)
6-13-5: PENALTY:
A violation of section
6-13-1 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. A violation of any other provision of this chapter shall be
an infraction, punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus
court costs. (Ord. 2016-8, 6-27-2016)
CHAPTER 14
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY
SECTION:
6-14-1: Purpose
6-14-2: Unlawful Assembly In Public Spaces
6-14-3: Failure To Disburse
6-14-4: Enforcement And Penalties
6-14-5: Exemptions
6-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public safety, ensure the free flow
of commerce, and protect the rights of business owners and the public from
unlawful assemblies that create hazardous or physically offensive conditions.
(Ord. O-2025-007, 4-21-2025)
6-14-2: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY IN PUBLIC SPACES:
   (A)   Unlawful Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
assemble in a public space or a space open to the public without lawful and
legitimate business with the property owner, business, or occupant adjacent to
the immediate space, if such assembly:
      1.   Creates or establishes a hazardous or physically offensive
condition, to include;
      2.   Causes significant disruption to normal operations of a property
owner, occupant, or resident;
      3.   Results in substantial interference with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic;
      4.   Results in the creation of excessive noise through amplified music,
chanting, yelling, clatter, or vehicle use such as revving engines, burnouts,
and racing;
      5.   Result in the creation and discard of excess garbage, waste, debris,
trash, and/or litter;
      6.   Poses a substantial risk of injury, alarm, or serious disruptions to
any person or property;
      7.   Blocks sidewalks with lawn chairs, tables, or other obstacles
without a business license or special events permit allowing for the general
use of the property by the public.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter constitutes an infraction and carries a
$300.00 fine.
   (C)   Exemptions: Any special event, festival, sale, or other public
activity organized and operated under a special event permit is exempt from
this section. (Ord. O-2025-007, 4-21-2025)
6-14-3: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
   (A)   Unlawful Conduct: When two (2) or more people congregate in a public
place and the acts of such persons create a substantial risk of injury, alarm,
or serious inconvenience to any person or property, or hinder or obstruct the
free passage of any person or vehicle upon a public right-of-way, a peace
officer or other public official engaged in executing and enforcing the law may
order the participants and others in the immediate vicinity to disperse.
   (B)   Penalty: A person who refuses a lawful order to disperse or knowingly
and intentionally fails to obey such an order is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to penalties including fines and/or imprisonment as determined
by local statutes. (Ord. O-2025-007, 4-21-2025)
6-14-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Law enforcement officers and other public officials are authorized to
enforce this chapter to ensure public order and compliance.
   (B)   Violators of this chapter may be subject to fines, citations, or other
penalties as prescribed by local law. (Ord. O-2025-007, 4-21-2025)
6-14-5: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to lawful demonstrations, protests, rallies or
gatherings protected under the First Amendment, provided such activities do not
create hazardous or physically offensive conditions as outlined in Section 2.
Exemptions from this chapter include special events such as parades, festivals,
sidewalk sales, etc., that complete and receive appropriate permits through the
City of Twin Falls Special Events Permit process. No such order shall apply to
a news reporter or other person observing or recording the events on behalf of
the public press or other news media, unless he/she is physically obstructing
lawful efforts by such officer to disperse the group. (Ord. O-2025-007, 4-21-
2025)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Nuisances Declared
7-1-2: Owner Responsible For Sanitary Conditions
7-1-3: Animal Nuisances
7-1-4: Dairy Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
7-1-5: Offensive Sewage
7-1-6: Cesspools
7-1-7: Irrigation Ditches; Obstruction, Destruction
7-1-8: Obstructing Gutters
7-1-9: Accumulation Of Materials Prohibited
7-1-10: Offensive Liquids
7-1-11: Deposit Of Putrid Matter
7-1-12: Waste Products; Deposit, Removal
7-1-13: Offensive Use Of Public Ways
7-1-14: Offensive Garbage, Waste Receptacles
7-1-15: Peddling Prohibited (Green River Ordinance) (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-
1984)
7-1-16: Depositing Debris
7-1-17: Responsibility For Nuisances
7-1-18: Abatement, Notice Of
7-1-19: Duty Of Health Officer
7-1-20: Control Of Particulate Matter (Dust)
7-1-21: Control Of Smoke
7-1-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Every act or thing done or made, permitted, allowed or continued in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a nuisance. (1958 Code, ch.
X, art. 4, sec. 13)
7-1-2: OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SANITARY CONDITIONS:
Whenever any owner or agent of the owner of any building shall rent, lease or
hire out to be occupied any building or part or parts thereof as a home or
residence for more than one family living independently of one another, or a
building to different persons for stores and offices in said building, giving
to each the common right to halls, yards, water closets or privies, or some of
them, then such owner or agent shall be liable for the conditions of said
halls, yards, water closets, or privies, and the said owner or agent may be
made defendant in a prosecution for the violation of the provisions hereof.
(1958 Code, ch. X, art. 3, sec. 4)
7-1-3: ANIMAL NUISANCES:
   (A)   Disposition Of Dead Animals: Every person being the owner of or having
in his possession or under his control or charge any horse or other animal
which shall in any manner come to his death, shall immediately remove or have
removed the body or carcass of such horse or other animal, to the place
provided for the disposition of such carcasses.
   (B)   Bins And Vaults For Animal Refuse: Every person owning, leasing or
occupying any stall, stable or compartment where any horse or any cattle or
mule shall be kept, and every owner of any horse, mule or head of cattle shall
contain a durably made receptacle, bin, vault or cellar which must be so
constructed as to preserve the contents at all times dry, free from rain and
other moisture, and of such nature and character as to preclude the
contamination of the atmosphere or the passage or breeding of flies; in which
receptacles shall be placed all manure or refuse from such horse, mule or
cattle.
   (C)   Offensive Animal Enclosures: It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent
or occupant of any livery stable, cattle yard, or shed, barn, slaughterhouse or
rendering establishment or structure of any kind, or for any person having
charge of any stable, stall, shed, apartment or yard in which any animal shall
be kept or in any place in which manure or liquid discharge of any animals
shall accumulate or collect, to permit the same to be kept in an unclean or
unsanitary condition or to become nauseous, foul or offensive.
   (D)   Offensive Animals And Fowl 1 : No person owning, occupying or having
charge of any building, stable or other premises shall keep or allow to be kept
thereon any fowl, dog or other animal which shall by barking or other noise, or
by offensive kennel or other place of keeping, disturb the quiet or repose or
the purity of the air in the living rooms of those thereon or in the vicinity
thereof, to the detriment of the life, health or comfort of any person.
   (E)   Burning Animal Refuse: It is hereby declared a nuisance to burn any
refuse, manure or animal or poultry droppings and feathers within the City
limits. (Ord. 2197, 3-16-87)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-4-14(H) of this code.
7-1-4: DAIRY PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
7-1-5: OFFENSIVE SEWAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cellar, vault, private drain,
pool, privy, sewer or grounds upon any premises belonging to or occupied by him
to become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health. (1958
Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 1)
7-1-6: CESSPOOLS:
No person shall throw into or deposit in any closet, vault, sink, privy or
cesspool any offal, ashes, garbage, swill or any similar substance. (1958 Code,
Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 8)
7-1-7: IRRIGATION DITCHES; OBSTRUCTION, DESTRUCTION:
If any person shall suffer or permit any watercourse or ditch used for the
purpose of carrying water to or from any building, lot or premises belonging to
or occupied by him, to overflow or undermine, or otherwise to injure or
obstruct any street, land, avenue, or alley, or to overflow or undermine, or
otherwise injure any house, lot or premises, such person shall be deemed the
author of a nuisance, and upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and a like fine for every twenty four (24)
hours the same shall continue after notice has been given by any officer of the
City to abate the same. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 5)
7-1-8: OBSTRUCTING GUTTERS:
No person shall deposit on any street, alley, private or public place any dirt,
brick or other material in such manner as to obstruct the free flow along any
gutter. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 5)
7-1-9: ACCUMULATION OF MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Unlawful Accumulation of Litter: No person, owner, agent, lessee or
occupant of any building, yard or lot of ground shall allow to accumulate or
remain in or on said building, yard or lot of ground, any putrid or unsound
meat, pork, fish, hides, decayed vegetables or food, manure, filthy ash heaps,
garbage, offal, rubbish, dirt or filth of any kind. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3,
Sec. 3)
   (B)   Accumulation of Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit
vegetable waste, litter, garbage, filth or refuse of any nature, kind or
description detrimental to health to accumulate within or upon any private
alley, yard or area. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 4, Sec. 3)
7-1-10: OFFENSIVE LIQUIDS:
   (A)   Leaky Drains and Stagnant Liquids: No person shall allow any drain
from any building or land of which he is the owner or occupant to leak, to be
out of repair or to remain clogged, nor shall any person suffer sewage or waste
or stagnant liquids to remain in any building or upon any land of which he is
the owner or occupant. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 7)
   (B)   Liquid Tight Tanks: No person shall carry or convey in any vehicle any
earth, sand, gravel, dirt, rubbish, ashes, manure or any loose fluid or semi-
fluid, or offensive articles or matter, or any articles whatever, so that the
same shall be scattered, dropped or spilled therefrom, and all vehicles
conveying foul, dusty or offensive matter of any sort shall have liquid tight
bodies. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 10)
7-1-11: DEPOSIT OF PUTRID MATTER:
No person shall throw or deposit on any premises any animal or vegetable
substance, manure or any material whatsoever that is putrid or offensive, or
that is liable to become so. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 9)
7-1-12: WASTE PRODUCTS; DEPOSIT, REMOVAL:
   (A)   Illegal Depository of Waste Matter: No person shall throw or let fall
or allow to be thrown any refuse, liquid or solid or any water that has been
used, swill, garbage, rubbish, ashes or any animal or vegetable matter, into or
upon any street, alley, ditch or public place, premises or open lot. (1958
Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 11)
   (B)   Waste Products to be Moved: No person in conducting or carrying on any
business or employment shall permit to be placed or to remain on his premises
any blood, bones, offal, filth, swill, slops, decayed fruits, vegetables or
animal substances, or other offensive matter for a longer period than twelve
(12) hours. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 12)
7-1-13: OFFENSIVE USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall use the sidewalks, streets or gutters of the City as a drainage
to carry off any water that has been used, or other fluids or soap suds or dye
stuffs or liquid manures or any other liquids, whether from privies or
otherwise. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 14)
7-1-14: OFFENSIVE GARBAGE, WASTE RECEPTACLES 1 :
   (A)   The occupant of any and all dwelling houses shall maintain a durably
made garbage receptacle, constructed in such manner as to preclude the
contamination of the atmosphere or the passage and breeding of flies, in which
receptacle shall be placed all putrid and unsound meat, decayed vegetables, and
food, garbage, offal, rubbish, dirt or filth of any kind, which by its decay or
putrefaction could or would become detrimental to health. (1958 Code, Ch. X,
Art. 3, Sec. 18)
   (B)   Defective Waste Receptacles: It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit any unclean, stinking, foul, defective or filthy drain, ditch,
tank, gutter or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box or
receptacles of similar character to remain on his premises. (1958 Code, Ch. X,
Art. 4, Sec. 2)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-3-5 of this Code.
7-1-15: PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-84)
7-1-16: DEPOSITING DEBRIS 1 :
   (A)   Placing Debris in Streets, Alleys or Public Easements: No person shall
wilfully or negligently deposit or throw from any vehicle or place upon or
alongside any highway, street, alley or easement used by the public for public
travel any debris, paper, litter, glass bottles, glass, nails, tacks, hooks,
cans, barbed wire, boards, trash or garbage, lighted materials or other waste
substances. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 20)
   (B)   Placing Debris on Public or Private Property: No person shall wilfully
or negligently deposit upon any public or private property within the City any
debris, papers, litter, glass bottles, glass, nails, tacks, hooks, cans, barbed
wire, boards, trash, garbage, lighted materials or other waste substances on
any place not authorized by the State, County, City or the owner of the private
property. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 3, Sec. 21)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  6-2-14 of this Code.
7-1-17: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES:
Where a nuisance exists upon property, and is the outgrowth of the usual,
natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord thereof or his agent,
the tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property
on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof, and
shall be equally liable therefor; but where any such nuisance shall arise from
the unusual or unnecessary use to which such property may be put, or from
business thereon conducted, then the occupants, and all other persons
contributing to the continuance of such nuisance, shall be deemed the authors
thereof. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 4, Sec. 15)
7-1-18: ABATEMENT, NOTICE OF:
In case of neglect or refusal of any person to abate any nuisance defined
herein, after notice in writing has been served upon him as hereinafter
provided and within the time in said notice specified, the Health Officer shall
abate or procure the abatement thereof, and the expense of such abatement shall
be collected from the person so offending.
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, the Health Officer may
serve a written notice upon the owner, occupant or agent of any lot, building
or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or upon him who may be
the cause of such nuisance, requiring him to abate the same in such manner as
the health officer may direct, and within a reasonable time to be fixed in the
notice; and failure to give a notice as provided herein shall not relieve the
author of any nuisance from the obligation to abate such nuisance, or from the
penalty provided for the maintenance thereof. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 4, sec.
16)
7-1-19: DUTY OF HEALTH OFFICER:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the health officer to ascertain and cause all
nuisances declared to be such in this chapter to be abated, and he shall have
authority, either by himself or by his agents or deputies, in the daytime, to
enter any house, stable, store or building in order to make a thorough
examination of cellars, vaults, sinks or drains; to enter upon all lots and
ground and cause all stagnant waters to be drained off, and pools, sinks,
vaults, drains, holes or low grounds to be cleansed, filled up or otherwise
purified, and to cause all noisome substances to be abated or removed.
   (B)   The Twin Falls City Manager shall be the designated Health Officer for
the City of Twin Falls, with all powers and duties for this position as found
within the City Code. (1958 Code, ch. X, art. 4, sec. 17; amd. Ord. 2024-009,
8-12-2024)
7-1-20: CONTROL OF PARTICULATE MATTER (DUST):
   (A)   General Rules: All reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent
particulate matter from becoming airborne. In determining what is reasonable,
consideration will be given to factors such as the proximity of particulate
emitting operations to human habitations and/or activities and atmospheric
conditions which might affect the movement of particulate matter. Some of the
reasonable precautions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Use Of Control Equipment: Installation and use of hoods, fans,
fabric filters or equivalent systems to enclose and vent the handling of dusty
materials. Adequate containment methods should be employed during sandblasting
or other operations.
      2.   Covering Of Trucks: Open trucks transporting materials which may
potentially release particulate matter must be covered.
      3.   Removal Of Materials: Prompt removal of earth or other stored
material from streets.
   (B)   Visible Emissions: No owner, occupant or tenant shall permit the
discharge of any particulate matter into the atmosphere from any construction
site, development site, unpaved parking lot, industrial yard, vacant lot or
maneuvering areas where the emission becomes a public nuisance, health hazard
or safety hazard.
Prima facia evidence of a public nuisance, health hazard or safety hazard shall
exist if the emission for a period or periods aggregating more than thirty (30)
seconds in any sixty (60) minute period is greater than fifty percent (50%)
opacity as determined by procedures specified in 40 CFR 60, appendix A, method
9, appendix A, method 22, or a state of Idaho approved equivalent method.
   (C)   Control Methods: Control methods may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Dust Palliative: Use of water or other environmentally safe dust
palliative for control of dust in the demolition of existing buildings or
structures, construction operations, the grading of roads, or the clearing of
land. The use of water resulting in mud on public streets will not be
permitted. Any mud or spillage shall be immediately removed.
      2.   Dust Suppressants: Dust suppressants (such as water or other
environmentally safe dust palliative) must be used to control the release of
particulate matter when practicable.
      3.   Paving: Paving of roadways and their maintenance in a clean
condition.
   (D)   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to
"agricultural land" as defined by section
10-2-1 of this code.
   (E)   Fines: In addition to criminal penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code, any person who violates this section shall pay civil
penalties to the city as follows:
      1.   First violation: Warning ticket.
      2.   Second offense in the same thirty (30) day period: Five hundred
dollar ($500.00) fine.
      3.   Third offense in the same thirty (30) day period: One thousand
dollar ($1,000.00) fine.
      4.   Each additional offense in the same thirty (30) day period: Two
thousand dollar ($2,000.00) fine. (Ord. 2468, 12-19-1994)
7-1-21: CONTROL OF SMOKE:
The creation, maintenance or continuation of excessive quantities of smoke
within the city is hereby declared a health hazard and a public nuisance.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the production or
continuation of excessive quantities of smoke which may be emitted by
appliances or fireplaces, which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety and welfare of any other person or persons of any
area within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after thirty (30) minutes from
the initial start up of any appliance or fireplaces to allow emissions
therefrom to exceed an opacity reading of twenty percent (20%) as determined by
method 9 in the procedures manual for air pollution control, Idaho air quality
bureau, department of environmental quality. This determination shall be made
by a certified visual emissions evaluator. (Ord. 2896, 1-22-2007)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Slaughterhouses and Meat Shops
7-2-2: Putrefaction of Waste
7-2-3: Offensive Rendering Unlawful
7-2-4: Clean Processing Plants
7-2-5: Offensive Premises
7-2-6: Operation of Dry Cleaning Plant
7-2-1: SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND MEAT SHOPS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any slaughterhouse, market,
meat shop or other place wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept or sold or
any meats are smoked, lard rendered or sausages or other meat products
manufactured, to permit the said premises or yard connected therewith to remain
unclean or unwholesome, or allow or permit any odors to arise therefrom.
7-2-2: PUTREFACTION OF WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dirt to gather in cleaning
yards, waste of mills or factories, or any rags, damaged merchandise, wet,
broken or leaking barrels, casks, or boxes or any materials which are offensive
or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render the atmosphere impure or
unwholesome, the same shall be deemed a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for
any person occupying or owning such premises to fail to abate the same.
7-2-3: OFFENSIVE RENDERING UNLAWFUL:
The business of bone crushing, bone boiling, fat boiling, gut cleaning or the
making of glue or the manufacture of fertilizing material from any dead animal,
or part thereof, or any boiling of an offal, swill, fat or grease which shall
be done or carried on in an offensive, unclean or defective manner in any
building, yard or lot of ground, shall be deemed a nuisance, and it shall be
unlawful for the owner or manager of any such business to fail to abate the
same.
7-2-4: CLEAN PROCESSING PLANTS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any processing plant or
factory to permit the same to remain unclean.
7-2-5: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any tannery, hide
house, pork house, laundry, fish house or factory, or any yard or enclosure of
any kind whatsoever, to place, conduct or discharge into or on any street,
alley, sidewalk, gutter, water ditch or canal or any vacant lot, any filthy or
offensive water, liquid waste, refuse or discharge of any kind which is
offensive or liable to become so.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any tannery, livery
stable, barn, laundry or factory of any kind, place or premises, to permit the
same to become noisome, foul or offensive.
7-2-6: OPERATION OF DRY CLEANING PLANT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, control or manage or handle any
dry cleaning plant or clothes pressing establishment in such manner and under
such conditions that the smell or stench from such plant or clothes cleaning
establishment shall become offensive. (1958 Code, Ch. X, Art. 4)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND SANITARY DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Placement Of Garbage In Containers
7-3-4: Preparation Of Garbage And Rubbish
7-3-5: Garbage And Rubbish Containers
7-3-6: Location Of Containers
7-3-7: Burning Restrictions
7-3-8: Collection Of Garbage
7-3-9: Collection Schedules
7-3-10: Licensing And Regulation Of Independent Collectors
7-3-11: City Sanitary Disposal Area (Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
7-3-12: Service Charges
7-3-13: Administration
7-3-14: Inspection And Enforcement
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is declared to be an ordinance to promote the general health,
welfare and safety of the people in the City; and is enacted for the promotion
and protection of the public health and safety; and to prevent nuisances, the
spread of disease and fire hazards. It is the purpose of this Chapter to aid
the people in keeping the City clean, safe, sanitary and free from petty
annoyances and nuisances. (1958 Code, ch. VII, art. 2)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: Includes all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens and other
places where food is prepared, all offal from fish, meat and vegetable markets
and all organic substances unfit for food and subject to decay.
ITEMS EXCLUDED FROM CITY COLLECTION: Shall include discarded household
furnishings, dirt or earth debris from construction or lawn renovation, rocks,
stones, automobile bodies and parts, dead animals, manure, building materials
such as mortar, plaster, scrap lumber and wood shavings, must be collected and
disposed of by the building contractor, owner or occupant of premises.
PERSON: Shall include a normal person, his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns; and shall also include a firm, partnership or corporation, its or
their successors or assigns. Singular includes plural. Male includes female.
RUBBISH: Includes all waste and refuse such as newspapers, magazines, wrapping
and other paper products, packing cases and materials such as straw, shavings,
excelsior, sawdust and discarded clothing, metals, tin cans, bottles, broken
glass, ashes, lawn and tree trimmings and cuttings and weeds and leaves from
residential property.
SHALL AND MAY: The word "shall" means mandatory and the word "may" means
permissive. (1958 Code, ch. VII, art. 2)
USER: With respect to residential real property, the word “user” in this
chapter means the owner of such property. With respect to non-residential real
property, the word “user” in this chapter means the owner or occupant of the
property.
7-3-3: PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE IN CONTAINERS:
No person shall deposit garbage or rubbish on or below the surface of the
ground in a manner otherwise than herein prescribed. No person shall deposit or
bury any garbage or rubbish in or upon a public street, alley, other public
area, or upon the premises of another person, whether or not the garbage or
rubbish is in a prescribed container. No garbage, dirt or rubbish of any kind
shall be thrown, swept or pushed into the street in front of any place of
business or residence, except on permission of the Sanitation Inspector, and
the proprietor of the business and the owner of or occupant of the premises
shall be responsible for the disposal of all such garbage or rubbish. All
garbage and rubbish shall be placed in containers at locations as prescribed in
this Chapter. (1958 Code, ch. VII, art. 2)
7-3-4: PREPARATION OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
All garbage and rubbish shall be placed in containers except as herein
otherwise provided. All garbage shall be drained of excess water and wrapped in
paper, placed in containers lined with paper, or placed in plastic bags.
Tree trunks, large limbs and similar heavy objects shall be cut or knocked down
to sizes not exceeding six feet (6') in length and fifty (50) pounds in weight.
Brush, tree trimmings, shrubs and twigs must be tied in small bundles not to
exceed three feet (3') in length for each handling and placed in piles and so
covered as to prevent the same from blowing and being scattered about. (Ord.
2819, 3-28-2005)
7-3-5: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH CONTAINERS 1 :
   (A)   "Garbage", as herein defined, shall be placed in one or more leakproof
and watertight metal or plastic containers, with tight fitting metal or plastic
covers to be kept securely in place at all times.
Each container shall be provided with handles or a bale, and shall be no larger
than thirty two (32) gallons, or weigh more than fifty (50) pounds when filled;
plastic bags shall weigh no more than thirty five (35) pounds when filled.
The owners or occupants of the premises shall provide the number of containers
adequate to store all garbage and rubbish accumulated between scheduled pick
ups.
   (B)   "Rubbish", as defined herein, shall be placed in a sturdy and suitable
container, the weight of which shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds when filled;
plastic bags shall not exceed thirty five (35) pounds when filled; and each
container shall be so designed as to permit quick and efficient pick up. (Ord.
2656, 6-12-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1-14 of this title.
7-3-6: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS:
No garbage or rubbish containers or piles of rubbish shall be maintained in or
upon alley right of way except commercial haulers may use dumpster type boxes
where the type and location is approved by the sanitation inspector.
Containers or rubbish shall be placed in front of the premises in areas where
there are no alleys and placed in alleys in areas where alleys are available,
by the owners or occupants of such premises on the morning of or the evening
before the day scheduled for collection; and the empty containers shall be
withdrawn from the front of the premises, or the alleys as soon after
collection as possible on the same day. (1958 Code, ch. VII, art. 2)
7-3-7: BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, cause or permit any open burning
within the city if such burning is not in conformance with a permit issued by
the Twin Falls fire department, except that permits shall not be required for
open fires used for the preparation of food, campfires and fires for
recreational purposes, under control of a responsible person.
Permits may be issued if the proposed burning is in compliance with the Idaho
department of health and welfare regulations for air pollution, the
international fire code and will not endanger life or property.
A fee may be charged for the issuance of an open burning permit, said fee to be
based upon the estimated costs of administration of the permits. (Ord. 2765,
11-10-2003)
7-3-8: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE:
The city council shall be authorized to provide for the collection of garbage
and rubbish as a city function or by contract with one or more independent
collectors.
No person or firm shall engage in the collection of garbage or rubbish for
monetary gain unless authorized and licensed by the council, which said council
may establish the geographic limits for such collection. (1958 Code, ch. VII,
art. 2)
7-3-9: COLLECTION SCHEDULES:
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected on schedule established and subject to
revision by the city manager, but in no case will there be less than one
collection provided each week for garbage, and one every two (2) weeks for
rubbish. Collection schedules shall be published periodically. (1958 Code, ch.
VII, art. 2)
7-3-10: LICENSING AND REGULATION OF INDEPENDENT COLLECTORS:
The city council may license independent contractors to collect garbage and
rubbish within the city. Licenses shall be granted for a period of one year,
beginning March 1 and ending the last day of February, upon payment of a fifty
dollar ($50.00) annual fee and presentation of facts indicative of ability to
properly execute collection. The council may revoke the license or the contract
of any independent collector violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
All independent collectors shall provide the number of trucks sufficient to
handle any and all garbage and rubbish offered for collection in conformance
with the provisions herein contained.
The garbage portion of each conveyance of an independent collector, or private
hauler, shall be equipped with watertight, leakproof bodies and provided with
tightfitting covers to remain closed at all times except during the actual
depositing of garbage into or out of the conveyance. All conveyances shall be
cleaned and disinfected at regular intervals of not less than once every two
(2) weeks, and shall be provided with adequate covers over the rubbish portion
of the conveyance besides those tightfitting covers already mentioned herein.
Garbage shall not be collected between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Independent collectors shall not collect garbage from
any single-family or duplex residential dwellings. All garbage collected within
the city of Twin Falls shall be deposited at the transfer station at 2186
Orchard Drive East, Twin Falls, Idaho. Failure to conform to the provisions of
this section by any licensee or contractor shall be immediate cause for
revocation of license and cancellation of contract by the city council. (Ord.
2849, 1-9-2006)
7-3-11: CITY SANITARY DISPOSAL AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
7-3-12: SERVICE CHARGES:
For the service of collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish, the user of
each premise from which garbage and rubbish is collected by the City shall be
charged such rates as may be established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council. Said charges shall be considered a debt owing to the City from
the user of said premises, and other persons using the disposal area. Fees and
rates paid to and collected by independent collectors shall be approved from
time to time by resolution of the Council.
No user of a premise within the City shall be exempt from the collection and
disposal service provided by the City or by individual collectors and
licensees, except by special permission of the City Council. All users of
premises within the City shall be subject to service charges prescribed by the
Council, and an adjustment for such charges shall be made at the discretion of
said Council.
Charges for sanitation service shall be billed as a separate item on the water
service bill. (Ord. 2022-18, 11-7-2022)
7-3-13: ADMINISTRATION:
The responsibility for the administering of this Chapter shall be vested in the
City Manager and under the immediate direction of the City Sanitation
Inspector.
7-3-14: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Foreman of Sanitation shall inspect all premises at regular intervals to
determine whether the provisions hereof as they apply to type and location of
containers, burning practices and apparatus and other collection and disposal
practices are being complied with; and shall call upon the City Sanitation
Inspector for assistance in determining collection and disposal conditions
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
It shall be unlawful and punishable as hereinafter provided for any person to
violate any of the regulations contained herein or to permit or maintain such
violation or to refuse to obey any provision hereof or to fail or refuse to
comply with any such provision or regulation herein provided. Each day that
such violation shall be committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense hereunder. (1958 Code, ch. VII, art. 2; amd. Ord. 2132, 12-17-
84)
CHAPTER 4
MEAT INSPECTION
SECTION:
7-4-1: Meat Inspection
7-4-1: MEAT INSPECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, carry for sale, offer for sale or
expose for sale any meat or by-products of meat animals, at wholesale or
retail, within the corporate limits of the City, unless such meat and by-
products of meat animals have been inspected and passed by a meat inspector of
the Department of Agriculture of the State of Idaho. (1958 Code, Ch. VII, Art.
3)
CHAPTER 5
SNOW, WEEDS REMOVAL
SECTION:
7-5-1: Snow, Ice, Rubbish Removal
7-5-2: Weeds, Grass And Rubbish Removal
7-5-3: Spraying For Pests
7-5-4: Nuisance Declared
7-5-5: Penalty (Rep. by Ord. 2022-014, 8-1-2022)
7-5-1: SNOW, ICE, RUBBISH REMOVAL:
   (A)   Every owner, tenant or occupant of the premises abutting or adjoining
any sidewalk or alley in the City shall be required to remove all snow, ice and
rubbish from any such sidewalks and all rubbish from such alleys.
   (B)   Should any owner, tenant or occupant of premises abutting or adjoining
any sidewalk in the City fail or neglect to remove such snow or ice from the
sidewalk, then said City by its proper officers or employees may remove such
snow or ice and assess the cost of such removal against the adjoining and
abutting premises and the same shall be a lien thereon. Such assessment shall
be certified by the City Clerk to the County Assessor or other proper County
officer having charge of the making up of the assessment rolls and such
assessment to be placed on the assessment rolls and collected in the same
manner as other Municipal taxes are collected. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 8)
7-5-2: WEEDS, GRASS AND RUBBISH REMOVAL:
   (A)   Every owner, tenant or occupant of private property within the City
shall cut and remove the weeds and grass and clean and remove rubbish as often
as necessary to keep the property neat, and to prevent weeds from seeding on
said private property to the center of any street or alley along or in front of
such property, including the parking within and the curbing abutting such
property. (Ord. 2009, 4-6-1981)
   (B)   Should any owner, tenant or occupant of private property within the
City fail or neglect to cut or remove the weeds, grass and rubbish as herein
required, the City may then have its proper officers or employees cut and
remove the weeds, grass and rubbish and assess the cost of such cutting and
removal against such property and the same shall be a lien thereon. Such
assessment to be certified to the County Assessor or other proper County
officer having charge of making up of the assessment rolls and such assessment
to be placed on the assessment rolls and collected in the same manner as other
Municipal taxes are collected. (1958 Code, ch. VI, art. 8)
   (C)   The City, through its employees, may issue warning notices for any
violation of this Section. If the violation is not corrected by the
reinspection date set on the warning notice, a civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for the first violation, two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for the second violation, and three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for the third and subsequent violations during the same calendar year. (Ord.
2516, 1-22-1996)
   (D)   In addition to the civil penalties enumerated in Paragraph (C),
violation of this Section is a misdemeanor punishable by up to sixty (60) days
in jail and/or a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine. Economic costs incurred
by the city or another party expended to bring the property into compliance
with this section may be charge as restitution in the criminal case. (Ord.
2022-014, 8-1-2022)
7-5-3: SPRAYING FOR PESTS:
   (A)   Every owner, tenant or occupant of private property within the City
shall eradicate by spraying or treating any disease or pests, eggs or larvae or
any pest injurious to trees, plants and shrubs or vines upon and from such
property including the planting strip abutting such property by and not later
than April 25 of each and every year and shall spray such plants and trees
under the direction and supervision of the Superintendent of Streets.
   (B)   Should any owner, tenant or occupant of private property within the
City fail or neglect to eradicate by spraying or treating any diseases or
pests, eggs or larvae of pests injurious to trees, plants and vines as herein
required, then the City may have its proper officers and employees spray or
treat said trees, plants, shrubs and vines diseased or infected with pests,
eggs or larvae of pests and assess the cost of such spraying or treating
against said private property and the same shall be a lien thereon. Such
assessment to be certified by the City Clerk to the County Assessor or to the
proper County officer having charge of the making up of the assessment rolls
and collected in the same manner as other Municipal taxes are collected. (1958
Code, ch. VI, art. 8)
7-5-4: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The failure to remove snow, ice and rubbish; or to cut and remove weeds, grass
and rubbish; or to eradicate by spraying or otherwise treating diseases or
pests injurious to trees, plants and shrubs, all as hereinabove provided for,
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 1850, 9-6-1977)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2022-014, 8-1-2022)
CHAPTER 6
FINANCING SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Sewers Constructed by Public Funds
7-6-2-1: Purpose
7-6-2-2: Connection Allowed
7-6-2-3: Connection Assessment
7-6-2-4: Payment of Assessments
7-6-2-5: Authority of City Engineer
7-6-3: Privately Funded Sewer Systems
7-6-3-1: Construction Financing
7-6-3-2: Dedication and Use
7-6-3-3: City Fund Participation
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: An owner whose property is contiguous to a public
right of way or easement that contains a public sewer.
PRIVATELY FUNDED SEWER: Public sewers that were financed by and are of primary
benefit to a small group of adjacent property owners.
PUBLICLY FUNDED SEWERS: Public sewers that were financed wholly or in part by
the general users of the City waste water system with no financial contribution
by the adjacent property owners at the time of construction and that are of
primary benefit to a large group of general users.
PROPERTY DEPTH: A distance measured perpendicular to the center line of a
publicly funded sewer between the property line which is nearest to and the
property line farthest from the center line of a publicly funded sewer.
Whenever the property lines are not exactly parallel to the sewer center line,
the average distance shall be used or such other distance that most nearly
satisfies the intent of this Chapter.
7-6-2: SEWERS CONSTRUCTED BY PUBLIC FUNDS:
7-6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the collection of an assessment
for sewer connection, which assessment shall be used by the City Waste Water
Department to participate in the construction of privately funded sewers. The
assessment for connection to a publicly funded sewer shall be equivalent to the
average cost a property owner would pay as his share of group project to
construct a privately funded sewer. The participation in the construction of
privately funded sewers shall be equivalent to the cost a property owner would
pay as his share of a group project to construct a privately funded sewer. The
participation is to be paid when such a property owner is not participating in
the group project by virtue of the fact that he has been allowed to connect to
a publicly funded sewer and is therefor increasing the financial burden of the
group of property owners who are not adjacent to the publicly funded sewer.
7-6-2-2: CONNECTION ALLOWED:
Whenever a property owner's property is contiguous for a distance of at least
fifty feet (50') to the right of way or easement containing a publicly funded
sewer, he shall be allowed to connect a building on such property to the
publicly funded sewer, subject to the provisions contained herein, providing
each building so connected is on a separate building lot conforming to the
provisions of the City zoning regulations 1  and providing neither the service
connection nor the building sewer exceeds fifty feet (50') in length. Such
connections shall, in addition to the provisions contained herein, be subject
to all regulations, charges and fees established by the City sewer system
regulations. 2  (Ord. 1783, 9-7-76)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code
2 2. See Chapter 7 of this Code
7-6-2-3: CONNECTION ASSESSMENT:
   (A)   Whenever a property owner connects directly to a publicly funded sewer
he shall agree to pay a connection assessment, plus a system development fee.
The assessment and fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 1783, 9-7-76; amd. 1980)
   (B)   The assessment referred to shall represent the average cost a property
owner would pay as his share of a group project to construct a privately funded
sewer and shall be adequate to reimburse the Waste Water Department for its
average participation in a group project as provided for herein. The assessment
shall be a fixed cost for properties of average depth. The average depth shall
be considered to be one hundred feet (100').
   (C)   All connection assessments paid shall be receipted to the Waste Water
Revenue Fund as a general user charge and transferred into the Waste Water
Improvement Fund Collection Division to be expended as a capital improvement.
7-6-2-4: PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS:
   (A)   Prior to connection to a publicly funded sewer, the property owner
shall either pay the sewer connection assessment in full or enter into an
agreement with the City to pay the assessment plus interest in two hundred
forty (240) equal monthly payments. The rate of interest shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The interest rate so established shall be equivalent to the average
interest rate paid on local improvement district bonds. The agreement shall
provide for early debt retirement without penalty and for termination of sewer
service for nonpayment of the monthly payments when due.
7-6-2-5: AUTHORITY OF CITY ENGINEER:
The City Engineer shall have the authority to determine the amount of
connection assessments due and to determine the amount of financial
participation in sewer projects. This determination shall be based on the
intent of this Section. All such determinations shall be subject to review by
the City Council. (Ord. 1783, 9-7-76)
7-6-3: PRIVATELY FUNDED SEWER SYSTEMS:
7-6-3-1: CONSTRUCTION FINANCING:
Whenever property owners within the City desire to construct a privately funded
sewer system to serve the territory within which they live, the following
methods of construction financing are suggested:
   (A)   Local improvement districts in conformance with State law. 1
   (B)   Private finance agreements among the property owners concerned.
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. 50-1701 et seq.
7-6-3-2: DEDICATION AND USE:
Whenever the privately funded sewer is to be connected to the City waste water
system, said privately funded sewer shall be dedicated to the public for public
use and the same shall be maintained and operated by the City Waste Water
Department for the benefit of the public at large.
7-6-3-3: CITY FUND PARTICIPATION:
   (A)   The Waste Water Department is authorized to participate financially in
the construction of a privately funded sewer whenever (1) an adjacent property
owner is not participating in the private sewer project because he was allowed
to connect to a publicly funded sewer, and (2) the nonparticipation of the
adjacent property owner will increase the financial burden to those persons
participating.
   (B)   The Waste Water Department's financial participation shall be equal to
what the nonparticipating owner's share will be; provided, however, that in
calculating the share of the nonparticipating owner, the property depth used in
the calculation shall not exceed one hundred twenty five feet (125').
   (C)   Funds for participation by the Waste Water Department shall be derived
by a connection assessment, which assessment shall be paid by persons
connecting to publicly funded sewers. Said assessment is provided for in
Chapter 7 of this Title. (Ord. 1784, 9-7-76; amd. Ord., 2-7-77)
CHAPTER 7
SEWER USE
SECTION:
7-7-1: General Provisions
7-7-1-1: Purpose And Policy (EPA 1.1)
7-7-1-2: Administration (EPA 1.2)
7-7-1-3: Definitions (EPA 1.3)
7-7-1-4: Abbreviations (EPA 1.4)
7-7-2: General Requirements
7-7-2-1: Prohibited Discharge Standards (EPA 2.1)
7-7-2-2: Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards (EPA 2.2)
7-7-2-3: State Requirements (EPA 2.3)
7-7-2-4: Local Limits (EPA 2.4)
7-7-2-5: City's Right Of Revision (EPA 2.5)
7-7-2-6: Special Agreement (EPA 2.6)
7-7-2-7: Dilution (EPA 2.7)
7-7-2-8: Pretreatment Facilities (EPA 2.8)
7-7-2-9: Deadline For Compliance With Applicable Pretreatment Requirements (EPA
2.9)
7-7-2-10: Additional Pretreatment Measures (EPA 2.10)
7-7-2-11: Accidental Spill Prevention Plans (EPA 2.11)
7-7-2-12: Septic Tank Wastes (EPA 2.12)
7-7-3: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements (EPA 3.0)
7-7-3-1: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing SIU (EPA 3.1)
7-7-3-2: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Source And New User
(EPA 3.2)
7-7-3-3: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Extra-Jurisdictional Users
(EPA 3.3)
7-7-3-4: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents (EPA 3.4)
7-7-3-5: Signatory And Certification Requirement (EPA 3.5)
7-7-3-6: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions (EPA 3.6)
7-7-3-7: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents (EPA 3.7)
7-7-3-8: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals (EPA 3.8)
7-7-3-9: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration (EPA 3.9)
7-7-3-10: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification (EPA 3.10)
7-7-3-11: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer (EPA 3.11)
7-7-3-12: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation (EPA 3.12)
7-7-3-13: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance (EPA 3.13)
7-7-4: Reporting Requirements
7-7-4-1: Baseline Monitoring Reports (EPA 4.1)
7-7-4-2: Final Compliance Report (Initial Compliance Report) (EPA 4.2)
7-7-4-3: Periodic Compliance Report (EPA 4.3)
7-7-4-4: Compliance Schedules For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards
(EPA 4.4)
7-7-4-5: Notification Of Significant Production Changes (EPA 4.5)
7-7-4-6: Hazardous Waste Notification (EPA 4.6)
7-7-4-7: Notice Of Potential Problems, Including Accidental Spills, And Slug
Loads (EPA 4.7)
7-7-4-8: Noncompliance/Repeat Sampling And Reporting (EPA 4.8)
7-7-4-9: Notification Of Changed Discharge (EPA 4.9)
7-7-4-10: Reports From Unpermitted Users (EPA 4.10)
7-7-4-11: Recordkeeping (EPA 4.11)
7-7-5: Sampling And Analytical Requirements
7-7-5-1: Sampling Requirements For Users (EPA 5.1)
7-7-5-2: Analytical Requirements (EPA 5.2)
7-7-5-3: City Monitoring Of Industrial User's Wastewater (EPA 5.3)
7-7-6: Compliance Monitoring
7-7-6-1: Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling (EPA 6.1)
7-7-6-2: Monitoring Facilities (EPA 6.2)
7-7-6-3: Search Warrants (EPA 6.3)
7-7-6-4: Vandalism (EPA 6.4)
7-7-7: Confidential Information (EPA 7.0)
7-7-8: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance (EPA 8.0)
7-7-9: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
7-7-9-1: Notification Of Violation (EPA 9.1)
7-7-9-2: Consent Orders (EPA 9.2)
7-7-9-3: Show Cause Hearing (EPA 9.3)
7-7-9-4: Compliance Orders (EPA 9.4)
7-7-9-5: Cease And Desist Orders (EPA 9.5)
7-7-9-6: Administrative Fines (EPA 9.6)
7-7-9-7: Emergency Suspensions (EPA 9.7)
7-7-9-8: Termination Of Discharge (EPA 9.8)
7-7-10: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
7-7-10-1: Injunctive Relief (EPA 10.1)
7-7-10-2: Civil Penalties (EPA 10.2)
7-7-10-3: Criminal Prosecution (EPA 10.3)
7-7-10-4: Remedies Nonexclusive (EPA 10.4)
7-7-11: Supplemental Enforcement Action
7-7-11-1: Performance Bonds (EPA 11.1)
7-7-11-2: Liability Insurance (EPA 11.2)
7-7-11-3: Payment Of Outstanding Fees And Penalties (EPA 11.3)
7-7-11-4: Water Supply Severance (EPA 11.4)
7-7-11-5: Public Nuisances (EPA 11.5)
7-7-11-6: Informant Rewards (EPA 11.6)
7-7-11-7: Contractor Listing (EPA 11.7)
7-7-12: Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
7-7-12-1: Upset (EPA 12.1)
7-7-12-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards (EPA 12.2)
7-7-12-3: Bypass (EPA 12.3)
7-7-13: Wastewater Treatment Rates (Reserved)
7-7-14: Miscellaneous Provisions
7-7-14-1: Pretreatment Charges And Fees (EPA 14.1)
7-7-14-2: Severability (EPA 14.2)
7-7-14-3: Conflicts (EPA 14.3)
7-7-15:    Effective Date
7-7-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7-7-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY (EPA 1.1):
(Hereafter, "EPA" is the comparable EPA Model Pretreatment Ordinance
reference).
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) for the City of Twin Falls and enables the City to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part
403). The objectives of this ordinance are:
   (A)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
   (B)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
   (C)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
   (D)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge
in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; and
   (E)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter authorizes the
issuance of industrial wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-1-2: ADMINISTRATION (EPA 1.2):
Except as otherwise provided herein, the City shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the City may be delegated by the City to City personnel.
Implementation of the provisions of this ordinance may be delegated to a
contractor by consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-1-3: DEFINITIONS (EPA 1.3):
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city
prohibitive standards, city specific pretreatment standards (local limits),
state of Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's categorical pretreatment
standards (when effective), whichever standard is appropriate or most
stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
   (A)   If the user is a corporation:
      1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
      2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations
and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
   (B)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
   (C)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her
designee.
   (D)   The individuals described in subsections (A) through (C) of this
definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in sections 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility (cf. 40 CFR 403.17).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a
specific category of users and which appears in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405-471 et seq.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment
standards.
CITY: The city of Twin Falls or the city council of the city of Twin Falls.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The water quality act as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: Refers to: a) the POTW if the POTW's pretreatment program
submission has been approved in accordance with the requirements of section
403.11; or b) the approval authority if the submission has not been approved.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such
as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the
only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes, or allows
the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW that is of a similar volume
and/or chemical makeup to that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from
a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one hundred (100) gallons
per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of
TSS per capita per day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency
or, where appropriate, the director of the region 10 office of water, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: A categorical industrial user, the construction or operation
of whose facility commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which would be applicable to such source if
and when the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307
of the act.
EXISTING USER: Any noncategorical industrial user which was discharging
wastewater prior to the effective date hereof.
GRAB SAMPLE: An individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding
fifteen (15) minutes (cf. 40 CFR 403, appendix E, condition II and 49 FR 31225,
August 3, 1984).
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW
from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
act. The discharge into the POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER: A source of indirect discharge (cf. 40 CFR 403.3 (j)).
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: An authorization or equivalent control
document issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The
permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set
forth in this chapter.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal: and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's IPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued hereunder, or more
stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LIQUID WASTE HAULER: Any person involved in the transportation of any sewage
from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and
septic tanks by means other than the city collection system (cf. section
7-7-3).
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD, OR STANDARD: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the clean water act, which applies
to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 (cf. 40 CFR 403.3(l)).
NEW SOURCE:
   (A)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
      2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
   (B)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection (A)2 or (A)3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
   (C)   Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
         (a)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
         (b)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
NEW USER: A user that is not regulated under federal categorical pretreatment
standards but that applies to the city for a new building permit or occupies an
existing building and plans to commence discharge of wastewater to the city's
collection system after the effective date of this chapter. Any person that
buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be
considered an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the
manufacturing operation.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation).
PERMITTEE: A user issued an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics
of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, BOD, chemical oxygen
demand [COD], toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard) (cf. 40 CFR 403.3(a)).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a national pretreatment standard
(cf. 40 CFR 403.3(t)).
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances, which appear in subsections
7-7-2-1(A) and (B) of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works", as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
The term also means the city.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production (cf. 403.17(a)(2)).
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit, ditch, or other device used to collect and transport
sewage from the generating source.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   (A)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   (B)   A user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day (gpd) or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
      2.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
      3.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (C)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (B) of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in sections
7-7-2-1 through
7-7-2-4 of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause pass-through or
interference.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the United States office
of management and budget.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United
States.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to
the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation
(cf. 40 CFR 403.16).
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment including recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-1-4: ABBREVIATIONS (EPA 1.4):
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP  - Accidental spill prevention plan
BOD   - Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   - Code of federal regulations
COD   - Chemical oxygen demand
EPA   - U.S. environmental protection agency
GPD   - Gallons per day
L     - Liter
LEL   - Lower explosive limit
mg    - Milligrams
mg/l  - Milligrams per liter
IPDES - Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M   - Operation and maintenance
POTW  - Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  - Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   - Standard industrial classifications
SNC   - Significant noncompliance
SWDA  - Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSS   - Total suspended solids
USC   - United States Code
 
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
7-7-2-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS (EPA 2.1):
   (A)   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference.
   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not
they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National,
State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste-streams with a closed-cup flash point of
less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference [but in no case solids
greater than ½ inch (½") or 0.7 centimeter(s) (0.7cm) in any dimension];
      4.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 104ºF (40ºC) unless the approval authority, upon the request of
the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits;
      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the City.
      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      10.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as
specifically approved by the City in compliance with applicable State or
Federal regulations;
      11.   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, de-ionized
water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized;
      12.   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
      13.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City;
      14.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      15.   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      16.   Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
      17.   Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides
or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud,
or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
      18.   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its IPDES permit
and/or other disposal system permits.
      19.   Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the City can cause harm
either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance, unless waived by the City (except that no
waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards).
      20.   The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any
person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank
waste, or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and
approval as may be generally required by the City of Twin Falls and has paid
all fees assessed for the privilege of said discharge.
      21.   Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal
Insecticide Fungicide Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)
      Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-2: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS (EPA 2.2):
The national categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by
EPA pursuant to the act and as found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405-471, are hereby incorporated and shall be enforceable under this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-3: STATE REQUIREMENTS (EPA 2.3):
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by
all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this
chapter or in other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-4: LOCAL LIMITS (EPA 2.4):
Pollutant limits shall be established by resolution of the city council to
protect against pass-through and interference. No SIU shall discharge
wastewater containing pollutant levels in excess of the daily maximum allowable
discharge limits.
The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW
(end of the pipe). All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total"
metal unless indicated otherwise. The city may impose mass limitations in
addition to (or in place of) the concentration based limitations. Where a user
is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given
pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall
apply. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-5: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION (EPA 2.5):
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENT (EPA 2.6):
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting
out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a
special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or
federal pretreatment requirement. A special agreement shall not constitute, nor
be construed as a replacement for, an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
However, if applicable, industrial users may request a net/gross adjustment to
a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request
a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval
authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-7: DILUTION (EPA 2.7):
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on users which he believes
may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-8: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES (EPA 2.8):
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations
specified by the EPA, the state, or the city, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-9: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS (EPA
2.9):
Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a
shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city
shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not
covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when
the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the federal
categorical pretreatment standards.
New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment
standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed ninety (90) days
from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install, have
in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment
required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to
discharge.
Any industrial wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall
not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Any other existing user or a
categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit which is in
noncompliance with any local limit shall be required to comply with a
compliance schedule to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible. The
compliance schedule may be included in a control mechanism, administrative
order or compliance order, or other appropriate enforcement or control remedy.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-10: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES (EPA 2.10):
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, issue an industrial wastewater discharge
permit solely for flow equalization, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and
such other actions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater
containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at
the user's expense.
   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-11: ACCIDENTAL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS (EPA 2.11):
The city may require any user to develop and implement an accidental spill
prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed necessary by the
city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of
pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. An
accidental spill prevention plan or slug control plan showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city
for review and approval before implementation. The city shall determine which
user is required to develop a plan and require said plan to be submitted within
one hundred eighty (180) days after notification by the city. The city may
develop such a plan for any user (cf. section 3.3 EPA model: January 2007 EPA
833-B-06-002). Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted or as modified
after such plan has been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval
of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharges with procedures for follow up written notification within five
(5) days. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would
violate any of the standards in sections
7-7-2-1 through
7-7-2-4 of this chapter; and
   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
chemicals (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-2-12: SEPTIC TANK WASTES (EPA 2.12):
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at a designated
receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are
established by the city. Such wastes shall not violate this section or any
other requirements established or adopted by the city. Industrial wastewater
discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities shall be
issued by the city.
   (B)   Septic tank waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations
specifically designated by the city. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the city. The city may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards. The city may require the
hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   (C)   Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste.
   (D)   Fees for dumping hauled wastes will be established as part of the user
fee system as authorized in section
7-7-14-1 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2975, 7-27-2009)
7-7-3: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS (EPA 3.0):
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without
first obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit from the city; the
permit must be enforceable and contain all the elements as required by 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B). Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the permittee to the sanctions set forth in this chapter. Obtaining an
industrial wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
The city may require other users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain
industrial wastewater discharge permits or liquid waste hauler permits. (Ord.
2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-1: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING SIU (EPA 3.1):
Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective
date hereof and that wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall,
within thirty (30) days after notification by the city, submit a completed
permit application to the city in accordance with section
7-7-3-4 of this chapter and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after ninety (90) days after notification by the city except in
accordance with an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-2: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW SOURCE AND NEW USER
(EPA 3.2):
At least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated startup, any new source,
which is a source that becomes a user subsequent to the proposal of an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard that is later promulgated, and any
new user considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU shall apply for an
industrial wastewater discharge permit and will be required to submit to the
city at least the information listed in subsections
7-7-3-4(A) through (E) of this chapter. A new source or new user is prohibited
from discharging without first being issued by the city an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. New sources and new users shall also be required
to include in their application information on the method of pretreatment they
intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources and new
users shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections
7-7-3-4(D) and (E) of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-3: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS
(EPA 3.3):
Any existing user who is located beyond the city limits and who is required to
obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall submit an industrial
wastewater discharge permit application as outlined in section
7-7-3-4 of this chapter. New sources and new users who are located beyond the
city limits and who are required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit shall comply with section
7-7-3-2 of this chapter.
   (A)   If another municipality, or industrial user(s) located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the city's collection system, the city
shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing
municipality.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (A) of this
section the city shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the city by the contributing municipality;
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the city's collection system; and
      3.   Any other information as the city may deem necessary to enter into
an intermunicipal agreement.
   (C)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (A) of this
section, shall contain the following conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits,
including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in section
7-7-4-1 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's
ordinance or local limits;
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      3.   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the city; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
city;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city
with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as
part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the city's
collection system;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      7.   A provision ensuring the city or its agents access to the facilities
of industrial users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the city; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-4: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS (EPA 3.4):
All users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit must
submit, at a minimum, the following information. The city shall approve a form
to be used as a permit application. Categorical users submitting the following
information shall have complied with 40 CFR 403.12(b).
   (A)   Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of
the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
   (B)   Permits: The user shall submit a list of all environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
   (C)   Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description
of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user,
including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the
facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the
POTW; number and type of employees; hours of operation; each product produced
by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount
of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and
duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated or manufacturing processes; site plans; floor plans; mechanical and
plumbing plans; and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection
manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
   (D)   Flow Measurement:
      1.   Categorical user: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
         (a)   Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
         (b)   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      2.   Noncategorical user: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
         (a)   Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant
flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city.
The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by
cost or feasibility.
   (E)   Measurements Of Pollutants:
      1.   Categorical User:
         (a)   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards
for each regulated or manufacturing process.
         (b)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by
the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the city) of regulated
pollutants (including standards contained in sections
7-7-2-1 through
7-7-2-4 of this chapter, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated
or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures
outlined in section
7-7-5 of this chapter.
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
         (d)   Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user, this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the
application.
      2.   Noncategorical User:
         (a)   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards
for its wastewater discharge.
         (b)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass
where required by the city) of regulated pollutants contained in sections
7-7-2-1 through
7-7-2-4 of this chapter, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical
procedures outlined in section
7-7-5 of this chapter.
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
         (d)   Where the city developed alternate concentration or mass limits
because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted as part of the application.
   (F)   Certification: The user shall submit a statement, worded as specified
in section
7-7-3-5 of this chapter, which has been reviewed by an authorized
representative of the user, and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (G)   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform with the
requirements of section
7-7-4-4 of this chapter. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established pursuant to section
7-7-2-9 of this chapter.
      1.   Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified
by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40
CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR
403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this subsection,
the information required by subsection (F) of this section and this subsection
(G) shall pertain to the modified limits.
      2.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)),
and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the
user submits the report required by subsection (F) of this section and this
subsection (G), then a report containing modified information shall be
submitted by the user within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved.
   (H)   Additional Information: The user shall submit any other information as
may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the industrial wastewater
discharge permit application.
      Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-5: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT (EPA 3.5):
All industrial wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must
be signed by a responsible officer or manager, or sole proprietor or general
partner as applicable, or duly authorized representative.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a responsible officer or manager
means:
      1.   A president, vice president, secretary, or treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation, or
      2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations
and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures. This authorization must be made in
writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and
submitted to the approval authority prior to or together with the report being
submitted of the user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
   (B)   A duly authorized representative is an individual designated by the
responsible officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in writing.
The written authorization must be submitted to the city and also specifies
either an individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall
operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such
as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company. If an authorization
in this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to
the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-6: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS (EPA 3.6):
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete
industrial wastewater discharge permit application, the city will determine
whether or not to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit. Upon a
determination to issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of
full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished. The city may deny any
application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-
19-2020)
7-7-3-7: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS (EPA 3.7):
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the city to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (A)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits must contain the following
conditions:
      1.   A statement that indicates industrial wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
      2.   A statement that the industrial wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
industrial wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including
effluent limits, best management practices (BMPs) based on applicable general
pretreatment standards in 40 CFR part 403 which may be made a part of this
chapter, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and any special
state requirements;
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of
technical reports, compliance schedules, and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state,
and local law;
      5.   Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-
monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
      6.   Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
      7.   Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges,
including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW;
      8.   Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to notify the city
within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the noncompliance and repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within thirty (30)
days after becoming aware of the violation;
      9.   A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule;
      10.   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW
to be necessary.
   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
      4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment including flow measurement devices;
      7.   A statement that compliance with the industrial wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the industrial wastewater discharge permit;
      8.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-8: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS (EPA 3.8):
Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms
of an industrial wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the industrial
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for objections,
and proposed alternative conditions, if any, it seeks to place in the
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the industrial wastewater discharge permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.
   (D)   If the city fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial
review.
   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
industrial wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the clerk of the district court for the fifth judicial district,
state of Idaho, within six (6) months. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-9: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION (EPA 3.9):
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the city. Each industrial wastewater
discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-10: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION (EPA 3.10):
The city may modify the industrial wastewater discharge permit for good cause
including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater
discharge permit;
   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the industrial wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
report;
   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial wastewater
discharge permit; or
   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-11: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER (EPA 3.11):
Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner and/
or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance
notice to the city and the city approves the industrial wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the city must include a written certification by
the new owner and/or operator which:
   (A)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
   (B)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
   (C)   Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing industrial
wastewater discharge permit beginning on the date of the transfer.
   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the industrial
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
   Provided that the notice required above occurred and that there were no
significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge and
provided that the industry is not subject to categorical standards or
requirements, the new owner will be considered an existing user and will be
covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-12: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION (EPA 3.12):
Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to,
the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
   (B)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed
conditions;
   (C)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the industrial wastewater discharge permit application;
   (D)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and/or certification statements;
   (E)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   (F)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and
records;
   (G)   Failure to meet discharge limitations;
   (H)   Failure to pay fines;
   (I)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   (J)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   (K)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the industrial wastewater
discharge permit application;
   (L)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
   (M)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the industrial wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
   (N)   If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in section
7-7-9-7 of this chapter.
   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon cessation of
operations. All industrial wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular
user are void upon the issuance of a new industrial wastewater discharge permit
to that user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-3-13: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE (EPA 3.13):
A user who is required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall
apply for industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete industrial wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with
section
7-7-3-4 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing industrial wastewater discharge permit. A user whose
existing industrial wastewater discharge permit has expired and who has
submitted its reapplication in the time period specified herein shall be deemed
to have an effective industrial wastewater discharge permit until the city
issues or denies the new industrial wastewater discharge permit. A user whose
existing industrial wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to
submit its reapplication in the time period specified herein will be deemed to
be discharging without an industrial wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2020-
018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
7-7-4-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS (EPA 4.1):
   (A)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4) (whichever is later) existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in subsection (B) of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (B) of this section. A new source shall report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      1.   Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      2.   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
      4.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      5.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         (a)   The pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and average concentrations (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with procedures
set out in section
7-7-5 of this chapter.
         (c)   In cases where a pretreatment standard requires compliance with
a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial
user shall submit sufficient documentation as required by the city or the
applicable standard to determine compliance with the standard.
         (d)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section
7-7-5 of this chapter.
      6.   Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      7.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in section
7-7-4-4 of this chapter.
      8.   Signature And Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with section
7-7-3-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-2: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT (INITIAL COMPLIANCE REPORT) (EPA 4.2):
   (A)   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in subsections
7-7-4-1(B)4, (B)5 and (B)6 of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
subsections
7-7-3-4(E)1(d) and (E)2(d) of this chapter, this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with subsections
7-7-3-4(E)1(d) and (E)2(d) of this chapter. All sampling shall be done in
accordance with section
7-7-5-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the city in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. (Ord. 2020-
018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT (EPA 4.3):
   (A)   Any user that is required to have an industrial wastewater discharge
permit and performs self-monitoring shall comply with all applicable
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 and submit to the city during the months of
June and December, unless required on other dates or more frequently by the
city, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous
reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the
industrial wastewater discharge permit. At a minimum, users shall sample their
discharge at least twice per year.
   (B)   The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if
specified in the industrial wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants
listed in the industrial wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a
record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated
sampling locations and shall also include any additional information required
by this chapter or the industrial wastewater discharge permit. Production data
shall be reported if required by the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required
by the city or by this chapter, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must
submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the
reporting period.
   (C)   Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the city or by unit production limits specified in the
applicable categorical standards shall report production data as outlined in
subsection
7-7-4-2(B) of this chapter.
   (D)   If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or
nonregulated flows, the user will be responsible for providing flow data
including regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.
   (E)   Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided,
however, that the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual
measurement is not feasible.
   (F)   All wastewater samples shall be representative of discharges and
samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements specified in section
7-7-5 of this chapter.
   (G)   The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have
an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed to
establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or
determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of
the sewer system.
   (H)   The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by
the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to
prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the city
agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may charge the user
for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for the sampling
and analyses. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and
shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to
perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-4: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
(EPA 4.4):
   (A)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
   (B)   No increment referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall
exceed nine (9) months.
   (C)   Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-5: NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES (EPA 4.5):
Any user operating under an industrial wastewater discharge permit
incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the city
within two (2) business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that
the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.
Any user not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to
comply with the existing limits contained in its industrial wastewater
discharge permit. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-6: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION (EPA 4.6):
   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
in writing: the city, the EPA region 10 office of air, waste, and toxics
director, and the Idaho department of health and welfare, division of
environmental quality remediation section, of any discharge into the city's
sewage collection system of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
      Such notification shall include:
      1.   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
      2.   The EPA hazardous waste number; and
      3.   The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
      4.   If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100)
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sewer system, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the extent it is
known or readily available to the industrial user:
         (a)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
         (b)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream(s) discharged during that calendar month; and
         (c)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream(s)
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
      All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180)
days after the discharge(s) commences. Any notification under this subsection
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under this chapter.
      The notification requirements of this section do not apply to pollutants
already reported by industrial users under self-monitoring requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which an
industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, an industrial user shall notify the
city, the EPA region 10 office of air, waste, and toxics director, and the
Idaho department of health and welfare, division of environmental quality
remediation section, of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, an industrial
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-7: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL SPILLS, AND SLUG
LOADS (EPA 4.7):
   (A)   In case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, a slug discharge or slug load as defined in section
7-7-1-3 of this chapter, that might cause potential problems for the city's
collection and/or treatment system, an industrial user shall immediately
telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include
the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, or an estimate if unknown, and corrective actions taken by the
industrial user.
   (B)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report describing
the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future recurrence. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be
incurred as a result of damage to the city's collection system and/or treatment
facilities, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on an industrial user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.
   (D)   Significant industrial users shall notify the city immediately of any
changes at their facilities affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord.
2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-8: NONCOMPLIANCE/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING (EPA 4.8):
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user
shall notify the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5)
days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty
(30) days after becoming aware of the violation. (Where the city has performed
the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city must perform
the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the industrial user of the
violation and requires the industrial user to perform the repeat analysis.)
Resampling is not required if:
   (A)   The city performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at
least once per month, or
   (B)   The city performs sampling at the industrial user between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the industrial user
or the city receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-9: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE (EPA 4.9):
All industrial users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any
significant changes in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment
modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
user has submitted initial notification under section
7-7-4-6 of this chapter (cf. 40 CFR 403.12 (p)).
   (A)   The city may require an industrial user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of an industrial wastewater discharge permit application.
   (B)   The city may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit or modify
an existing industrial wastewater discharge permit in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-10: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS (EPA 4.10):
All users not required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. (Ord.
2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-4-11: RECORD KEEPING (EPA 4.11):
Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the industrial user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices (BMPs) that may be
established in this chapter. Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples;
the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses including
documentation associated with best management practices. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
industrial user or the city, or where the industrial user has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the city. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-5: SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
7-7-5-1: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS (EPA 5.1):
   (A)   Except as indicated in subsections (B) and (C) of this section,
industrial users must collect wastewater samples using twenty four (24) hour
flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city. Where time
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the
samples must be representative of the discharges and authorization
documentation included in the users' files. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty four (24) hour period
may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols,
and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field;
for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (C)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90) day compliance reports required in sections
7-7-4-1 (pertaining to BMRs),
7-7-4-2 (pertaining to FCRs), and
7-7-4-3 (pertaining to periodic compliance reports for categorical and
noncategorical SIUs) of this chapter, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must
be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfides and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
city may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports, the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (D)   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by
the city and specified in the user's industrial wastewater discharge permit.
For categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula at
40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its
local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment
standard(s). Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) the adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the city and included in the industrial user's file.
   (E)   All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling
and methods of analysis and shall certify that the waste stream sampled is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the
user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required in
its industrial wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part
136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as
part of its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-5-2: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS (EPA 5.2):
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-5-3: CITY MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL USER'S WASTEWATER (EPA 5.3):
If the city elects to conduct periodic monitoring of an industrial user's
discharge, the city shall follow the same procedures outlined in sections
7-7-5-1 and
7-7-5-2 of this chapter as required of industrial users. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-
2020)
7-7-6: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
7-7-6-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING (EPA 6.1):
The city shall have the right to enter the premises and facilities of any
industrial user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this chapter and any industrial wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Industrial users shall allow the city ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   (A)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city shall be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the industrial user's operations.
   (C)   The city may require an industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency to ensure continuous accuracy.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
industrial user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial
user.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the industrial
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-
2020)
7-7-6-2: MONITORING FACILITIES (EPA 6.2):
The city may require an industrial user, at the user's expense, to install a
monitoring station, facilities and/or equipment as necessary to allow
inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the city
and to ensure compliance with this chapter. All monitoring facilities shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable city construction
standards and specifications. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated at a frequency that will ensure their continuous
accuracy.
There shall be ample room in or near sampling facilities to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. Sampling facilities,
including sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the user's expense. (Ord. 2020-018,
10-19-2020)
7-7-6-3: SEARCH WARRANTS (EPA 6.3):
If the city has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or
any part thereof and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any industrial wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of
a search warrant from the district court of the fifth judicial district, Twin
Falls County, Idaho. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-6-4: VANDALISM (EPA 6.4):
No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the city's sanitary collection system or treatment
facilities. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-7: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION (EPA 7.0):
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
industrial wastewater discharge permit applications, industrial wastewater
discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and
sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to the IPDES program or pretreatment program and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 shall
not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the
public without restriction. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-8: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (EPA 8.0):
The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the
city, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial
user is in SNC if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
   (A)   "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined herein as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
   (B)   "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as those
in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of city personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an industrial wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the city determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2020-018,
10-19-2020)
7-7-9: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
7-7-9-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION (EPA 9.1):
When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of
such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-9-2: CONSENT ORDERS (EPA 9.2):
The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
7-7-9-4 and
7-7-9-5 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2020-018,
10-19-2020)
7-7-9-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING (EPA 9.3):
The city may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the city and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and
a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-
19-2020)
7-7-9-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS (EPA 9.4):
When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user
does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-9-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS (EPA 9.5):
When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to
the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:
   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-
19-2020)
7-7-9-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES (EPA 9.6):
   (A)   When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar
days, be assessed interest at the same rate and in the same manner as that
established by the federal government for the internal revenue service for
unpaid taxes and penalties (currently 6 percent on the date of adoption
hereof). A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties.
   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the city may convene a hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days of
receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-
19-2020)
7-7-9-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS (EPA 9.7):
The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to
the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which
presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
   (A)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The city shall allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in section
7-7-9-8 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   (B)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future recurrence, to the city prior to the date of any show cause
or termination hearing under sections
7-7-9-3 and
7-7-9-8 of this chapter.
   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-9-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (EPA 9.8):
In addition to the provisions in section
7-7-3-12 of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
   (A)   Violation of industrial wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   (B)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (C)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
   (D)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
   (E)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in section
7-7-2 of this chapter.
   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and
be offered an opportunity to show cause under section
7-7-9-3 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-10: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
7-7-10-1: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF (EPA 10.1):
When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may petition the district court of the fifth judicial district of the state of
Idaho in and for the county of Twin Falls through the city's attorney for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the industrial wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on
activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the
user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-10-2: CIVIL PENALTIES (EPA 10.2):
   (A)   A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
   (B)   The city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-
19-2020)
7-7-10-3: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION (EPA 10.3):
   (A)   A user who wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months, or both.
   (B)   A user who wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
   (C)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-10-4: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE (EPA 10.4):
The enforcement remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The
city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city may
take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
7-7-11-1: PERFORMANCE BONDS (EPA 11.1):
The city may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge
permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless such user
first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE (EPA 11.2):
The city may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11-3: PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES (EPA 11.3):
The city may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or
penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous
industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder. (Ord. 2020-
018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11-4: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE (EPA 11.4):
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user
may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, only after
the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 2020-018,
10-19-2020)
7-7-11-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the city. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall
be subject to the provisions of this code governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying
said nuisance. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11-6: INFORMANT REWARDS:
The city may pay for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a
user. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-11-7: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale
of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or
services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance
with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion
of the city. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-12: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
7-7-12-1: UPSET (EPA 12.1):
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection (C) of this section are met.
   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the city and
treatment plant operator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within 5 days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of their treatment facilities until the facilities
are restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord.
2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-12-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS (EPA 12.2):
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in subsections
7-7-2-1(A) and (B)3 through (B)7 of this chapter if it can prove that it did
not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference
and that either: a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-
through or interference; or b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not
change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its IPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-12-3: BYPASS (EPA 12.3):
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   Occurrence Of Bypass: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.
   (C)   Bypass Notifications:
      1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the POTW at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass,
if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case by
case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
   (D)   Bypass Prohibition And Conditions:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C) of
this section.
      2.   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection (D)1 of this section. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-
2020)
7-7-13: WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES:
[RESERVED] (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-14: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
7-7-14-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES (EPA 14.1):
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:
   (A)   Fees for industrial wastewater discharge permit applications including
the cost of processing such applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (E)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs associated with
enforcement activity taken by the city to address industrial user
noncompliance; and
   (F)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the city. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-14-2: SEVERABILITY (EPA 14.2):
If any provision of this ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-14-3: CONFLICTS (EPA 14.3):
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting
with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-2020)
7-7-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. (Ord. 2020-018, 10-19-
2020)
CHAPTER 8
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Damage To, Improper Use Of Water System Prohibited
7-8-3: Use Of Public Or Private Water Supply Required
7-8-4: Connection To Public Water Line, Procedure
7-8-5: Use Of Public Water Lines
7-8-6: Private Water Supply
7-8-7: Building Water Lines And Service Connections
7-8-8: User Fees And Charges
7-8-9: Funds Established
7-8-10: Design And Construction Of Public Water Lines
7-8-11: Inspection And Administration Of Water Facilities
7-8-12: Restriction, Termination Of Water Use
7-8-13: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
7-8-14: Water Conservation
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions given herein shall govern the construction of this chapter and
its application unless otherwise apparent from the context:
ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials.
AWWA: American Water Works Association.
BUILDING WATER LINE: The water line between the water meter and the building.
CITY ENGINEER: As provided in this code.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
OWNER: A person owning real estate which is or proposes to be, connected to the
water system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
PUBLIC WATER LINE: A common water line controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
USER: With respect to residential real property, “user” means the owner of the
real property. With respect to non-residential property, “user” means the
occupant or owner of the real property.
WATER: Potable water intended for human consumption and free from any bacteria
which are harmful to health. All other water shall be considered as polluted
water.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: A collective term referring to the entire piping
system that transports water from the water reservoirs to the users.
WATER SUPERINTENDENT: The person appointed by the city manager to be
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the water supply and
distribution department.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: A collective term referring to all facilities necessary to
purify and transport water from its source to the water distribution system.
WATER SYSTEM: A collective term referring to all supply and distribution
facilities necessary to transport water from its source to the users. (Ord.
1758, 3-5-1976; amd. 1980; Ord. 3106, 10-5-2015; Ord. 2022-08, 11-7-2022)
7-8-2: DAMAGE TO, IMPROPER USE OF WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water supply system or for any
person except authorized city employees, to operate or attempt to draw water
from or obstruct, cover or otherwise deny or restrict access to or the use of
any fire hydrant, water meter, valve or other outlet or access point designed
for the use of the city personnel unless written permission is obtained from
the water superintendent.
If any water user fails to remove any tree limbs, shrubs or other restrictions
or obstructions to any fire hydrant, water meter, valve or other outlet or
access point designed for use by city personnel, after ten (10) days' prior
written notice mailed to the water user's billing address, the city may hire
the work done and the cost of this service shall be the obligation of the water
user and will be charged to the water bill next following the removal of the
restriction or obstruction. (Ord. 2374, 4-20-1992)
7-8-3: USE OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private water source
or to connect to or use the city water system except as herein provided.
   (B)   All houses, buildings or properties under the jurisdiction of the city
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes that contain
facilities designed to supply water for human consumption shall connect such
facilities to a public or private water source conforming to the provisions
contained herein and no permit to construct a building shall be issued until
evidence has been submitted to the building official that the owner has
obtained a permit as provided herein to construct a private water supply or to
connect to a public water line for the purpose of water supply.
   (C)   The owners of all new houses, buildings or properties abutting on any
street, alley or other right of way in which there is located a public water
line of the city, shall, at the owner's expense, make the necessary line
extensions, connect to and use the water from the public water lines as
provided herein; providing, that said public water line is within one hundred
feet (100') (30.5 meters) of his property line.
   (D)   The owners of all existing houses, buildings or properties served by a
private water supply shall, at the owner's expense, abandon the private water
supply and make the necessary line extensions, connect to and use the water
from the public water line, at any time a public water line becomes available
for extension and/or connection within one hundred feet (100') (30.5 meters) of
the property line, providing the state department of health and welfare or the
city water superintendent notifies the owner, in writing, that the private
water supply is polluted.
   (E)   The developer of a new subdivision shall, at his expense, construct
the necessary extensions of the public water system to provide a public water
supply for each lot in his subdivision, providing the boundary line of the
subdivision is within one-half (1/2) mile of a public water line.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the use of the city's potable water
supply as the primary source of irrigation water in all new developments shall
be prohibited, unless negotiated and approved by the City Engineer. For
purposes of this subsection, the term "new development" means any new
subdivision or ZDA, or any development of any parcel of land of two (2) acres
or larger that is not part of a subdivision or ZDA.
(Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976; amd. 1980; Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014; Ord. O-2025-003, 1-27-
2025)
7-8-4: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER LINE, PROCEDURE:
   Any owner of property outside the corporate limits of the city who desires
to connect to a public water line shall first obtain approval of the city
council and upon such approval shall sign a contract for providing water
service. Approval by the city council shall be based on the availability of
surplus capacity in the public facility and the council's determination that
the connection will not have a detrimental effect on the health, safety or
welfare of the other users of the water system. The contract for providing
water service shall, as a minimum, contain the following provisions:
   (A)   A request that the property served be annexed into the city
immediately upon becoming contiguous to said city.
   (B)   An agreement to comply with all policies, rules and regulations
governing the water system and to pay all fees and charges for services
provided, all as established herein.
   (C)   An agreement to comply with all provisions of the building, zoning and
subdivision regulations1 of this code; except, that the requirements for a city
issued building permit shall not apply to property which is not then eligible
for annexation.
   (D)   An acknowledgment that the use of the public water system is granted
only because surplus capacity is available and agreement that such use may be
terminated by the city council at any time said council determines that such
surplus capacity is no longer available or determines the terms of the
agreement are not being complied with by the owner.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the use of the city's potable water
supply as the primary source of irrigation water in all new developments shall
be prohibited, unless negotiated and approved by the City Engineer. For
purposes of this subsection, the term "new development" means any new
subdivision or ZDA, or any development of any parcel of land of two (2) acres
or larger that is not part of a subdivision or ZDA.
(Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976; amd. 1980; Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014; Ord. O-2025-003, 1-27-
2025)
7-8-5: USE OF PUBLIC WATER LINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
   (A)   To discharge or cause to be discharged any substance into any public
water line without written permission from the water superintendent or city
engineer.
   (B)   To allow a public water source to be connected directly to or an
opening from such source to come in contact with any polluted waters or
substances that could cause the water source to become polluted.
   (C)   To waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect stops, valves,
leaky joints or pipes or allow water to wastefully run from any source, whether
he is paying for such wasted water or not. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976; amd. 1980)
   (D)   To use water from a public water line unless he has made application
therefor, paid all required fees and charges, and signed an agreement with the
city to pay all water, sanitation and wastewater user charges when due, and to
be governed by all rules and regulations as provided herein 2 .
If a water user fails to pay the water, sanitation or wastewater user charges
within thirty (30) days after due, the city shall have the power to turn off
the water at said premises and assess a service charge of ten dollars ($10.00)
against the delinquent account. Said user and his guarantor shall not receive
water service at said premises or elsewhere until all delinquent user charges
and service charges have been paid and he has made a new application therefor
in accordance with the provisions herein.
If the city has found it necessary to turn off water as provided above, two (2)
or more times due to nonpayment of user charges by the same user, it shall have
the power to require that the user deposit with the city a sum of money equal
to the estimated user charges for a three (3) month period as a guarantee that
said user charge will be paid when due. In the event a water user, owner or
guarantor has a deposit and defaults in the payment of the water, sanitation or
wastewater user charges or service charges as required herein, the deposit or
as much thereof as may be necessary shall be applied upon the delinquent
charges and the balance thereof refunded to said user and the water service
shall not be turned on again until said user again meets the requirements as
above provided. (Ord. 2496, 7-10-1995)
 
Notes
2 2. See section
  7-3-12 of this title.
7-8-6: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY:
   (A)   When connection to a public water supply is not required as provided
herein, then an owner may construct and maintain at his expense a private water
supply in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private water system the
owner shall obtain a permit from the Idaho department of health and welfare.
The application for such permit shall be made through said department and the
applicant shall furnish any plans, specifications and other information as are
deemed necessary by said department.
   (C)   A permit for a private system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Idaho department of health
and welfare. The department's representative shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the department when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered.
   (D)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private water system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Idaho department of health and
welfare.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private water system in a
sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (F)   Whenever an owner connects to the public water system he shall, at his
expense, physically disconnect any private water source from the public water
source in such a manner that water from a private source will never pass
through the same pipes that carry any water from the public source except as
may be approved by the city council, water superintendent and state department
of health and welfare. Such approval shall be contingent upon the owner, at his
expense, adequately testing the private water source to assure the water
superintendent that the private source is not and has not become polluted and
the construction of an approved positive air separation or reduced pressure
backflow prevention system, or double check valve device between the private
source and the public water line to guarantee that no water from the private
source can enter a public water line if a negative pressure should occur in the
public water line, all as required by law. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976; amd. 1980)
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with or supersede any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Idaho
department of health and welfare. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976)
7-8-7: BUILDING WATER LINES AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   No person except authorized city employees shall uncover, make any
connections with or openings into, use, alter or disturb, any public water line
or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city
engineer or water superintendent.
   (B)   There shall be two (2) classes of water service connection permits:
      1.   A general permit for general use of water; and
      2.   A fire permit for use of water only for fire protection systems.
Both classes of permits shall be further classified by size and as in-city and
out of city permits.
In-city permits shall be applied for by the owner or his agent on a form
provided by the city clerk. In-city permits shall be approved by the water
superintendent. Approval shall only be contingent upon the availability of a
public water line adjacent to the owner's property and the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
Out of city permits shall be applied for by the owner on a form provided by the
city engineer and shall be accompanied by an executed copy of the standard
agreement for services outside the city limits. Out of city permits shall be
approved by the city council based on recommendation by the water
superintendent and the city engineer. Approval shall be contingent upon the
availability of a public water line adjacent to the owner's property, execution
of the agreement for services outside the city limits, conformance of the
proposed land use with city comprehensive plans and the applicable provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976)
   (C)   Service connections shall include the tap into the public water line,
the water service line between the tap and the water meter, the water meter,
meter stand and meter vault. All taps which are constructed into public water
lines shall be constructed by city forces. Service connections to existing
public water lines shall be constructed by city forces. Water service lines in
new subdivisions shall be constructed by city forces or by a qualified
contractor after first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer or
water superintendent. All such service lines shall be as directed and approved
by the city engineer or water superintendent. The owner shall construct all
other portions of the building water system.
The owners or group of owners constructing new public water line extensions in
new subdivisions shall include new service connections for each potential user
and construct the water service line connections thereto, all as directed and
approved by the city engineer or water superintendent.
Service connections or meters installed in new subdivisions which require
relocation will be relocated by city forces. Any cost for relocation of service
connections or meter relocations will be the responsibility of the person
requesting said relocation. The cost of relocation or removal will be based
upon actual time, equipment and materials expended by city forces in doing said
work. Until said cost is paid by the person requesting same, no water service
will be provided to said location. (Ord. 2399, 1-4-1993)
   (D)   A separate and independent building water line and service connection
shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no public water line is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the water superintendent may allow the front building water line to
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building water
line, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
When such connection is allowed through one meter, it shall be assumed that
each user uses an equal portion of the total volume of water passing through
such meter and each such user shall be charged for water service as though he
were on a separate meter. A violation of the water or wastewater regulations 1
by one user which results in termination of service will cause termination of
service to all of the other users on such a connection.
   (E)   Old building water lines may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the water superintendent,
to meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976)
   (F)   The size, alignment and materials of construction of a building water
line, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, connection
into the public water line, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall
all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes 2  or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and AWWA standards shall apply. (Ord.
1758, 3-15-1976; amd. Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
   (G)   No person except authorized city employees shall turn water on or off
at the meter or otherwise tamper with a meter or box. A water valve for the use
of the owner shall be installed in all building water lines so that water may
be turned off and on between the meter box and the building. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-
1976)
   (H)   Water of quality, quantity and pressure type characteristics as shall
supply general public domestic use and city fire department uses will be
provided by the city in conformance with this code. A water user desiring water
characteristics in excess of general public domestic use for the purpose of,
but not limited to: water softening, mineral removal and increased pressures,
may apply to the city council for approval of securing such additional
characteristics at the applicant's full expense, cost and payment. (Ord. 1798,
2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this title.
2 2. See title 4, chapters 1 and 3 of this code.
7-8-8: USER FEES AND CHARGES:
   (A)   Water connection fees shall be established by resolution of the city
council. The fee so established shall be sufficient to reimburse the city for
all connection costs, excluding the cost of the meter. Each fee, including the
system development fee, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be a fixed
amount representing the average cost incurred for performing the service for
which reimbursement is sought. The following fees shall be established: (Ord.
1758, 3-15-1976; amd. 1980)
      1.   General Permit: Reimbursement for processing applications for a
general water permit, tapping the public water line and constructing the meter
and box.
      2.   Fire Permit: Reimbursement for processing applications for a fire
water permit and tapping the public water line.
      3.   Service Line: Reimbursement for constructing a water service line.
      4.   Fire Line: Reimbursement for constructing a fire line.
All owners applying for a general permit or fire permit shall pay the
respective permit fee. When city forces are required, as provided herein, to
construct the water service line or fire line, the owner shall also pay the
respective line fee.
There shall be established fixed fees for standard size connections which are
fifty feet (50') or less in length. If a larger than standard size connection
is required the owner shall pay the fixed fee for the largest standard size
connection plus the cost of the larger size connection to include the extra
cost of any larger size meter. If a longer than fifty foot (50') service or
fire line is required the owner shall pay the fee for the standard length plus
the actual cost of the extra length. If any rock excavation is required the
owner shall pay the cost of such excavation in addition to any other fees or
charges.
   (B)   General user charges shall be established by resolution of the City
Council. All charges so established shall be in proportion to the benefits
derived by the user from the water service. The charges so established shall
generate sufficient revenue to repay any indebtedness, to operate and maintain
the water supply and distribution facilities and to build a reserve fund
sufficient to pay for future capital improvements to the water system. The cost
to be paid by each user shall be based on the volume of water supplied.
   (C)   Fire user charges may be established by resolution of the City
Council. All users with a fire connection shall pay the fire user charge so
established. Any charge so established shall be a fixed monthly charge to
reimburse the general users for providing an adequate supply of water for fire
protection.
   (D)   Turn-on charges shall be established by resolution of the City
Council. The charge so established shall be a fixed charge to reimburse the
City for turning water on and off at the meter and for processing user
applications for water service. Turn-on charges shall be paid at the time a
water turn-on is requested.
   (E)   The City shall install, as provided herein, a flow measuring device to
measure the volume of water used. The City will read all flow measurements
required to calculate the user charges.
7-8-9: FUNDS ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established the following funds for the purpose of accounting
for revenues received and expenditures made in the Water Supply and
Distribution Department of the City.
   (A)   Water Works Fund: This Fund shall be used to receive all revenues and
to disperse expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the Water Supply
Division and the Water Distribution Division and to disperse funds into the
1965 Water Bond Fund. Expenditures for water supply shall be accounted for
separately from expenditures for water distribution.
   (B)   1965 Water Bond Fund: This Fund shall be used to receive funds
transferred from the Water Works Fund and to disperse expenditures to redeem
the 1965 water bonds. This Fund shall show a minimum balance in accordance with
the requirements of the Water Bond Ordinance and shall carry all differences
between the total amount of accumulated revenue received and the expenditures
that have been made during a given year.
The above Funds shall be shown in the annual accounting of the City as follows:
   WATER WORKS FUND
REVENUE EXPENDITURE
REVENUE             EXPENDITURE
1. User Charges     1. Water Supply M & O
2. Connection Fees  2. Water Distribution M & O
3. Miscellaneous    3. 1965 Water Bond Fund
1965 WATER BOND FUND REVENUE EXPENDITURE
REVENUE             EXPENDITURE
1. Water Works Fund 1. Bond Redemption
                   2. Accumulated Reserves
 
7-8-10: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WATER LINES:
   (A)   All design plans and specifications for the construction of public
water lines shall be prepared and approved by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Idaho. All plans and specifications shall conform to
standards established by the City Engineer and shall be approved by him and the
Water Superintendent prior to construction of any public water line.
   (B)   All public water lines shall be constructed in a public utility
easement, traffic way or other approved right of way, properly dedicated to the
public, which is not less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
   (C)   The user shall be responsible for the design and construction of a
public water line in accordance with the policies established by a resolution
of the City Council for the "engineering and construction of improvements
within public rights of way and easements within the jurisdiction of the City
and payment of same" and in accordance with any special agreements required by
the City Council.
   (D)   Construction of public water lines shall conform to the approved plans
and specifications, this City Code and the standards established by the City
Engineer and shall be approved by the City Engineer before the City assumes any
responsibility for the maintenance of the water line. The owner or his
contractor shall notify the City Engineer one day before any excavation is
begun. No trench backfill shall be placed until the City has inspected and
approved the water pipe and a City inspector is available to inspect and test
the backfill material.
7-8-11: INSPECTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF WATER FACILITIES:
   (A)   The water superintendent or city engineer and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement and other work pertinent to supply of water from the city water
system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The water superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the water facilities lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
herein, the water superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees, and the city shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to his
property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of
such work, except when the same may be occasioned by the negligence of the
user.
   (D)   The water superintendent may require a user of water services to
provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
1758, 3-15-1976)
7-8-12: RESTRICTION, TERMINATION OF WATER USE:
   (A)   The city manager is hereby empowered to declare an emergency and issue
a written order limiting or terminating the use of all or any part of the
public water system in the event the supply or pressure of the water in the
public system should for any reason become diminished or in danger of becoming
diminished or for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the city. The effective time of said restrictive use of water
shall be at the hour and day said order is issued and any person using water in
violation of said order shall be in violation of this code.
   (B)   Should any person violate the water or wastewater regulations 1
established by the city council, the water superintendent is hereby empowered
to terminate water and wastewater service to such person until the violation is
rectified. (Ord. 1758, 3-15-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this title.
7-8-13: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The 1977 edition of the Idaho regulations for public drinking water
systems, section 1-8306, as promulgated by the Idaho department of health and
welfare and as now or hereafter amended, is adopted as law by the city together
with all subsequent amendments. The most current version of these regulations
shall prevail.
   (B)   One copy of said regulations shall be kept on file at the office of
the city clerk.
   (C)   The penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code shall be applicable to violations of the above regulations.
(Ord. 2037, 2-1-1982)
7-8-14: WATER CONSERVATION:
   (A)   Minimum Standards: The following minimum standards are considered the
foundation to "best practices of water use". These standards are in effect from
June 1, 2004:
      1.   Increase public awareness of the water supply situation and provide
educational materials about best practices of water use.
      2.   Encourage the entire community to conserve water wherever possible.
      3.   No eating establishment, restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeterias, etc.,
shall serve drinking water unless expressly requested by a patron and will
display notice of such policy.
      4.   Hotels will provide notice of declared water conservation program
and encourage conservation practices.
      5.   City facilities will be limited to the following irrigation
schedule:
               (a)   Three (3) days a week for facilities using a potable water
source,
               (b)   Every other day for facilities using TFCC shares through a
pressure irrigation (PI) system.
      6.   Vehicles will be washed only on scheduled irrigation day.
      7.   When using the city of Twin Falls potable water source, landscape
irrigation is restricted to the following schedule:
Even numbered addresses: Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday.
Odd numbered addresses: Wednesday, Friday, Sunday.
Premises with no street address, such as a median: Monday, Wednesday, Friday.
      8.   When using the city of Twin Falls potable water source, watering
will only be allowed on appropriate irrigation days before ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
      9.   Outdoor landscape watering with a drip irrigation system or handheld
container is allowed at any time.
      10.   All irrigation systems must be maintained in a manner that promotes
efficient watering and limits leaks or damage to the system that would allow
flow of water beyond property lines.
      11.   When using TFCC shares through a pressure irrigation system,
landscape irrigation is restricted to the following schedule:
Even numbered addresses: Irrigate on even calendar days.
Odd numbered addresses: Irrigate on odd calendar days.
Premises with no street address, such as a median: Every other day.
   (B)   Additional Stage 1 Through 3 Restrictions: When deemed appropriate
based on engineering evaluation of projected supply and demand of the city's
potable water sources, the city council may move to additional restrictions for
use of the city's potable water supply as outlined in stages 1 through 3.
      1.   Stage 1:
               (a)   No water customer shall apply water to impervious surfaces
such as streets, sidewalk, patio, deck, etc.
               (b)   Landscape irrigation two (2) days per week on designated
days.
City facilities are restricted to two (2) days a week.
Even numbered addresses: Tuesday, Saturday.
Odd numbered addresses: Wednesday, Sunday.
Premises with no street address, such as a median: Monday, Friday.
      2.   Stage 2:
         (a)   No water customer shall apply water to impervious surfaces such
as streets, sidewalk, patio, deck, etc.
         (b)   Landscape irrigation one day per week on designated days.
City facilities are restricted to one day a week.
Even numbered addresses: Tuesday.
   Odd numbered addresses: Friday.
Premises with no street address, such as a median: Monday.
      3.   Stage 3:
               (a)   No water customer shall apply water to impervious surfaces
such as streets, sidewalk, patio, deck, etc.
               (b)   Indoor use may be reduced by a percentage to be determined
by city council.
               (c)   Landscape irrigation two (2) days per month on designated
days.
City facilities are restricted to one day a week during the first and third
weeks of the month.
Even numbered addresses: Second and fourth Tuesday.
   Odd numbered addresses: First and third Friday.
Premises with no street address, such as a median: Second and fourth Monday.
   (C)   Additional Restrictions: Based upon evaluations of the expected yield
of the city's potable water supply and projected demands the city council may
impose additional restrictions on water use of the city's potable water supply
during any stage up to and including, but not limited to, any of the following:
      1.   No additional water connections to the system allowed; moratorium on
building permits.
      2.   Outdoor watering prohibited except for large trees with trunks of at
least six inches (6") in diameter.
      3.   Operation of water features prohibited.
      4.   Filling or refilling of water features, pools or ponds prohibited.
   (D)   Duration Of Restrictions: Regular evaluations of the expected yield
and projected demands to determine whether it is necessary to continue the
water use restrictions. If water supply conditions warrant restrictions may be
either downgraded or withdrawn subject to city council approval by resolution.
   (E)   Exceptions: Water customers may use water essential to protect the
general public health, safety or welfare. Irrigation systems may be operated at
any time for maintenance purposes (not to exceed 10 minutes per station).
Customers may apply for relief from the watering schedule for purposes of
establishing a new lawn not to exceed three (3) months.
   (F)   Alternate Water Management Plans: A water customer may request relief
from applicable restrictions by filing an alternative water management plan
with the city's water conservation committee. The city will provide customers
with the ability to design water management alternatives that give customers
flexibility in meeting the restrictions while achieving maximum conservation
goals. The city must give approval to the plan and may require periodic
reporting and posted notice of alternate water management plan.
   (G)   Violations And Fines:
      1.   Water Customer's Premises: Each water customer shall be responsible
for compliance with this section with respect to the water customer's premises,
and shall be responsible for applicable fines for noncompliance with this
section. In the event of an alleged violation of this section, proof of the
existence of a declared water shortage and proof of any violation of any
restriction set forth in this section, together with proof that the violation
originated at any water customer's premises shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that the water customer is responsible for the violation.
      2.   Fines Through Stage 2:
First violation: Written warning.
Second violation: Written notice and add a forty dollar ($40.00) fine to the
water bill for the premises.
Third violation: Written notice and add an eighty dollar ($80.00) fine to the
water bill for the premises.
Fourth violation and subsequent: Written notice and add a one hundred twenty
dollar ($120.00) fine to the water bill for the premises.
      3.   Fines Through Stage 3:
First violation: Written notice and add an eighty dollar ($80.00) fine to the
water bill for the premises.
Second violation: Written notice and add a one hundred sixty dollar ($160.00)
fine to the water bill for the premises.
Third and subsequent: Written notice and add a two hundred forty dollar
($240.00) fine to the water bill for the premises.
      4.   Fine Assessed: Any fine assessed shall be added to the customer's
water bill.
      5.   Appeal: Any appeal of a fine imposed may be appealed within fifteen
(15) days of the billing date through the water conservation committee. Any
decision of the water conservation committee may be appealed to the city
council within fifteen (15) days of the decision. Appeals must be in writing
addressed to the utility billing department.
      6.   Notice: Written warning or notice shall be delivered in person to
the customer's premises by leaving it with a person at the premises or posted
on the front door if no one is present to accept it. (Ord. 2940, 5-27-2008)
CHAPTER 9
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-9-1: Definitions
7-9-2: Water Supply Protection
7-9-3: Duty To Install And Inspect Annually
7-9-4: New Construction
7-9-5: Installation Required
7-9-6: Existing Equipment
7-9-7: Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
7-9-8: Access For Inspection
7-9-9: Certified Backflow Technician
7-9-10: Notification Of Public
7-9-11: Records
7-9-12: Violations
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump,
elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flowing back of used water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from
any source other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure
in the potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a potable water
distribution system as a result of cross connection.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR ASSEMBLY: A device, assembly or means designed to
prevent backflow. See plumbing code, as adopted for specifications of such
devices or assemblies.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection between a potable water
system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce
into the public drinking water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or
substance other than the intended potable water. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-1999; amd.
Ord. 2671, 10-30-2000; Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
7-9-2: WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by
the city or any other water utility, unless the water supplying the premises is
protected as required by state and city laws and regulations. Atmospheric and
pressure vacuum breakers must be approved by the International Association Of
Plumbing And Mechanical Officials. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of occupiable premises to effect installation and inspections as required
herein, and to immediately give notice to the supplier water utility of any
deficiencies of his/her water system in that regard. (Ord. 2671, 10-30-2000)
7-9-3: DUTY TO INSTALL AND INSPECT ANNUALLY:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of property where water is consumed
to purchase, install, test and maintain backflow prevention devices or
assemblies commensurate with the degree of hazard wherever it will be possible
for used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures, or substances to
enter any portion of his/her potable water system, and to otherwise control
cross connections. Such owner shall have certified inspections and operational
tests made at least once a year at the owner's own expense. Where the city
deems the hazard to be great, the city may require the owner to have such
inspections and tests at a more frequent interval as prescribed by the city.
All such tests shall be made according to the standards set forth by the state
of Idaho department of environmental quality (DEQ). Test reports will be made
in triplicate, with copies going to the owner, the city water department and
one retained by the inspector for their records. (Ord. 2671, 10-30-2000)
7-9-4: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The building official of the city and the state plumbing inspector will review
all plans and inspect new construction to ensure that unprotected cross
connections are not an integral part of the owner's water system. If a cross
connection cannot be eliminated, protection will be required. Installation of
an air gap or other approved backflow prevention device or assembly, in
accordance with the plumbing code, Idaho Code 37-2102, IDAPA 58.01.08, table
900.02, and the current edition of the "Accepted Procedures And Practice In
Cross Connection Control Manual - Pacific Northwest Section Of American Water
Works Association (AWWA)", as adopted. Water vacating the drinking water supply
must do so by means of an approved air gap or mechanical backflow prevention
device or assembly as required by said code. The owner shall provide the
building official with verification of a certified test of the backflow
prevention device or assembly before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
(Ord. 2719, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 3072, 6-2-2014)
7-9-5: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
Whenever the city deems that a service connection's water usage contributes a
sufficient hazard to the water supply and a property owner has not made
appropriate installation, the installation of an approved backflow prevention
device or assembly shall be required on the lateral service line of the owner's
water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building
being served, but before the first branch line leading off the lateral service
line in any event. The type of protective device or assembly required shall
comply with local and state requirements. The owner shall provide the city
water department with a certified test of such backflow prevention devices or
assemblies within ten (10) working days after their initial installation in
order to determine their adequacy. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-1999)
7-9-6: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All backflow prevention assemblies existing, which do not meet the requirements
hereof shall nonetheless be required to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Backflow prevention assemblies that are deemed by the building
official or the water department to be nonetheless adequate for the purposes
intended, in which event compliance with any particular provision hereof may be
waived in writing by the city. Such previously existing assemblies shall be
subject in any event to the periodic inspection and testing. Whenever an
existing assembly is moved to another location, or requires more than minimum
maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the
unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device or assembly
meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-1999)
7-9-7: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention
devices or assemblies and cross connection control devices required by this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of property where an assembly
or device is installed, and failure to adequately maintain any required
equipment shall be a violation hereof. All installations and repairs of such
equipment shall be effected by a certified journeyman plumber or other agent of
the owner, provided he/she is a certified backflow technician. (Ord. 2638, 12-
27-1999)
7-9-8: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All water systems shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times by
authorized representatives of the city water department in order to determine
whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards including
violations of this chapter exist. In order to make such determination, the
inspection shall include access to above ceiling areas, pits, paneled interior
areas, or their locations where cross connections might exist. The owner and
any occupant shall be responsible to provide a route of access across the
property for inspection purposes that is free from litter, overgrowth, the
threat of a vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be detrimental to the
safety of the inspector or obstructive to his/her ease of access. (Ord. 2638,
12-27-1999)
7-9-9: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of backflow prevention devices or assemblies shall be conducted by a
certified backflow technician who will be responsible for the competence and
accuracy of all tests and reports. Such technician shall be responsible for the
following:
   (A)   Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention devices or
assemblies.
   (B)   Make report of such testing and/or repair within required times to the
owner and the city water department on a form approved for such use by the city
water department.
   (C)   Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts
used.
   (D)   Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts
and that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
   (E)   Maintain his/her license in current condition and his/her testing
equipment in proper operating condition.
   (F)   Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges,
and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention
devices or assemblies. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-1999)
   (G)   Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure
backflow assembly or other backflow prevention device or assembly showing the
serial number, date tested, and by whom, together with the technician's license
number.
   (H)   Inspect high hazard air gap assemblies. (Ord. 2671, 10-30-2000)
   (I)   Comply with all OSHA standards on confined spaces, including
procedures for entering such spaces and required safety equipment. (Ord. 2719,
4-15-2002)
7-9-10: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
Although failure of a consumer to be aware of this chapter shall be no defense
to violation hereof, the water department shall use reasonable means to notify
its customers of the hazards of cross connections and the need for annual
inspection of backflow prevention devices or assemblies. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-
1999)
7-9-11: RECORDS:
The water department shall keep records of cross connection hazards and the
condition of backflow prevention devices or assemblies, including those records
required by state and federal agencies. (Ord. 2638, 12-27-1999)
7-9-12: VIOLATIONS:
Service of water to a consumer on property found to be in violation of this
chapter should be discontinued by the city after written notice of the
violation to both the owner and consumer, if different. A violation exists if:
   (A)   Backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter for control of
cross connections that are not installed, tested, or maintained, as required
herein.
   (B)   It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed.
   (C)   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
   (D)   The periodic system inspection required herein has not been conducted.
   (E)   A false report or false information is provided to the city by or on
behalf of the owner or consumer, with regard to the cross connection or
backflow prevention assembly.
Where written notification of a deficiency is provided by the city, and the
owner fails to take the required corrective action within ten (10) days after
the date of mailing such notice, the city shall immediately discontinue water
service unless the city, at the request of the owner, authorizes a longer time
for completion. Water service will not be restored until all existing
conditions or defects are corrected. In the event that there exists a
noncompliance with state or local law or other circumstances, which poses a
significant health hazard, the city may immediately discontinue water service
until compliance is attained or the significant health hazard is removed. (Ord.
2638, 12-27-1999)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Designation
8-1-2: Street Grades
8-1-3: Names of Streets and Avenues
8-1-4: House Numbering
8-1-5: Vegetation Encroachment
8-1-1: DESIGNATION:
All streets, avenues and alleys within the corporate limits of the City which
have been laid out, platted and dedicated as required by law by any owner or
owners of the land included in such plats and dedications, which have been
accepted by the City by special ordinance, or by being worked by the City under
the authorization therefor by the City Council, and which have not been
vacated, are the streets and avenues and alleys of the City, subject to the
power of the Council to open, close, widen, extend and vacate the same as
provided by law. (1958 Code, ch. IV, art. 1)
8-1-2: STREET GRADES:
The grades given and shown in detail upon the plat of the City, as prepared by
C.H. Mull, City Engineer, under certificate of said Engineer, dated May 20,
1909, as subsequently amended, and on file in the office of the City Clerk, be
and the same are hereby adopted and declared to be the established grades of
said City upon the streets and alleys as shown thereon.
The City Engineer shall establish grades for all new streets and alleys taken
into the City and for all streets and alleys not now graded and shall file
records of the same in the form of profile drawings with the City Clerk. Such
grades shall become official upon filing with the City Clerk.
The elevation figures shown upon maps and profile drawings or set forth in
ordinances refer to Local Datum which is hereby established by the monument at
the corner common to Sections 15, 16, 21 and 22, Township Ten (10) South, Range
Seventeen (17) East, B.M., the top of said monument being at elevation 3812.07
feet above sea level. (1958 Code, ch. IV, art. 1)
8-1-3: NAMES OF STREETS AND AVENUES:
The names of streets and avenues as given and shown on the map of the City
adopted by the City Council on February 25, 1957, and on file in the office of
the City Clerk, or as may hereafter be renamed by said Council, are hereby
declared to be the names of the same. Names of all streets and avenues
hereafter dedicated shall be approved by the City Council. (1958 Code, ch. IV,
art. 1)
8-1-4: HOUSE NUMBERING:
All dwelling and business house numbers within the City shall be determined and
assigned by the City Engineer and shall conform to the numbering map approved
by the City Council, February 25, 1957, and on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
Every owner, or other person having control of any dwelling or business house
within the City, shall place or cause to be placed on the front of said
building the proper number thereof in conformity with the provisions of this
Section, which numbers shall be not less than three inches (3") in height and
shall be so placed as to be plainly visible from the street. (1958 Code, ch.
IV, art. 1)
8-1-5: VEGETATION ENCROACHMENT:
Every owner, tenant, or occupant of the premises abutting or adjoining any
public right of way shall be required to trim or remove any trees, shrubbery,
or plant growth which encroaches over any sidewalk, beyond any curb line, or
over the edge of the pavement in such a manner as to violate the following
provisions:
   (A)   No trees, shrubbery or plant growth of any kind shall encroach over
any sidewalk below a height of seven feet (7') above the sidewalk.
   (B)   No trees, shrubbery or plant growth of any kind shall encroach beyond
the curb line or edge of pavement into any street or alley below a height of
thirteen feet (13') above the street or alley surface. (Ord. 2491, 7-3-95)
CHAPTER 2
USE OF STREETS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permit Required
8-2-2: Application And Permits
8-2-3: Denial Of Application
8-2-4: Approval Of Permits
8-2-5: Progress Of Work
8-2-6: Safety, Warning Signs, And Barricades
8-2-7: Ditching Across Public Right Of Way
8-2-8: Awnings
8-2-9: Use Restrictions
8-2-10: Weight Restrictions
8-2-11: Council May Order Construction
8-2-12: Sidewalks, Curbs And Driveway Approaches
8-2-13: Liability For Damages Or Injuries Occurring On Sidewalks, Curbs And
Driveway Approaches
8-2-14: Bench Seats And Signs
8-2-15: Inspections, Street Restoration, And Bond Requirements
8-2-16: Permit Fees
8-2-17: Suspension, Revocation, Or Modification Of Permit
8-2-18: Cuts In New Pavement Prohibited
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than authorized City
employees, to commence to repair, improve, alter or otherwise perform any
street maintenance or work upon the public streets or Rights-of-Way within the
City without first having obtained a permit from the Public Works Director. In
granting a permit under this Chapter, the Director shall have the authority to
impose any conditions necessary to safeguard the public interest, including,
but not limited to, conditions on use, construction, indemnity, insurance and
compensation to the City for degradation of the useful life of streets and the
Rights-of-Way. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-2: APPLICATION AND PERMITS:
Any person, firm or corporation required to obtain a permit for work in, or
business use of, a public street or Rights-of-Way shall file an application
therefor with the Director of the Department of Public Works. The application
shall be in writing, shall conform to the City Specifications and Standard
Drawings and any amendments thereto, and shall be upon forms provided by the
City. It shall contain information showing the type of construction, the
length, the exact location, the purposes and other information which may be
required by the Public Works Director. The provisions of this section shall
apply to any person, firm or corporation qualified for and seeking permits for
street openings or work in the public streets and Rights-of-Way of the City.
(Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-3: DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
Wherever work in the public streets or Rights-of-Way within the City will
create an exceptional traffic hazard or will unreasonably restrict the use of
City streets, will create an impediment to the free movement of vehicles upon
the aforementioned streets, or an inordinate disruption of parking space at the
curb of aforementioned streets, or a hazard to the travel or safety of
pedestrians thereon, the Public Works Director, at his/her discretion, may deny
any application, or part thereof, made under the terms of this Chapter. (Ord.
O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-4: APPROVAL OF PERMITS:
Permits for any work involving the removal or destruction of any street
surfacing, curb, curb and gutter, sidewalks, signs or other structure with
public right of way shall be approved by the City Engineer.
A permit for performing work in or upon any public right of way shall not
relieve the permittee of responsibility for the safety of water lines, sewer
lines, electrical cables, conduit or any other structures, material or
equipment which may be either above or below the ground, nor shall any such
permit allow the permittee to enter upon any private property.
Permits shall not be granted for any improvement, excavation, fill,
construction, repairs or any other work within the public right of way unless
the contemplated work includes the construction of curb on all streets
adjoining the property where adequate curbing does not exist at the time of
application nor shall any permit be granted for any work within the streets
adjoining any business property unless the contemplated work includes the
construction of curb and sidewalk on all streets adjoining the property where
adequate curbing and sidewalks do not exist at the time of application, except
that in the Manufacturing Zones, as defined in this Code 1 , this requirement
may be waived on approval of the City Council.
Permits shall not be granted for any work within or upon any public right of
way bordering on any property having motor vehicle fuel pumps, driveway
approaches, signs, sidewalks, curbs or other structures which do not conform to
the existing requirements unless such items are to be reconstructed, removed or
altered to conform to the existing requirements and regulations.
Permits shall not be granted for the use of any material other than Portland
cement concrete for any new construction bordering on any business property
within the space between the property line and the curb line of any street.
(Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this code.
8-2-5: PROGRESS OF WORK:
Whenever any work is done in or upon any public right of way, such work shall,
when once commenced, be continued to completion without unnecessary delay. If,
at any time during the progress of the work, the work is left unattended for a
period of more than twenty-four (24) hours, the superintendent of streets may
restore the site to its original condition and the person responsible for the
work shall be billed for the expense of such restoration. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-
28-2022)
8-2-6: SAFETY, WARNING SIGNS, AND BARRICADES:
The safety requirements of the City and of the state of Idaho, as applicable to
any work for which a permit is required hereunder, shall be observed.
Anyone doing any work in or upon any public right of way, whether by permit or
otherwise, shall, if such work is not completed before sunset, provide a fence
or other suitable obstruction around the site of such work and shall provide a
minimum of four (4) flares or lights and keep them burning throughout the hours
from sunset to sunrise. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-7: DITCHING ACROSS PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
When, for any reason, it is necessary to run a ditch of any depth across more
than one-half (½) the width of any street, excavation and backfilling shall be
completed on one-half (½) of the street before any excavation is started on the
other half. Whenever such ditching is to be done, the person responsible for
the work shall inform the police and fire departments not less than two (2)
hours before the work is scheduled to start and shall notify the police and
fire departments as soon as the work is completed. Backfilling shall be done in
accordance with city specifications for sewer construction. (Ord. O-2022-009,
2-28-2022)
8-2-8: AWNINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, construct or maintain any
awning, shade or other structure of any kind or for any purpose over or above
the sidewalk space of any street or avenue within the city, unless each and
every part thereof other than the cloth or fabric covering shall be at least
seven feet (7') above the surface of the sidewalk, and unless each and every
part of the cloth or other fabric covering and fringe be at least six and one-
half feet (61/2') above the sidewalk. Provided, that this section does not, and
shall not, be deemed to affect or change in any way the provisions for height
of electric or other signs 1 . (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 9 of this code.
8-2-9: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Fires: It shall be unlawful for any person to set or maintain a fire
on any public right of way 1 .
   (B)   Rubbish And Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep,
throw, drop, leave or otherwise place any paper, rubbish, dirt, ashes, waste,
trash, weeds, grass or other like substances on any public right of way.
   (C)   Obstruction Of Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct in any way any public right of way except by permit issued under this
code.
   (D)   Horses And Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any
horse, mule or team standing in any street or public place or an enclosure
without a rider or driver, unless such horse, mule or team is securely
fastened.
   (E)   Driving Over Curb: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
cause to be driven any vehicle, team, or wagon over or upon any curbing or
sidewalk, except at locations where an approved crossing has been provided.
(Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  7-3-7 of this code.
8-2-10: WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive or haul or cause to be driven or hauled any
vehicle of which the weight, or distribution of the weight or the length of a
single vehicle, or the combined length of joined vehicles or the width shall
exceed in any respect that or those allowed by any statute of the state now or
hereafter in effect, or any regulation of the state highway department now or
hereafter in effect, or any regulation of any highway district in the city
which now is or hereafter may be in effect; or to drive or haul, or cause to be
driven or hauled, any vehicle having projecting hard knobs or parts upon any of
its wheels, except upon permission of the city engineer, which permit shall
designate the street or streets to be traveled; or to move any weight or
article upon or over any street or streets to be traveled; or to move any
weight or article upon or over any street unless the same be mounted upon, and
the weight thereof borne by, wheels. Provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to the moving of buildings 1  under special permit granted by the
city council or to the operation of any vehicles or equipment by the City in
the care of or work upon its streets and alleys. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 8 of this code.
8-2-11: COUNCIL MAY ORDER CONSTRUCTION:
The City Council may from time to time by order or resolution entered upon its
minutes, order and direct the construction or repair of any sidewalk in the
manner designated in the order and when any sidewalk shall be so ordered built,
rebuilt or repaired, and the owner shall fail or neglect to build, rebuild or
repair the same, the same may be done by the Superintendent of Streets or by
the contractors who may agree to do the same, and such contract shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder therefor. The City Clerk shall, as the
City Council may direct, advertise for bids for the construction of sidewalks
in a newspaper published in the City.
The Clerk shall, upon the passage of any order or resolution of the Council
directing the building or repair of any sidewalk, cause a written notice to be
served on the owner or owners of the property abutting, fronting on or adjacent
to the sidewalks to be constructed, notifying them to construct the same in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the order or resolution
directing the construction of the same, within fifteen (15) days from the date
of the service of said notice, which notice may be served by delivering a copy
thereof to the owner or owners, his or their agent, or by leaving a copy
thereof at the usual place of abode of the owner with any member of the owner’s
family over the age of fifteen (15) years. In case any owner is a nonresident,
or his place of abode cannot be found, then the Clerk shall cause said notice
to be published for four (4) weeks in a newspaper published in the City.
If, at the expiration of the time for which said notice is given, the said
sidewalk shall not be built by the owner of the property abutting, fronting on
or adjacent to the same, then the Superintendent of Streets or contractor shall
proceed as soon as practicable to construct the proper sidewalk as provided by
this Code, and in accordance with the order or resolution directing the
construction of the same.
When any sidewalk shall need repairing or rebuilding to conform to the
requirements of this Code, the Superintendent of Streets may cause notice
signed by the City Clerk to be given to the owner of the property fronting on
or abutting on or adjacent to such walk requiring the repair to be made within
fifteen (15) days, or the rebuilding to be done in fifteen (15) days. The
serving of notice shall be made in the same manner as provided above and if the
same is not repaired or rebuilt within the time above specified, it may be
repaired or rebuilt by the Superintendent of Streets or contractor in the same
manner and upon the same terms as provided for first construction.
As soon as the building, rebuilding or repairing of any sidewalk shall be
completed, the sidewalk shall be inspected by the City Engineer, and if it be
constructed or repaired in conformity with this Code and the order or
resolution ordering the same and the contract, if one is made, a certificate
shall be issued to the Superintendent of Streets or contractor as the case may
be, which shall state the amount of sidewalk constructed by the Superintendent
of Streets or contractor, the street or avenue, where constructed and the
description of the lots and blocks in front of, abutting on or adjacent to
which such sidewalk is built and the amount due for that fronting on, abutting
or adjacent to each lot.
Upon the presentation of one or more such certificates to the City Clerk, he
shall assess the amount of such certificates separately upon the lots fronting,
abutting on or adjacent to the sidewalks built or repaired, and record and file
the assessment roll in his office. At the next regular meeting of the City
Council the Clerk shall notify said Council of the fact that he has made such
assessment.
The City Clerk shall immediately thereafter give the lot owner notice of such
assessment by publication for a period of three (3) days in a newspaper
published in the City, notifying such owner to appear before the Council at its
next regular meeting, giving time and place of such meeting, that such property
owner may be heard before the Council as to the justness and correctness of the
amount so assessed.
In case the owner shall fail to pay such assessment or fail to appear and make
objections or shall fail to have his objections sustained by the Council, then
the assessment, unless the same be paid within ten (10) days after such
hearing, shall be certified by the City Clerk to the proper County officer
having custody of the tax list of Twin Falls County, at the time the said
certificate is made, in the same manner as other City taxes are certified to
said officer.
All such assessments shall be known as special assessments for sidewalk, and
shall be levied and collected as a separate tax in addition to the taxes for
general revenue purposes to be placed on the tax roll for collection, subject
to the same penalties and collected in the same manner as other City taxes.
As soon as the City Clerk has so certified such assessment he shall draw and
issue a warrant to the contractor or Superintendent of Streets as the case may
be for the amount called for in the certificate by the City Engineer upon the
sidewalk fund which shall be signed by the proper officers of the City and
registered in the office of the City Treasurer.
All warrants so issued shall be payable out of the moneys collected by the
County Collector from said sidewalk assessment and the City shall in no event
be liable on such warrants except to the amount collected from said assessment.
When any warrant drawn on the sidewalk fund is presented to the City Treasurer
for payment and there are no funds in the Treasury for the payment of the same,
the Treasurer shall endorse upon the back of said warrant the date of
presentation for payment with words “No Funds”
8-2-12: SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES: 1
   (A)   Property Owner Responsibility: Sidewalks, curbs and driveway
approaches shall be constructed and repaired by the owners of the property
adjoining the location of the work at their expense, at such times and in such
places and manner as herein provided. The City Engineer is hereby authorized
and directed to inspect all such work and to obtain compliance with this Code
and the specifications and drawings herein referred to.
   (B)   Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, place or
construct any crossing over curbing in the City by means of cutting or removing
such curb, or otherwise, without first obtaining a permit from the City
Engineer to be issued according to the regulations contained herein.
Any property owner desiring to obtain a permit for a service driveway or
driveways to serve his property, shall file application therefor with the City
Engineer. Said application shall be in writing and upon a form provided by the
City and shall contain information showing the type of construction, the length
of driveway desired, location of driveway and any other information which may
be required by the City Engineer.
The permit fee for cutting a curb shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per each thirty
five feet (35') or less of driveway.
If the proposed alteration as set forth in said application conforms with the
regulations herein contained and the provisions of Resolution No. 1048 and
amendments thereof, the City Engineer shall issue a permit therefor.
The city council reserves the right to review any decision of the city engineer
upon any application and to permit curb cuts for a distance in excess of thirty
five feet (35') in a commercial or manufacturing district where it appears that
it is necessary to accommodate large trucks and trailers. The public welfare,
safety and convenience shall be considered in granting any such application.
   (C)   Line And Grades: All lines and grades for all construction within the
public right of way shall be established by the city engineer. If sidewalks,
curbing, driveway approaches or other construction in the public right of way
is not set to the lines and grades as established by the city engineer, the
city council may direct removal and reconstruction to the proper grades. (Ord.
O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-12-4-2(C).
8-2-13: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES OR INJURIES OCCURRING ON SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND
DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
Since the owners of property adjoining right of way are responsible for the
construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs and driveway approaches, the city,
its officers and employees shall not be liable for injuries or damages
resulting from a failure to construct, rebuild or repair sidewalks, curbs and
driveway approaches. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-14: BENCH SEATS AND SIGNS:
The city council may permit placement of bench seats or bench signs on public
right of way at a specific location under the following conditions:
   (A)   Application: The application shall contain the name and address of the
applicant, location of the proposed bench, a site plan showing all structures
and improvements within twenty five feet (25').
   (B)   Permit Fee: Any person desiring to place a bench seat or bench sign on
public right of way shall pay a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year
per bench sign and five dollars ($5.00) per year per bench seat for use of the
right of way.
   (C)   Special Use Permit: No bench sign shall be placed without prior
approval by special use permit pursuant to subsection 10-9-8(C) of this code.
   (D)   Liability Insurance: No bench seat or bench sign shall be placed on
public right of way until the person desiring to place the bench provides a
certificate of insurance insuring the city of Twin Falls in the amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence.
   (E)   Location: Benches shall be placed parallel to the edge of the sidewalk
opposite the street and with a clear space for pedestrian traffic of at least
five feet (5') between the front edge of the bench and the edge of the sidewalk
closest to the street.
   (F)   Liability: Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, the
permit holder shall have the sole responsibility for inspection and maintenance
of any benches permitted and, by applying for the permit, agrees to release and
indemnify the city and all adjoining property owners of and from any liability
arising out of the placement, maintenance or use of the benches. (Ord. 2306, 4-
16-1990; amd. Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011; Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-15: INSPECTIONS, STREET RESTORATION, AND BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Inspections: The Department of Public Works, or qualified designee,
shall inspect Rights-of-Way occupancy permit locations/sites to evaluate the
condition of public infrastructure (including but not limited to; curb/gutter,
sidewalk, roadway/street and alley paving, grading, drainage structures,
bridges [vehicular and pedestrian], railings, retaining walls, boulevard or
median improvements, driveway approaches, alley approaches, curb ramps,
landscaping, street lighting, traffic management signs, traffic signals, curb
and pavement markings, traffic management structures, public utility
connections and other related appurtenances to determine if any harm, damage,
degradation 1 , or other adverse condition to the public infrastructure has
occurred. Any/all resultant harm, damage, degradation, or other adverse
condition to the public infrastructure shall be fully restored to prior
condition or better, as determined feasible and/or appropriate by the Public
Works Department. The permittee accepts full responsibility, including any/all
resultant costs, for restoration of the public infrastructure. Failure to
comply with restoration requirements may result in the City completing the
restoration work and;
      1.   Assessing the person, firm or corporation; and
      2.   Drawing against the bonds posted by one or more licensed
contractors; and
      3.   Refusing future ROW permits for nonperformance until performance
issues are resolved.
   (B)   Street Restoration:
      1.   The permittee, or its agent or contractor, shall restore, repair and
replace any portion of the improvements or infrastructure located within
Rights-of-Way that is damaged or disturbed by the permittee’s work in or
adjacent to the Rights-of-Way.
      2.   If the permittee fails to timely restore, repair or replace the
Rights-of-Way as required in this subsection, the City or its contractor may do
so and the permittee shall pay the City’s reasonable costs and expenses in
completing the restoration, repair or replacement including reasonable
attorneys’ fees and expenses.
   (C)   Bond Requirements:
The Public Works Director is authorized to require a bond, or deposit, from any
permittee under this Chapter, in order to guarantee the restoration of the
street and Rights-of-Way or use thereof to its original condition and to
compensate the City for the degradation of the street and Rights-of-Way.
Bond amounts shall be at the discretion of the Public Works Director, utilizing
commonly used estimation formulas for Public Works Construction. (Ord. O-2022-
009, 2-28-2022)
 
Notes
  1. As used in the Chapter, Degradation means a decrease in the useful life of
  the infrastructure located in Rights-of-Way or damage to any landscaping
1 within the Rights-of-Way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the
  Rights-of-Way, resulting in the need to reconstruct the surface and/or
  subsurface structure of any such Rights-of-Way earlier than would be required
  if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
8-2-16: PERMIT FEES:
   (A)   Permits required under this Chapter specifying the authorized work
shall be issued by the Public Works Director, or their designee, upon proper
application therefore and upon payment of the fees required as follows:
      1.   A basic fee in an amount established by the City; and
      2.   The estimated cost of administration and inspection as determined by
the Public Works Director, including the City’s labor, overhead and all other
costs for street work, said amount shall not exceed 20% percent of the
estimated cost of construction.
      3.   In the event that reinspection or other actions are necessary, an
additional fee shall be charged in an amount determined by the Public Works
Director to equal the City’s costs of performing the reinspection or other
actions, including all labor, overhead and other costs.
      4.   A payment of all related street degradation costs.
      5.   Any permit for temporary use or occupation of the public Rights-of-
Way, where there is no construction involved, shall not require payment of a
degradation cost as part of the permit fee.
      6.   Before a permit is issued pursuant to this article, the applicant
shall pay to the City a permit application fee, which shall be determined in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City from time to time.
   (B)   Fees will be reasonably related to the costs inherent in managing the
public Rights-of-Way. As used in this Chapter, these costs include, but are not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   The costs of permitting Rights-of-Way occupant(s),
      2.   Verifying Rights-of-Way occupation(s),
      3.   Mapping Rights-of-Way occupation(s),
      4.   Inspecting job site(s) and Rights-of-Way restoration(s),
      5.   Administering this Chapter,
      6.   Costs relating to the degradation of the Rights-of-Way (i.e., the
cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the City at the time
the permit is issued); and (7) disruption costs resulting from traffic
disruption and delay.
   (C)   The portion of the permit fee relating to degradation costs shall be
reduced by the City in cases where the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the excavation proposed will be
used by two (2) or more entities, legally and financially unrelated, for the
installation, maintenance, or repair of facilities.
   (D)   The degradation cost portion of the permit fee shall be further
reduced in cases where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Director that the excavation to be made will be commenced and
completed during the twelve-month period immediately prior to the scheduled
repaving or resurfacing of a street, as indicated in the most recent edition of
the City’s repaving plan. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-17: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   The Public Works Director may suspend, revoke, or modify any permit
issued under this section when such permit holder, or any party to the permit:
      1.   Violates any of the terms and requirements outlined in the approved
permit;
      2.   Exceeds the scope of the use or work outlined in the permit
application;
      3.   Has obtained a permit by fraud, misrepresentation, concealment, or
through inadvertence or mistake; or
      4.   Makes a misrepresentation or fails to disclose a material fact to
the City related to any of the obligations set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. O-
2022-009, 2-28-2022)
8-2-18: CUTS IN NEW PAVEMENT PROHIBITED:
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, “new pavement” includes any paving
or surface treatment that has been in place less than five (5) years; nominal
surface treatments such as chip, slurry, or fog seals are excluded from this
definition.
   (B)   A permit to cut new pavement shall not be granted. Permittees shall
determine alternate methods to avoid cutting new pavement.
   (C)   Exceptions:
      1.   Emergency which endangers life or property;
      2.   Interruption of essential utility service;
      3.   Work that is mandated by City or by state, or federal legislation;
      4.   Service for buildings or customers where no other feasible means of
providing service exists; and
      5.   Cuts smaller than two (2) square feet, only permitted outside of a
wheel path as determined by Public Works Director.
   (D)   Permits issued under (C)(1) to (C)(4) above require mill and inlays of
all lanes affected. Unless otherwise specified by the Public Works Director or
their designee, mill and inlays shall extend at least one hundred (100) feet on
arterials, or at least fifty (50) feet on collectors.
   (E)   Permits issued under (C)(5) above shall be in accordance with the City
Specifications and Standard Drawings. (Ord. O-2022-009, 2-28-2022)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Title
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Regulations Governing Park Property
8-3-4: Sanitation Regulations
8-3-5: Traffic Regulations
8-3-6: Recreation Activities
8-3-7: Behavior In Parks
8-3-8: Merchandising, Advertising And Signs
8-3-9: Park Operating Policy
8-3-10: Penalty
8-3-11: Enforcement
8-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TWIN FALLS CITY ORDINANCE
REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS. (Ord. 1920, 1-2-1979)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
CITY: The city of Twin Falls.
DIRECTOR: A person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities,
and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, trail, swimming pool, beach, recreation
center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to
active or passing recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
VEHICLE: Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn, or self-
propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service
of the city parks. (Ord. 1920, 1-2-1979; amd. Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
8-3-3: REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARK PROPERTY:
No person, without the authorization of the director, in a park shall:
   (A)   Buildings And Other Property:
      1.   Disfiguration And Removal: Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, rocks, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
      2.   Removal Of Natural Resources: Remove any beach sand, whether
submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down
timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting, or other means or agency.
      3.   Erection Of Structures: Construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
   (B)   Trees, Shrubbery, Lawns:
      1.   Injury And Removal: Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or
plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any
tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or
in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
   (C)   Climbing Trees: Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments,
vases, fountains, railing, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
   (D)   Wild Animals, Birds:
      1.   Hunting: Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
annoy, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall they
remove or have in their possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs,
nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor destroy the nests or habitat of any
wild animal; nor shall they collect, remove, have in their possession, give
away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any
specimen alive or dead collected from any park area except for an authorized
licensed trapper.
      2.   Feeding: Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any
tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substance. (Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
8-3-4: SANITATION REGULATIONS:
No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Pollution Of Waters: Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to
be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body
of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or
drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
   (B)   Refuse And Trash: Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage
or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere. (Ord. 1920, 1-2-1979)
8-3-5: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
No person, without the authorization of the director, in a park shall:
   (A)   State Motor Vehicle Laws Apply: Fail to comply with all applicable
provisions of the state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and
operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this
and other provisions of this code.
   (B)   Enforcement Of Traffic Regulations: Fail to obey all traffic officers
and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to
direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways,
streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions
of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued
subsequently by the director.
   (C)   Obey Traffic Signs: Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs
indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others
posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
   (D)   Speed Of Vehicles: Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted.
   (E)   Operation Confined To Roads: Drive any vehicle on any area except the
paved roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director.
      1.   Drive a motorized vehicle in any area of the Rock Creek Canyon
Parkway or the Snake River Canyon Rim Trail System.
   (F)   Parking:
      1.   Designated Areas: Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted
directions thereat and with the instructions of any attendant who may be
present.
      2.   Parking: Park on the road or driveway at any time unless directed by
a police officer or a park attendant. All unauthorized motorized vehicles shall
be prohibited from standing or parking within any Twin Falls park during their
closed hours.
      3.   Muffler Required: Fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the sound
of the engine in a motor vehicle.
   (G)   Bicycles:
      1.   Confined To Roads: Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular
road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to
wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any
paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
         (H)   Trucks, Trailers And Other Equipment: Operate or park trucks or
trailers of one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity or more or other equipment on
any city park parking lot without the authorization of the city. (Ord. 2735, 9-
16-2002)
8-3-6: RECREATION ACTIVITIES:
No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Scuba Diving: Scuba dive in any designated swim area in Dierkes Lake.
   (B)   Golf: Golfing or hitting golf balls is prohibited except where
specific facilities have been provided.
   (C)   Boating:
      1.   Designated Areas: Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating by the director. Such activity shall be in accordance
with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be adopted.
   (D)   Hunting And Firearms: Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No
person shall use, carry or possess loaded firearms of any descriptions, or air
rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other form of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of
trapping device provided that it shall be lawful for police officers or other
duly authorized officers while on duty to use and carry firearms. It is also
provided for authorized licensed animal control officer to hunt or trap in any
park area. Provided further that this provision does not apply to lawful use,
possession and transportation of firearms on designated firing ranges. Shooting
into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
   (E)   Picnic Areas And Use:
      1.   Regulated: Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the
maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with
any directions given to achieve this end.
      2.   Gatherings: Conduct or be a part of any large group, meeting,
assembly or audience consisting of fifty (50) or more persons without
permission of the director.
      3.   Duty Of Picnicker: Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans,
bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly
disposed of elsewhere.
   (F)   Camping: Camp without prior permission of the director. Permission
shall be limited to organized groups who will be given a designated area for
camping.
   (G)   Games: Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model
airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
   (H)   Horses: Have a horse in any designated park or park area without
written permission of the director.
   (I)   Keg Beer: Possess or use keg beer without a permit issued pursuant to
section
3-7-12 of this code.
   (J)   Fishing: Fish in any waters, whether by the use of a hook and line
net, trap, or other device, except in water designated for that use and must
follow the Idaho fish and game regulations.
   (K)   Hot Air Balloons: Launch, land, or tether a hot air balloon except
with written permission from the director. (Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
8-3-7: BEHAVIOR IN PARKS:
No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Intoxicating Beverages: Possess or consume any alcohol or intoxicating
beverage where posted signs prohibit such possession or consumption, or be
under the influence of any intoxicating beverage. (Ord. 2936, 4-28-2008)
   (B)   Fireworks And Explosives: Brought or have in his possession, or set
off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives or inflammable material, or
discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article
that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous
from any of the foregoing standpoints. (Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
   (C)   Domestic Animals: Permit or allow a dog or other domestic animal to
enter or remain in any park except on a leash and/or carried while leashed by
such person owning or having the care, custody and control of dog or domestic
animal, except as specifically authorized by the city within temporary or
permanent "dog parks". No dogs or other domestic animal shall be permitted at
Dierkes Lake except for water dog training shall be allowed in those areas of
Dierkes Lake specifically signed for that purpose. In no event shall firearms
be used during said training. Unless said training is actually taking place,
the dog shall at all times be leashed. (Ord. 3024, 1-17-2012)
   (D)   Fires: Build or attempt to build a fire except in fireplaces provided
for that purpose. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter burning
material or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway,
road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
   (E)   Loitering And Boisterousness: Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any unlawful conduct or
criminal activity or in any way commit a violation or breach of the peace.
   (F)   Glass Containers: Bring to the park or have in his possession while in
the park any glass bottle or other glass beverage container.
   (G)   Safety: Endanger the safety or health of any person by any conduct or
act.
   (H)   Interference: Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its
facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and the
rules and regulations applicable to such use.
   (I)   Soliciting: Solicit or accost other persons for the purpose of begging
or soliciting. (Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
8-3-8: MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS:
No person in a City park or recreational facility shall:
   (A)   Vending And Peddling: Expose or offer for sale any article, thing, or
service; nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article, thing, or service.
Exception is herein made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by
and under the authority and regulation of the director. (Ord. 1920, 1-2-1979;
amd. Ord. 2021-013, 6-28-2021)
8-3-9: PARK OPERATING POLICY:
   (A)   Hours: Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. except as otherwise posted. Violation of any curfew
established by resolution of the city council shall be a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in section
8-3-10 of this chapter.
   (B)   Closed Areas: Any section or part of any park may be declared closed
to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regularly and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find
reasonably necessary.
   (C)   Effect Of A Permit: A Twin Falls park permittee shall be bound by all
park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the
same were inserted in said permit. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injuries sustained by any person
or property by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued. The director, or a duly authorized
representative, shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon finding of
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause. (Ord. 2735, 9-16-2002)
8-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount
not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned in the county
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or be both so fined and
imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord.
1920, 1-2-1979)
8-3-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Officials: Police officers, the director, and park attendants, or duly
authorized representatives of the director, shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Ejectment: A police officer, any park attendant, the director, or
their duly authorized representative, shall have the authority to eject from
the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. Any person ejected
from the park who has not been previously ejected during the preceding three
hundred sixty five (365) days shall leave promptly and peaceably and shall not
return to the park for any reason for a period of one week from the day of
their ejectment. Any person ejected from the park who has been previously
ejected during the preceding three hundred sixty five (365) days shall be
served a no trespass order by the police, and shall leave promptly and
peaceably and shall not return to the park for any reason for a period of one
year after the day of their ejectment. Any person charged with committing a
crime at any park shall be barred from returning to the park during the
pendency of criminal charges, and for a period of one year following the
incident if the person pleads guilty or is found guilty of any criminal offense
as a result of the charge.
Any person aggrieved by the decision to eject or bar them from a park may
appeal such decision to the city council within seven (7) days. The appeal to
the city council must be in writing and must set forth the reasons therefor why
the person should not be denied entrance to the park. The city council shall
set the time and place for a hearing a reasonable period of time subsequent to
the applicant's written notice. Notice of such hearing shall be personally
served upon the person, or mailed postage prepaid to the person at his last
known address, at least three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing. The
order of the city council shall be final.
   (C)   Seizure Of Property: A police officer shall have the authority to
seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in
violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Removal Of Vehicles: Whenever any police officer or duly authorized
representative finds a vehicle unattended in the park and the vehicle is parked
in violation of this chapter, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest available garage or place of safety. (Ord. 2900, 3-26-
2007)
CHAPTER 4
TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Title
8-4-2: Statement Of Purpose
8-4-3: Definitions
8-4-4: Responsibilities Of Adjacent Property Owners
8-4-4-1: Adjacent Property Owners' Responsibilities For Public Trees
8-4-4-2: Responsibilities For Private Trees
8-4-4-3: Responsibilities For Alley Trees
8-4-5: Licensing Of Private Tree Service Companies
8-4-6: Notification And Permits
8-4-7: Damaging, Destroying, Mutilating Or Removing Public Trees
8-4-8: Public Nuisances
8-4-9: Abatement Of Public Nuisances
8-4-10: Penalties For Violation
8-4-11: Severability
8-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TWIN FALLS TREE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-
2004)
8-4-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the implementation and continuation of
proper professional care of the city's public trees by setting forth and
enforcing a set of tree care regulations and standards by which the community
forest shall be managed. (Refer to the "Twin Falls City Arboricultural
Specifications And Standards Guide".) This chapter is not intended to resolve
or regulate disputes or tree management issues on private property that do not
affect the safety of the general public.
This chapter is enacted to:
   (A)   Promote the general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Protect public safety, welfare, property and health.
   (C)   Preserve and enhance the community's social and economical environment
with a diverse range in size, maturity and species of public trees.
   (D)   Increase awareness and appreciation of maintaining a healthy community
forest by both professionals and the general public.
   (E)   Encourage building, development, site and utility planning/practices
that prevent and prohibit not only the indiscriminate removal or destruction of
trees but also avoidance of unnecessary disturbance to trees, above and below
ground, within the city.
   (F)   Provide a stable and sustainable community forest by establishing
common guidelines and enforcement procedures for proper tree management
practices such as contained in ANSI A300 and the "Twin Falls City
Arboricultural Specifications And Standards Guide". (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
ANSI A300: The "American National Standard For Tree Care Operations - Tree,
Shrub And Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices". This document
outlines basic national performance standards for tree pruning and maintenance.
It was first published in 1995 and revised in 2002 by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person(s) owning property adjacent to public
rights of way.
ARBORICULTURE: The management of trees including planting, pruning, watering,
fertilizing, removal or any other action which affects the healthy growth and
maintenance of trees.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The collective masses of trees found within a city's
boundaries, including both publicly and privately owned trees.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in
all directions to an imaginary line ten feet (10') outside of the drip line.
DISEASE: A process that causes anatomical disruptions, physiological
dysfunctions, and energy disruptions that lead to decline and/or death of an
organism or any of its parts.
HAZARD TREE: Any tree or part thereof (public or private) that poses a high
risk (upon fracture or failure) for damage or injury to property, power lines,
or people.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the city and required for any activity above
or below ground that may impact the canopy or the critical root zone of any
public tree.
PEST: Any insect, disease, animal or other organism that causes harm or damage
to trees.
PRIVATE TREE: Any tree whose trunk is located entirely on or within the legal
boundaries of a property, which is owned by private individuals or
organizations.
PROPERTY OWNER: The recorded owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PRUNING: The practice of managing tree health according to the national
standards as set forth in ANSI A300 and the "Twin Falls City Arboricultural
Specifications And Standards Guide".
PUBLIC NUISANCE: See section
8-4-8 of this chapter.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Real property owned, managed, or leased to the city and
dedicated to the public for present or future use.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by,
dedicated to, or deeded to the public or public's use, for the purpose of
providing vehicular, pedestrian and other public use. Such public property
provides circulation and travel to abutting properties and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, landscaping, provisions for public
utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open public space.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm or injury and/or
property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using
public property.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree whose trunk is located partly or in whole on public
property.
STREET TREE: Trees located on a public right of way between the private
property line and the curb and/or edge of pavement adjacent to a city street,
alley, avenue, boulevard, or public rights of way in street medians within the
city.
TOPPING: The removal of the top portion of the leader stem(s). "Rounding",
"heading back" or any other term demonstrated by severe cutting back of limbs
within a tree crown to laterals, stubs, or buds that are not large enough to
assume a terminal (leader) role is also considered "topping".
TREE: Any perennial woody plant that generally grows taller than twelve feet
(12') and branches several feet above the ground from the stem or trunk of the
plant.
TREE COMMISSION: See section
2-8-1 of this code. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS:
Any person in possession of private property shall maintain trees upon adjacent
public rights of way and any trees upon private property, which may affect
public property, in a safe, healthy condition in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. Adjacent property owners have the following responsibilities.
(Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-4-1: ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PUBLIC TREES:
   (A)   Permits: Adjacent property owners shall:
      1.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for work done
on any public trees as required in section
8-4-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior to
commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalk adjacent to any
public trees as required in section
8-4-6 of this chapter.
      3.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for any tree
planting on public property as required in section
8-4-6 of this chapter.
   (B)   Routine Maintenance: Routine public tree maintenance for trees planted
after July 1, 2004:
      1.   Adjacent property owners shall:
               (a)   Prune and maintain trees planted according to ANSI A300.
               (b)   Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not
acceptable forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees.
               (c)   Except as otherwise determined by the tree commission,
branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide
sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to
interfere with "public travel" as defined by section
8-1-5 of this title.
               (d)   Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs
that are considered a "public nuisance" as defined in section
8-4-8 of this chapter.
               (e)   Any commercial chemical application on public trees or
public rights of way trees must be applied by a state of Idaho department of
agriculture licensed professional applicator.
      2.   Control pests on trees located on public rights of way adjacent to
the owners' private real property.
      3.   Provide water sufficient to keep trees located on public rights of
way adjacent to the owners' private real property in a healthy, growing
condition.
   (C)   Protection/Preservation:
      1.   Obtain a permit from the tree commission before performing any
activity, which may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical
root zone).
      2.   Notify the tree commission when any part of a public tree is damaged
or destroyed. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-4-2: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PRIVATE TREES:
   (A)   Routine Tree Maintenance:
      1.   Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner's private real
property that are considered a "public nuisance" as defined in section
8-4-8 of this chapter.
      2.   Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that
are considered a "public nuisance" as defined in section
8-4-8 of this chapter. Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be
pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so
as not to interfere with "public travel" as defined in section
8-1-5 of this title.
      3.   Control of pests on trees located on the owner's private real
property that may pose a threat to public trees upon determination by the tree
commission.
      4.   Remove or barricade all debris (wood, branches and leaves) on public
property at the end of the working day on which any tree work is done. (Ord.
2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-4-3: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALLEY TREES:
Prune, remove or otherwise abate "public nuisances" as defined in section
8-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-5: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICE COMPANIES:
Tree service companies performing work on public trees are required to apply
for a license through the Twin Falls parks and recreation department.
Applications are then reviewed by designated members of the Twin Falls tree
commission and the Twin Falls parks and recreation department to ensure
applicants meet the "Twin Falls City Arboricultural Specifications And
Standards Guide". Upon approval, licenses shall be issued by the Twin Falls
parks and recreation department valid for two (2) years from the date of issue
for a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   (A)   Licensing Requirements:
      1.   International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist on
staff.
      2.   An ISA certified arborist or an ISA certified tree worker to be on
site while work is being performed.
      3.   Liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      4.   Knowledge and compliance of ANSI A300 section 2.3.
   (B)   Revocation Of License: The Twin Falls parks and recreation department
with the recommendation of the Twin Falls tree commission may revoke a license
for violation of any section of this chapter. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-6: NOTIFICATION AND PERMITS:
   (A)   Notification: No person may perform any of the following acts without
first notifying the Twin Falls parks and recreation department. Contact the
Twin Falls parks and recreation department via mail, phone, fax, or e-mail at a
minimum of two (2) business days prior to commencement of the proposed work.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the
requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by law:
      1.   Prune or otherwise disturb any public tree. This provision shall not
be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to public rights of way
from minor pruning, watering, or fertilizing such trees;
      2.   Attach any object to public tree(s);
      3.   Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the
critical root zone of any public tree(s);
   (B)   Application Procedures And Requirements: Permit application procedures
and requirements for public tree(s) removal:
      1.   This is in no way intended to interfere with the immediate removal
of a tree that presents a hazardous or emergency situation;
      2.   Upon inspection, the Twin Falls tree commission may issue a permit
through the Twin Falls parks and recreation department. Permits are available
at the Twin Falls parks and recreation office (136 Maxwell Avenue) between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and one
o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday;
      3.   The Twin Falls parks and recreation department may condition the
approval of any permit;
      4.   Prior to the removal of any public, street, or alley tree, the
property owner or private tree service company intending to perform the work,
which is currently licensed by the city of Twin Falls, must make a request for
permit. All work must be completed within thirty (30) days of issuance of said
permit;
      5.   Whenever a public or street tree is removed, the stump of said tree
shall also be removed. Permit holders shall then replace the removed tree in
accordance with subsection
8-4-7(E) of this chapter. Tree replacement shall be a condition of issuance of
a permit for removal, unless the Twin Falls tree commission for good cause
shown waives such requirement. Tree replacement is the responsibility of the
permit holder. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-7: DAMAGING, DESTROYING, MUTILATING OR REMOVING PUBLIC TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Damage, destroy, mutilate, or remove any public tree.
   (B)   Attach any device or structure (i.e., tree houses, lights, signs,
etc.) to or on public trees unless otherwise authorized by the tree commission.
   (C)   Store, spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which may be
harmful to trees, on any part of a public tree or within the critical root zone
of a public tree.
   (D)   Damage public trees through construction activities in violation of
the conditions of a permit issued under this chapter. Such activities include,
but are not limited to:
      1.   Making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees
unless otherwise approved by the tree commission.
      2.   Damage roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill within
the critical root zone of a tree.
      3.   Engage in any pruning activity on public trees not in accordance
with ANSI A300, including, but not limited to: topping, heading, rounding or
shearing unless otherwise approved by the tree commission.
   (E)   Remove any public or street tree and fail to plant a replacement tree.
The replacement tree shall be an approved variety from the city of "Twin Falls
Tree Selection Guide" and shall be a minimum of a ten (10) gallon size
specimen. Where utility lines are present, a class I type tree (mature height
not greater than 20 feet) shall be required. Replacement tree shall be planted
within thirty (30) days of removal of said tree, or as soon as weather
conditions allow. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-8: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this chapter:
   (A)   Any tree or part thereof (public, street or private) which, by reason
of location or condition, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined
by an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist in
conjunction with the Twin Falls tree commission.
   (B)   Any tree or part thereof (on public or private property) which
obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which
obstructs public street lighting.
   (C)   Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or private
property) which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to injure or
harm public trees.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to plant, transplant or set out any poplar
(cottonwood) or willow tree on any street, alley, avenue, sidewalk or other
public place or within fifty feet (50') of any sidewalk, paved street, alley or
avenue or on any private property within seventy five feet (75') of any main or
lateral sewer of the sewer system.
   (E)   When the roots of any poplar (cottonwood) or willow tree planted on
private property or on public property by the adjoining property owner have
obstructed or are about to obstruct or damage any sewer line, curb, gutter,
sidewalk or street, it shall be the duty of the owner of said private property
to remove the encroachment within ten (10) days from the service of the notice.
(Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-9: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this
chapter:
   (A)   Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (public or private)
declared to be a public nuisance as set forth in section
8-4-8 of this chapter shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Costs for nuisance abatement
are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner of a street tree or the
property owner of a "private tree" as defined in section
8-4-3 of this chapter.
   (B)   The tree commission may cause a written notice to be personally served
or sent by mail to the owner of the particular property.
   (C)   In the event the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the
notice, the tree commission is authorized to cause the abatement of said
nuisance without further notice. The reasonable cost of such abatement will be
charged to the subject property owner. Monies which have not been recovered
through the city bill collection procedures may result in a lien against the
property or assessed on taxes as provided for in Idaho Code title 50. In
addition, the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located may be
subject to prosecution under this chapter, or any other chapter of this code or
the Idaho Code for maintaining a public nuisance. Nothing in this provision
shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirement of obtaining
permits under section
8-4-6 of this chapter.
   (D)   The tree commission is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of
any nuisance if it is determined by the tree commission to be an emergency or
immediate hazard to public safety.
   (E)   If the tree commission determines that disposal of the wood, branches
and soil from removal or pruning of a nuisance tree is required to complete
abatement, such disposal shall be done as required by the tree commission.
Costs associated with the disposal of material from private trees shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-10: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person performing tree work that violates any provisions of this chapter
may be punishable by a fine equal to or less than the monetary value of the
tree as assessed by a certified arborist or certified tree appraiser using the
guidelines established by the International Society of Arboriculture and the
degree of damage to the tree. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
8-4-11: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable and a finding by a
court of law that a provision of this chapter is unlawful shall have no effect
on the remaining provisions. (Ord. 2791, 7-6-2004)
CHAPTER 5
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2019, 8-10-1981)
CHAPTER 6
CITY IRRIGATION SYSTEM
(Rep. by Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 7
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Authorization (Rep. by Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-2: Joint Service Agreement
8-7-3: Airport Advisory Commission Created
8-7-4: Airport Commercial Ground Transportation Regulations
8-7-5: Airport Traffic And Parking Regulations
8-7-6: Fees And Charges
8-7-7: Off-Airport Rental Car Businesses
8-7-7-1: Purpose
8-7-7-2: Scope
8-7-7-3: Permits
8-7-7-4: Requirements
8-7-7-5: Prohibited Actions And Activities
8-7-7-6: Advertising And Telephones
8-7-7-7: Condition Of Strict Compliance
8-7-7-8: Violation Procedure
8-7-7-9: Hearing Before Airport Advisory Commission
8-7-7-10: Appeals
8-7-7-11: Permit Application Fee
8-7-7-12: Violation And Penalty
8-7-7-13: Severance
8-7-1: AUTHORIZATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-2: JOINT SERVICE AGREEMENT:
The joint service agreement between the City of Twin Falls, Idaho, and the
County of Twin Falls, Idaho, entered into on December 10, 1968, and designated
Document C-375 and as on file in the City Clerk's office is confirmed and
ratified in all respects. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-3: AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created an Airport Advisory Commission of six (6) members. The
members are to be selected three (3) by the City and three (3) by the County
from the general populace residing within the respective jurisdictions. No
member of said Airport Advisory Commission may hold an elective public office.
The term of each member shall be three (3) years. Any vacancy which occurs on
this Commission shall be filled by the jurisdiction losing a position on the
Airport Advisory Commission and for the remaining portion of the vacated term.
No compensation shall be provided for members of the Airport Advisory
Commission. Each jurisdiction may appoint a nonvoting, ex officio member of the
Commission from the respective governing body. The Commission shall elect a
chairman for the conduct of business, and the Airport Manager shall serve as
secretary and a nonvoting ex officio member of the Commission.
The Airport Advisory Commission shall plan the operation, construction,
improvement and development of said Airport; shall recommend the annual budget
for operation, improvement, construction and development of said Airport shall
recommend employment of Airport personnel; consider and recommend contract and
lease provisions for all operations conducted at the Airport and shall
recommend and advise generally the respective governing bodies as to all
matters concerning the Airport.
All meetings of the Airport Advisory Commission shall be called by the Airport
Manager or the chairman of the Airport Advisory Commission and shall be
conducted at the Airport. A quorum shall consist of four (4) representatives.
The passage of any action shall require a minimum of four (4) votes. (Ord.
2636, 12-6-1999)
8-7-4: AIRPORT COMMERCIAL GROUND TRANSPORTATION REGULATIONS:
All commercial ground transportation at the Airport and the parking of all
commercial ground transportation vehicles shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Airport Manager.
No ground transportation carrier shall be allowed to solicit any business in
the air terminal building or upon any area adjacent to the air terminal
building; provided, however, counter space within the air terminal building may
be allowed by written agreement.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial ground transportation carrier who does
business at the Airport to fail to post in the air terminal building a schedule
of its rates and tariffs to all points serviced by the carrier. (Ord. 2631, 10-
12-1999)
8-7-5: AIRPORT TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Speed Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any
motor vehicle upon any road or area on Joslin Field, Magic Valley Regional
Airport in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, or as posted, except the main
access road from the High Line Canal to the Airport Loop Road junction where
the maximum speed shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   (B)   Parking:
      1.   Parking Areas: The Airport Manager is authorized and directed to
designate on the Joslin Field, Magic Valley Regional Airport free public
parking, long-term public parking, short-term public parking, parking for
commercial ground transportation vehicles, airport employee parking, airport
lessee employee parking, parking spaces for on- premises automobile concession
vehicles and handicap parking spaces for vehicles properly displaying
handicapped vehicle licenses or permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in a parking area for
which the person or vehicle is not authorized to park.
      2.   Passenger, Baggage And Cargo Loading And Unloading Areas: The
Airport Manager is authorized and directed to designate passenger, baggage and
cargo loading and unloading areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in a designated passenger,
baggage or cargo loading and unloading area, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or
unloading passengers, baggage or cargo.
   (C)   One-Way Traffic: One-way traffic may be established and designated
upon any road on said airport, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a vehicle contrary to said designation.
   (D)   Towing Vehicles: Towing of vehicles shall be permitted as provided in
this Code.
   (E)   Enforcement: The Airport Manager or any regularly employed and
salaried City employee designated by the Airport Manager can act as an
enforcement agent. If the Airport Manager or designated employee observes a
violation of this section, he or she shall issue a ticket with the date, time,
license number, State registration, make of vehicle and the employee's name.
(Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
   (F)   Parking Violation: If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked
in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter and the identity
of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, person, corporation or named
lessee in whose name said vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie
responsible for said violation. The ticket shall notify the owner or operator
of the fine increase for failure to pay such fine within the initial three (3)
business day period and the penalties for failure to pay the increased fine
within the notice period.
There is hereby imposed a thirty five dollar ($35.00) fine, or fifty dollar
($50.00) fine if not paid within three (3) business days. Any owner or operator
of such vehicle violating said provisions and who fails to pay said fine within
three (3) business days in the collection box at City Hall shall be subject to
the penalty set forth herein. Fines unpaid for a period of forty five (45) days
following issuance may be turned over to a collection agency for collection and
shall be subject to an additional twenty five dollar ($25.00) charge for
collection.
Upon the failure of the owner or operator to pay the required fine within three
(3) business days, the person as designated by the City may, after the giving
of written notice, sign a complaint against the owner or operator of the
vehicle cited for the violation of this chapter. Written notice to the owner or
operator is deemed sufficient if mailed to the last known address of such
person. The complaint may be signed after five (5) days from the date of the
notice. (Ord. 2018-021, 10-22-2018)
8-7-6: FEES AND CHARGES:
Fees and charges for aircraft landing, aircraft rescue and firefighting and
security for commercial service and public charter aircraft may be established
by the concurrence of the City Council and County Commission. (Ord. 2631, 10-
12-1999)
8-7-7: OFF-AIRPORT RENTAL CAR BUSINESSES:
8-7-7-1: PURPOSE:
In order to protect the public, for the order and peace of the airport, and to
regulate the entrances to property and buildings of the airport and the way of
ingress and egress to and from the same it is necessary to enact reasonable
standards, controls, rules, regulations and procedures of off- airport rental
car businesses. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-2: SCOPE:
A person, persons or corporation desiring access to the Joslin Field, Magic
Valley Regional Airport terminal for the purpose of conducting rental car
business operations, either directly or indirectly, shall first obtain a
nontenant rental car business permit from the Airport Manager prior to
conducting any such business on airport property. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-3: PERMITS:
Nontenant rental car business permits will be issued annually for a twelve (12)
month period within thirty (30) days after the application for permit has been
submitted to the Airport Manager, provided the application is approved. (Ord.
2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-4: REQUIREMENTS:
The Airport Manager may issue a permit upon receipt of a signed and verified
application from the rental car business owner containing the following
information, agreements and proof:
   (A)   The names and addresses of every person, company or corporation having
an interest in the business.
   (B)   For companies or corporations not traded publicly, the names and
addresses of every person having an interest in the business.
   (C)   Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of at
least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) covering all business
operations, employees, and customers and naming the City and County and the
Airport as additional insureds.
   (D)   Upon request, provide the make, model, color, identification number,
and motor vehicle identification number of all vehicles to be operated on
Airport property.
   (E)   A written agreement to pay, for the duration of the permit, ten
percent (10%) of the permittee's gross revenue on all automobile rental
contracts entered into by the permittee with customers picked up at the
Airport, payable on the tenth day of each month for the preceding months'
contracts.
   (F)   The names and job titles of local management personnel, as well as,
all business employees engaged in the operation of vehicles to be operated on
Airport property.
   (G)   A written agreement covenanting to obey and follow all standards,
regulations and ordinances of the City and the Airport Commission.
   (H)   Upon request, proof of all business and motor vehicle permits required
by local, State, and Federal authorities.
   (I)   A written agreement to submit written proof to the Airport of all
automobile rental contracts at the time payment is due, accompanied by a
statement certified by an officer of the permittee attesting to the accuracy of
payments due the Airport Manager.
   (J)   A written agreement to authorize the Airport Manager, or its agent, to
audit all business records and accounts at any time during normal business
hours upon demand and to make said records and accounts available.
   (K)   A written agreement that vehicles will stop while at the Airport only
when in the process of loading and unloading customers. Drivers of vehicles (or
permittee personnel that may accompany them) shall be prohibited from
soliciting business in any manner whatsoever upon the Airport. The operation of
permittee's vehicles will be specifically limited to the picking up and
delivery of customers.
   (L)   A written agreement to park only in the parking areas designated for
short-term parking.
   (M)   A written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless and defend the City
and County and the Airport from any and all claims whatsoever arising out of
permittee's business operations and proof of insurance for such contractual
liability.
   (N)   A written agreement to abide by such additional requirements as the
City and County and the Airport Advisory Commission may enact from time to
time. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-5: PROHIBITED ACTIONS AND ACTIVITIES:
A nontenant rental car business permit shall not be construed to permit a
business holding such permit to have an office or station on Airport property,
to park rental cars on Airport property, except in designated public parking
facilities, or to operate rental cars on Airport property; and all of these
actions and activities are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-6: ADVERTISING AND TELEPHONES:
A nontenant rental car business not having a nontenant rental car business
permit shall not advertise or place a telephone on Airport property. A
nontenant rental car business permittee may advertise its nontenant rental car
business on Airport property but may not place a business telephone on Airport
property. Fees for such advertising are not included in the permit fees and
charges. Advertising fees, charges and locations must be negotiated separately
in addition to permit fees and charges. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-7: CONDITION OF STRICT COMPLIANCE:
Every permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be conditioned upon strict
compliance with the regulations set forth in this Chapter and the rules and
regulations of the Joslin Field, Magic Valley Regional Airport. (Ord. 2631, 10-
12-1999)
8-7-7-8: VIOLATION PROCEDURE:
Upon a showing of sufficient cause to believe that a violation of the rules and
regulations specified in this Chapter has occurred, the Airport Manager may:
   (A)   Initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke the permit by notifying the
permittee of the possible suspension or revocation of the permit and the
grounds therefor. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the
hearing before the Airport Advisory Commission on the possible suspension or
revocation of the permit and shall be served on the permittee by certified mail
or personal service at least ten (10) working days before the scheduled date of
the hearing. Failure of the permittee to actually receive a notice sent or
served shall not invalidate the proceedings.
   (B)   Immediately suspend the permit upon a determination that the conduct
of the permittee and its continued operation at the Joslin Field, Magic Valley
Regional Airport presents an exigent danger to persons or property.
      1.   In such event, the Airport Manager shall notify the permittee by
certified mail or personal service that the permittee must immediately cease
and desist all activity authorized by the permit.
      2.   The notice shall specify the grounds for the immediate suspension of
the permit and the date, time and place of the hearing before the Commission on
the continued suspension or possible revocation of the permit. The hearing
shall be held not more than five (5) working days from receipt by the permittee
of the notice to cease and desist.
      3.   If the Airport Advisory Commission determines to continue suspension
of the permit or to revoke the permit, the effective date of such suspension or
revocation shall be the date the permittee received the notice to cease and
desist. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-9: HEARING BEFORE AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMISSION:
Hearing on a denial of the issuance or transfer of a permit under this Chapter
or on the suspension or revocation of a permit under this Chapter shall be
before the Airport Advisory Commission. At such hearing the permittee may
present evidence, call witnesses and be represented by counsel. The Commission
may render its decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing, but shall
provide the permit applicant or permittee with written notice of its decision
not later than five (5) days after the date of the hearing.
   (A)   On appeal of a denial of the issuance or transfer of a permit, the
Commission may affirm the denial or approve the issuance or transfer of a
permit, and may, upon approval thereof, impose such reasonable conditions
related to the use of the permit as are appropriate in the circumstances.
   (B)   After hearing on the suspension or revocation of a permit, the
Commission may:
      1.   Revoke the permit.
      2.   Suspend the permit for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. In
its decision to suspend a permit, the Commission may provide for the
reinstatement of the permit prior to the expiration of the suspension period
upon the fulfillment of such reasonable conditions as the Commission may
impose, and may further provide that in the event such conditions have not been
fulfilled upon the expiration of the suspension period, the period of
suspension will be extended for a stated additional period. In the event of an
extension, notice thereof and the reasons therefor shall be provided to the
permittee, but further hearing shall not be required, unless requested in
writing by the permittee. Provided, however, that no suspension shall be
continued for a total period in excess of sixty (60) days without notice and
hearing as provided in this Chapter.
      3.   Issue a letter of warning notifying the permittee that any further
violation may result in the suspension or revocation of the permit.
      4.   Allow the use of the permit to continue and impose such reasonable
conditions related to the use of the permit as are appropriate under the
circumstances. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-10: APPEALS:
An appeal of the decision of the Airport Advisory Commission under this Chapter
may be taken to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Clerk within ten (10) working days of the date of the written decision of the
Airport Advisory Commission. Notice of the date of hearing before the Council
shall be provided to the appellant within fourteen (14) days of the hearing. At
the hearing before the Council, the appellant may present evidence, call
witnesses and be represented by counsel. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision of the Commission and may delete or modify conditions imposed by the
Commission, or impose such reasonable conditions, as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-11: PERMIT APPLICATION FEE:
A fee payable in advance shall be charged to defray administrative costs of a
permit request for each permit. The cost is not refundable in the event the
permit application is rejected or in the event the permit is revoked. (Ord.
2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-12: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be considered a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and six (6)
months in jail. (Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
8-7-7-13: SEVERANCE:
If any part of this Chapter is held invalid by any court or administrative
agency, the remainder of this Chapter shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2631, 10-12-1999)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE, ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Traffic Section
9-1-4: City Traffic Engineer
9-1-5: Traffic Committee (Rep. by Ord. 2674, 11-20-2000)
9-1-6: Definitions
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title, known as the TWIN FALLS TRAFFIC VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN CODE, may
be cited as "traffic code" and will be referred to herein as "this code". (1958
Code ch. IX art. 1)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards or regulations to
protect the public safety by creating a set of rules which, if faithfully
adhered to by the public, will aid in providing safe, expeditious and orderly
conduct upon the sidewalks, streets, alleys and all public highways and
thoroughfares in the city. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 1)
9-1-3: TRAFFIC SECTION:
There is hereby established in the city police department a section of traffic
to be under the control of an officer of the police department appointed by and
directly responsible to the chief of police. It shall be the duty of the
traffic section, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the
police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and
all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city; to make
arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with
the city engineer and other city officials in the administration of the traffic
laws, and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and to
carry out those duties specifically imposed upon the section by this traffic
code.
The police department or the traffic section thereof shall maintain a record of
all violations of this traffic code or of state vehicle laws together with
other records and files as may be required. The traffic section shall prepare
and submit reports of arrests, traffic accidents and other information to the
city manager and city council as and when required. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 2;
amd. 1978 Code)
9-1-4: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other
functions, and shall exercise the power and duties with respect to traffic as
provided in this code. It shall be the general duty of the city engineer to
conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and an analysis of
traffic accidents, and to devise remedial measures, to determine the
installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and
to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 2)
9-1-5: TRAFFIC COMMITTEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2674, 11-20-2000)
9-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this title shall have meanings ascribed to them
as the same are provided in title 49, Idaho Code, and as the same may be
amended from time to time.
ALLEY: A narrow passageway between two (2) streets in the city as distinguished
from a public street and is usually located in the rear of the properties
fronting on such streets.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles
and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle having wheels, any two (2) of which are not less than
twelve inches (12") in diameter, propelled exclusively by human power, upon
which any person may ride, including tricycles and other multicycles, excluding
scooters and similar devices.
CROSSWALK: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated
for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or passengers).
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more
apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no
legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this code placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
PARK: When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartner ship, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 16; amd. Ord. 2994, 11-8-2010; Ord.
O-2025-008, 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Authority Of Police And Fire Department Officials
9-2-2: Required Obedience To Traffic Code
9-2-3: Obedience To Police And Fire Department Officials
9-2-4: Pushcarts, Riding Animals
9-2-5: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates, Skateboards, Toy Vehicles Or Similar
Devices
9-2-6: Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations
9-2-7: Exemptions To Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-2-8: Procedure In Case Of Accident
9-2-9: Vehicle Equipment
9-2-1: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic
laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the city.
   (B)   Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 3)
9-2-2: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE:
Except as otherwise specifically provided, it shall be an infraction punishable
by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. (Ord. 2994, 11-8-
2010)
9-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official. (1958 Code ch. IX
art. 3)
9-2-4: PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this code which by their very nature can have no application.
(1958 Code ch. IX art. 3)
9-2-5: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, TOY VEHICLES, OR SIMILAR
DEVICES:
   (A)   Limitation To Use Of Streets: No person upon roller skates or
operating in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street within a
crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians 1 . This
section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as
authorized by ordinance of this city.
   (B)   Limitations To Use Of Sidewalks: No person shall upon roller skates,
coasters, skateboards, toy vehicles or similar devices operate such devices
upon a sidewalk or any area within the business improvement district with the
boundaries of 3rd Streets west and north, 4th Avenues north and east, 3rd
Streets south and east and 2nd Avenues west and south. The police department is
authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway indicating that the
operation of roller skates, coasters, skateboards, toy vehicles or similar
devices thereon by any person is prohibited. Whenever any person is operating
roller skates, coasters, skateboards, toy vehicles or similar devices on a
sidewalk in other than the business improvement district of the city, such
person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking such pedestrian. (Ord. 2213, 7-6-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title.
9-2-6: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or
city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this code, except as otherwise permitted in this code or by state
statute. (1958 Code, ch. IV, art. 3)
9-2-7: EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   (A)   The provisions of this code regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined
in this code, except as follows:
A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer, may:
      1.   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this code;
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      3.   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life and property;
      4.   Disregard regulations governing directions of movement or turning in
specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   Those exemptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of
an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said
vehicle sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary,
and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as a warning
to others.
   (C)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of
others. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 3)
9-2-8: PROCEDURE IN CASE OF ACCIDENT:
   (A)   Stop In Event Of Accident: The driver of any vehicle involved in any
collision or in any accident shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene
of such accident.
   (B)   Information Upon Accident: The driver of any vehicle involved in any
accident or in any collision shall, upon stopping as required in subsection
         (A) of this section, give his name, address and the registration
number of his vehicle and exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license, if
such license is required by law, to the person struck, to the driver, or to the
occupants of any vehicle collided with, and to, upon authority of a physician
or surgeon, aid injured persons as requested by such physician or surgeon.
   (C)   Collision With Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which
collides with any other vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and
shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such
vehicle of his name and address and the registration number of his vehicle and
exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license, if such license is required by
law, and the driver of the vehicle striking the other unattended vehicle, if he
is unable to locate the operator or owner of the other vehicle struck, shall
leave in a conspicuous place on the vehicle struck a written note giving the
above information and a statement of the circumstances of the accident.
   (D)   Application Of Provisions: Each and all of the provisions of this
section shall apply in all cases whether or not there shall have resulted any
injury to any person or any damage to any vehicle or other property.
   (E)   Report In Event Of Accident: The drivers of all vehicles, as soon as
possible, but not more than twelve (12) hours after causing any accident or
collision, whether or not injury to any person or damage to any vehicle or
other property results, shall report the same to the police department giving
the information required in subsection (A) of this section and a full statement
of the circumstances of the accident. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 3)
9-2-9: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
Vehicles shall be equipped and in the condition required by the laws of Idaho
as is now set forth in the Idaho Code and as from time to time may be amended 1
. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 6, sec. 2)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 49-801 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: General Speed Limits
9-3-2: Intersections
9-3-3: Schools
9-3-4: Alleys
9-3-1: GENERAL SPEED LIMITS:
Vehicles traveling upon city streets shall be operated at the following rates
of speed:
Twenty five (25) miles per hour in residential and other areas as defined by
the city zoning regulations 1 , except as otherwise provided herein.
The city is authorized to post speed limits in variance with the speed limits
as specifically set forth in this code, in case of unusual circumstances, as
determined by the city council. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 4; amd. 1978 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
9-3-2: INTERSECTIONS:
Vehicles approaching intersecting streets shall proceed at a speed of twenty
(20) miles per hour when approaching within fifty feet (50') of and in
traversing any intersection within the city, except where the intersection has
"stop" signs posted or the intersection is a part of a through street. (1958
Code, ch. IX, art. 4)
9-3-3: SCHOOLS:
Vehicles shall proceed at the following maximum rates of speed in school zones:
   (A)   Twenty (20) miles per hour through school zones as indicated by signs
posted at the school zone areas.
   (B)   Twenty (20) miles per hour on all public streets and thoroughfares
within the boundaries of the College of Southern Idaho.
Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall pay
an infraction penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2728, 7-22-2002)
9-3-4: ALLEYS:
Vehicles traveling upon any alley shall proceed at fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 4)
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections
9-4-2: Authority To Place And Obedience To Turning Markers
9-4-3: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-4-4: Right, Left And U-Turns Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 3000, 2-22-2011)
9-4-5: Drivers' Signals
9-4-1: REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
   (A)   Right Turn: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows: Both the approach for a right turn and a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge
of the roadway. Right hand turns may be made against a red light upon the
vehicle being brought to a complete stop before crossing the stop line and
crosswalk; and before or while proceeding the driver shall give the right of
way to vehicles lawfully in the intersection and to pedestrians traversing the
crosswalk or proceeding with the green light who are declared to have the
superior right of way.
   (B)   Left Turn: The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion
of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and after
entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. The
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any vehicle or pedestrian
approaching from the opposite direction which is in the intersection or so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   One-Way Streets: The approach for a left turn from a two-way street
into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of any such
centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street
into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline
of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. Where both streets
or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the left hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
   (D)   Four Lane Intersection On Two Lane Street: When a two (2) lane street
widens into a four (4) lane intersection, a right hand turn only is permitted
from the right hand lane.
   (E)   Right And Left Hand Turns From Opposite Lanes: When moving into a four
(4) lane intersection, no vehicle shall make a left hand turn from a right hand
lane and no right turn from a left hand lane. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 5)
9-4-2: AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS:
   (A)   Authority To Place: The city is authorized to place markers, buttons
or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by this
code.
   (B)   Obedience To Markers: When authorized markers, buttons or other
indicators are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indicators. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 5)
9-4-3: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The city is authorized to designate and mark streets and alleys intended for
one-way traffic. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 5)
9-4-4: RIGHT, LEFT AND U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 3000, 2-22-2011)
9-4-5: DRIVERS' SIGNALS:
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by
such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given
continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
   (D)   The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device of a type approved by the police
department, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then
said signals must be given by such a lamp or device.
   (E)   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3.   Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1958 Code
ch. IX art. 6)
CHAPTER 5
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices
9-5-2: Specifications
9-5-3: Obedience to Official Devices
9-5-4: Traffic Control Signal Legend
9-5-5: Pedestrian Walk and Wait Signals
9-5-6: Flashing Signals
9-5-7: Full Stop at Stop Signs
9-5-8: Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings
9-5-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The City shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices
when and as required under the Traffic Code of the City to make effective the
provisions of said Code, and may place and maintain such additional traffic
control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the Traffic
Code or under State law, or to guide or warn traffic.
9-5-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to State law or
requirements adopted by the City Council. All signs and signals required
hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to
type and location throughout the City. All traffic control devices so erected
and not inconsistent with the provisions of the State law or this Code shall be
official traffic control devices.
9-5-3: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic control
device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the Traffic Code of the
City, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this Code. 1
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  9-2-7 of this Code
9-5-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
"Go", "Caution", or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights successively
one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said
terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green Alone or "Go":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place or the provisions of this Code
prohibit either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such
signal is exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow Alone or "Caution" When Shown Following the Green or "Go"
Signal:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop"
signal is exhibited.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (C)   Red Alone or "Stop":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is
shown alone.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (D)   Red With Green Arrow:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (E)   In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
Section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
9-5-5: PEDESTRIAN WALK AND WAIT SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk' or
"Wait" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on
the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Wait"
signal is showing.
9-5-6: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before crossing the stop
line or entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or if none, then
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution. (1958 Code, Ch. IX, Art. 7)
9-5-7: STOP AT STOP SIGNS REQUIRED:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, or before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of the approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of way to
any vehicle within the intersection and any vehicle approaching the
intersection on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the
time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction
of the roadways. (Ord. 1935, 4-16-79)
9-5-8: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall
place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any
traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall
not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and the City is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause
it to be removed without notice. (1958 Code, Ch. IX, Art. 7)
CHAPTER 6
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION:
9-6-1: Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
9-6-2: Angle Parking
9-6-3: Obedience To Angle Parking Signs, Markings
9-6-4: Permit For Loading Or Unloading At An Angle To The Curb
9-6-5: Lights On Parked Vehicles
9-6-6: Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic
9-6-7: Parking In Alleys
9-6-8: Parking Trucks, Trailers, Unused And Inoperative Vehicles
9-6-9: All-Night Parking Prohibited
9-6-10: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
9-6-11: Stopping And Parking Adjacent To Schools
9-6-12: Parking Prohibited On Narrow Streets
9-6-13: Standing Or Parking On One-Way Streets
9-6-14: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Near Hazardous Or Congested Places
9-6-15: Stopping For Loading Or Unloading
9-6-16: Parking And Loading Areas For Handicapped Persons; Handicapped Licensed
Vehicles
9-6-17: Stopping, Standing Or Parking On Public Park Rights Of Way Prohibited
9-6-18: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
9-6-19: Parking On Certain Streets Prohibited
9-6-20: Parking Regulations, Signs And Curb Markings
9-6-21: Enforcement And Fines
9-6-1: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the
curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1958
Code, ch. IX, art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-2: ANGLE PARKING:
The city shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and
shall mark or sign such streets to permit angle parking. (1958 Code, ch. IX,
art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-3: OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS, MARKINGS:
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic
engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than
at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-4: PERMIT FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB:
The police department is authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any
permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of
any such permit. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-5: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a
business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked
vehicle. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-6: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1958 Code,
ch. IX, art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-7: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle in any alley within the business zone of the
city except for the specific purpose of loading or unloading merchandise. In
other than the business zone, no person shall park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet
(10') in the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. No person shall
leave a vehicle unattended in an alley in the business district. (1958 Code ch.
IX art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-8: PARKING TRUCKS, TRAILERS, UNUSED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES:
   (A)   No person shall park the following on any street or alley, except as
outlined in paragraph (B):
      1.   A motor vehicle of one and one-half (1 1/2) ton capacity or more, or
      2.   A vehicle which has an overall length of more than twenty-two feet
(22'), or
      3.   Any trailer.
   (B)   Exceptions: Paragraph (A) shall not apply when:
      1.   In the Manufacturing District, or
      2.   The person is engaged in the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or property, or
      3.   The person is engaged in an ongoing, lawful construction project,
where such construction project is conducted under a valid City of Twin Falls
permit and such trailer or vehicle is parked within one hundred feet (100') of
such construction.
   (C)   No unused, inoperative, abandoned vehicle or recreational vehicle
shall be parked for more than twenty-four (24) hours on any street. (Ord. 2019-
011, 10-14-2019; amd. Ord. O-2025-008, 4-21-2025)
9-6-9: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street as designated by the city for a
period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except physicians on emergency calls,
during the months of December, January, February and March. (1958 Code ch. IX
art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-10: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or public right of way for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-11: STOPPING AND PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
The city is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no stopping or parking
upon that side of any street adjacent to school property when such stopping or
parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation. When official signs are erected indicating no stopping or parking
upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall
stop or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 10;
amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-12: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS:
The city is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any
street when, in its judgment, the width of the roadway does not allow for the
safe flow of traffic. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon
narrow streets, as herein authorized, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of such sign. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 10; amd. 1978
Code)
No motor vehicle, bicycle, any other vehicle or object shall be parked at any
time on either side of Washington Street North between Addison Avenue and
Caswell Avenue. (Ord. 1957, 11-5-1979)
9-6-13: STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city is authorized to erect signs upon the left hand side of any one-way
street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are
in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left hand side in
violation of any such sign. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 10; amd. 1978 Code)
9-6-14: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
The city is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not
exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in which stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic. When official signs are erected at hazardous or
congested places, as herein authorized, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 10; amd. 1978
Code)
9-6-15: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING:
   (A)   Designation Of Permits For Curb Loading Zones: The city is authorized
to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall
place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours
during which the provisions of this section are applicable. The city shall not
designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person
unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and pays the
actual cost of erecting zoning signs or markers.
A loading zone may be occupied by a vehicle while actually engaged in loading
and unloading persons, supplies or merchandise for a period of not to exceed
twenty (20) minutes during any one period of time, except by special permission
by the police department. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
   (B)   Designation Of Public Carrier Stands: The city is authorized to
establish and/or revoke bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places
and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every bus stop and taxicab stand or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs.
   (C)   Regulation Of Bus And Taxicab Parking: The driver of a bus or taxicab
shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than
at a bus stop or taxicab stand, except that this provision shall not prevent
the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with
other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
   (D)   Restricted Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands: No person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a
taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and
appropriately signed. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 11)
9-6-16: PARKING AND LOADING AREAS FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS; HANDICAPPED LICENSED
VEHICLES:
   (A)   Local parking areas for vehicles licensed to transport handicapped
persons shall be available in the city and designated "Parking For Handicapped
Licensed Vehicles Only".
Permits for parking in spaces designated "Parking For Handicapped Licensed
Vehicles Only" shall be issued to handicapped persons upon application and
proof of the necessity of the permit. "Handicapped person" shall be defined as
set forth in Idaho Code, section 49-236(2). A vehicle transporting a
handicapped person who has been issued a permit under this section and which
displays a valid permit on the dashboard in front of the steering wheel may
park in spaces designated "Parking For Handicapped Licensed Vehicles". The use
of a permit in violation of this section shall result in revocation of said
permit.
No vehicles shall remain parked in an area designated for handicapped licensed
vehicles unless properly licensed or properly displaying a valid handicapped
parking permit.
   (B)   Loading zones for handicapped persons shall be available in the city
and designated "Loading Zone For Handicapped Persons Only".
No person shall use an area designated for the loading and unloading of
handicapped persons unless loading or unloading a handicapped person. (Ord.
2096, 3-5-1984)
9-6-17: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING ON PUBLIC PARK RIGHTS OF WAY PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on any public park right of
way or area intended for park patron use only; and any such public park right
of way or parking area is hereby reserved exclusively for park patrons. If any
vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in violation of this
section and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner,
person, corporation or named lessee in whose name said vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation. (Ord. 1968, 3-17-
1980)
9-6-18: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in
compliance with law, the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      1.   On the traffic side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a highway;
      2.   On a sidewalk;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   On a crosswalk;
      5.   On the wrong side of the street facing oncoming traffic;
      6.   In a designated bicycle lane;
      7.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit stopping.
         (B)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
      1.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      2.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
highway;
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a highway opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance (when properly signposted);
      6.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit standing. (Ord.
2673, 11-13-2000)
9-6-19: PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS PROHIBITED:
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets or parts of streets within
the city:
The west side of Locust Street north from its intersection with Stadium
Boulevard to its intersection with Filer Avenue East. (Ord. 1999, 11-17-1980)
9-6-20: PARKING REGULATIONS, SIGNS AND CURB MARKINGS:
   (A)   The city is authorized to erect signs regulating parking and
establishing areas for no parking at any time, loading zones, limited time
parking, and handicapped parking.
   (B)   The city may use curb markings as substituting or supplemental to
standard signs. Where signs are not used, the intended meaning should be
stenciled on the curb. The colors shall be as follows:
      1.   No Parking Any Time: Red curbing with black stenciled letters, if
any.
      2.   Loading Zone: Yellow curbing with black stenciled letters, if any.
      3.   Limited Time Parking: Green curbing with white stenciled letters, if
any.
      4.   Handicapped Parking: Blue curbing with white stenciled letters, if
any.
   (C)   When official signs and/or curb markings regulating parking are used
as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon a street in
violation of such sign or marking. If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or
parked in violation of this section and the identity of the operator cannot be
determined, the owner, person, corporation or named lessee in whose name said
vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation.
(Ord. 2235, 5-26-1988)
   (D)   The city may cause lines or markings to be painted or placed upon the
curb, or street adjacent to the curb, designating parking spaces. Each vehicle
parked in a designated parking space shall park within the lines or markings so
established for that particular space. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this chapter to park any vehicle across any such line or markings, or to park a
vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area
designated for the space in which such vehicle is parked.
   (E)   Any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked parallel or
diagonal to the curb in accordance with the lines or markings so established.
(Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-6-21: ENFORCEMENT AND FINES:
If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in violation
of the provisions of this chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be
determined, the owner, person, corporation or named lessee in whose name said
vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for said
violation. There is hereby imposed a thirty five dollar ($35.00) fine, or fifty
dollar ($50.00) fine if not paid within three (3) business days. Any owner or
operator of such vehicle violating said provisions and who fails to pay said
fine within three (3) business days shall be subject to the penalty set forth
herein.
Upon the failure of the owner or operator to pay the required fine within three
(3) business days, the person as designated by the city may, after the giving
of written notice, sign a complaint against the owner or operator of the
vehicle cited for the violation of this chapter. Written notice to the owner or
operator is deemed sufficient if mailed to the last known address of such
person. The complaint may be signed after five (5) days from the date of the
notice.
Any police officer or person as designated by the city observing a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall leave upon the violating vehicle a traffic
ticket which shall provide the ticket number, date, time, license number,
parking lot location, make of vehicle and officer's or designated person's
name. The ticket shall notify the owner or operator of the fine increase for
failure to pay such fine within the initial three (3) business day period and
the penalties for failure to pay the increased fine within the notice period.
(Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC OFF STREET PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Designation Of Lots And Spaces
9-7-3: Establishment Of Off Street Parking Space Time Limits And Parking Passes
9-7-4: Designation Of Off Street Private Parking Spaces
9-7-5: Monthly Parking Fees
9-7-6: Illegal Parking
9-7-7: Meter Prohibitions (Rep. by Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-8: Speed Regulation
9-7-9: Operating Hours
9-7-10: Enforcement And Fines
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
OFF STREET PARKING LOTS: Those parking areas not situated in public streets,
alleys or rights of way which are under the jurisdiction of the city to provide
public parking.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space within an off street parking lot
designated and made available by the city for public parking purposes.
PARKING METER: A mechanical device which records a certain number of minutes by
use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for which parking
privilege may be extended to a person depositing the required coin therefor.
(1958 Code ch. XVIII art. 20)
9-7-2: DESIGNATION OF LOTS AND SPACES:
The city council has designated and approved the off street parking plan map
which designates the current off street parking lots and spaces located in the
Twin Falls townsite, and hereby by reference adopts said map as the official
designation thereof and said map shall be kept on file in the office of the
city engineer for public inspection.
From time to time the city council may redesignate such off street public
parking lots and spaces upon said map and such redesignation shall become a
part of this chapter. Designated off street public parking spaces and private
parking spaces as shown on said official map shall be properly designated in
each of the off street parking lots. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFF STREET PARKING SPACE TIME LIMITS AND PARKING
PASSES:
There are hereby established within the off street public parking lots a
maximum three (3) hour limit free and parking pass off street parking spaces.
Parking pass holders may park in designated off street parking spaces without a
maximum time limit during operating hours of the off street parking lots. (Ord.
3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-4: DESIGNATION OF OFF STREET PRIVATE PARKING SPACES:
There are hereby established off street private parking spaces as designated
upon the official off street parking plan map and as may from time to time be
hereafter changed, which spaces have, by agreement with the city, been reserved
for use by private parties and such spaces are not included within the off
street public parking spaces available to the public, but the same are subject
to all regulations and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff.
11-1-2012)
9-7-5: MONTHLY PARKING FEES:
The city council may establish by resolution fees for the purchase of parking
passes within the Twin Falls townsite. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-6: ILLEGAL PARKING:
   (A)   Unlawful To Park Outside Markings: It shall be unlawful for any person
to park or permit to be parked any vehicle outside of the marked boundary of
each parking space or across any marking separating parking spaces.
   (B)   Unlawful To Park Except Within Designated Space: It shall be unlawful
for any person to park or permit to be parked any vehicle within the off street
parking lot except within the lawful designated parking spaces. (Ord. 2442, 3-
21-1994)
   (C)   Unlawful To Park Except Upon Payment Of Fee: It shall be unlawful for
any person to park, or permit to be parked, any vehicle in designated public
parking spaces for a period of time longer than the maximum designated time
limit during the public parking lot operating hours. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park, or permit to be parked, any vehicle within a designated
parking pass parking space during the public parking lot operating hours
without properly displaying a valid parking pass. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff.
11-1-2012)
9-7-7: METER PROHIBITIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-8: SPEED REGULATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle within any off
street parking lot in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (1958 Code ch. IX
art. 20)
9-7-9: OPERATING HOURS:
Operating hours of off street parking lots shall be between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, except
on city designated holidays and other special days as may be designated by the
city council. (Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
9-7-10: ENFORCEMENT AND FINES:
If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in violation
of the provisions of this chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be
determined, the owner, person, corporation or named lessee in whose name said
vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for said
violation. There is hereby imposed a thirty five dollar ($35.00) fine, or fifty
dollar ($50.00) fine if not paid within three (3) business days. Any owner or
operator of such vehicle violating said provisions and who fails to pay said
fine within three (3) business days in the collection box or city hall shall be
subject to the penalty set forth herein. Fines unpaid for a period of forty
five (45) days following issuance may be turned over to a collection agency for
collection and shall be subject to an additional twenty five dollar ($25.00)
charge for collection.
Upon the failure of the owner or operator to pay the required fine within three
(3) business days, the person as designated by the city may, after the giving
of written notice, sign a complaint against the owner or operator of the
vehicle cited for the violation of this chapter. Written notice to the owner or
operator is deemed sufficient if mailed to the last known address of such
person. The complaint may be signed after five (5) days from the date of the
notice.
Any police officer or person as designated by the city observing a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall leave upon the violating vehicle a traffic
ticket, which shall provide the ticket number, date, time, license number,
parking lot location, make of vehicle and officer's or designated person's
name. The ticket shall notify the owner or operator of the fine increase for
failure to pay such fine within the initial three (3) business day period and
the penalties for failure to pay the increased fine within the notice period.
(Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
CHAPTER 8
PARKING METERS
(Rep. by Ord. 3038, 9-10-2012, eff. 11-1-2012)
CHAPTER 9
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Compliance With Street Lanes
9-9-2: Backing And Leaving From Parking Space
9-9-3: Approaching Railroad Crossing
9-9-4: Right Of Way For Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-9-5: Crossing Fire Hose
9-9-6: Driving Through Processions
9-9-7: Identification Of Funeral Processions
9-9-8: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
9-9-9: Vehicles On Sidewalk
9-9-10: Preventing Smoke And Noise
9-9-11: Prohibition Of Whistles
9-9-12: Windshield And Rear Windows Unobstructed
9-9-13: Injurious Material In Streets
9-9-14: Injury To Pavement
9-9-15: Width Of Vehicles
9-9-16: Obstruction To Vision At Intersections, Alleys And Driveways
9-9-17: Lights Dimmed
9-9-18: Designated Truck Routes
9-9-19: Obstruction Of Traffic Control Signs
9-9-20: Engine Compression Brakes
9-9-21: Use Of Wireless Communications Devices (Rep. by Ord. 3029, 6-18-2012)
9-9-22: Overtaking Bicyclists And Pedestrians
9-9-23: Harassment Of Bicyclists And Pedestrians Prohibited
9-9-24: Turning In Front Of Bicyclists Prohibited
9-9-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STREET LANES:
   (A)   Every vehicle shall keep to the right hand boundary of the street upon
which it is moving. Where the street is marked into traffic lanes a vehicle
shall be driven entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved out of
such lane until such movement can be made with safety, and such movement shall
be subject to the right of way of vehicles in other lanes. The driver of a
vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall drive
to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle, provided, that where the street is
marked into traffic lanes, it shall be permissible for the overtaking vehicle
to pass the overtaken vehicle in either the right or left hand lane provided
the overtaking vehicle remains in the same lane and does not weave in and out
of traffic lanes. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of
the centerline of a street in passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such driver has a clear view and the left side of the street
is free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without impeding the safe
operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, such
approaching vehicle having the superior right of way.
   (B)   Where streets are marked into four (4) lanes, the driver of a vehicle
shall not cross over the centerline of the street while passing or overtaking
another vehicle.
   (C)   No overtaken vehicle shall increase its speed while being passed by
the overtaking vehicle.
   (D)   A vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction at any railway grade crossing or at any intersection of
streets unless otherwise provided in this code. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 14)
9-9-2: BACKING AND LEAVING FROM PARKING SPACE 1 :
No vehicle shall be backed without ample warning having been given by the
operator, and, while backing shall yield the right of way to all vehicles and
pedestrians on the street; and any vehicle leaving any parallel parking space
or any other parking space shall yield the right of way to all vehicles and
pedestrians on the street. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 14)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-10-5(B) of this code.
9-9-3: APPROACHING RAILROAD CROSSING:
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle approaches the railroad grade crossing under any
of the following circumstances, it shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not
less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall
not proceed until it can do so safely; when a clearly visible electrical or
mechanical signal device gives warning of immediate approach of a railroad
train; when a crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; when
a railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the street crossing emits a signal audible from such distance
and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing,
is an immediate hazard; when an approaching railroad train is plainly visible
and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 14)
9-9-4: RIGHT OF WAY FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   (A)   Upon the sounding of the siren or bell of a police, fire or other
authorized emergency vehicle on official business, all vehicles on the streets
shall immediately park in accordance with the provisions of this code, or if
there be no parking space within the block in which the vehicle is then
located, the vehicle shall immediately take position as near as possible and
parallel to the right hand edge of the curb of the street, clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the siren or
bell ceases sounding.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
five hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1958 Code ch. IX
art. 14)
9-9-5: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department officials in command.
(1958 Code ch. IX art. 14)
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive, or cause to be ridden or
driven, any wagon, automobile or other vehicle or machine over any fire hose or
other hose when or while the same has been laid by the firemen or other
officials or persons, upon the streets, avenues, alleys or other public places
or private grounds at any time of any fire, or at any time when the same may be
laid or used in accordance with the duty or privileges of such officers,
firemen, employees or other persons in discharge of their duties, or in
compliance with their privileges in that regard. (1958 Code ch. X art. 5)
9-9-6: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS:
No vehicle other than a fire, police, ambulance or U.S. mail vehicle, shall be
driven through authorized processions except with the permission and under the
direction of a police officer. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 14; amd. 1978 Code)
9-9-7: IDENTIFICATION OF FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by
the display upon the outside of each vehicle of an identifying insignia or by
such other method as may be designated by the police department. (1958 Code ch.
IX art. 14; amd. 1978 Code)
9-9-8: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or
any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon
any roadway. (1958 Code ch. IX art. 14; amd. 1978 Code)
9-9-9: VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. A twenty five foot (25') wide driveway is
hereby established for mail delivery in front of mailboxes placed behind the
sidewalk in conformance with subsection
10-12-4-2(L) of this code. No vehicle shall be parked within any sidewalk area
except as provided herein. (Ord. 2766, 11-17-2003)
9-9-10: PREVENTING SMOKE AND NOISE:
No motor vehicle shall be driven on the street unless it is equipped with a
muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or
unusual noise, annoying smoke and escape of excessive gas. All exhaust pipes
from the motor shall be directed so as to prevent excessive or unusual noise. A
muffler cutout shall not be used on any motor vehicle on a street. (1958 Code,
ch. IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-11: PROHIBITION OF WHISTLES:
A gong, siren or exhaust whistle shall not be used on any vehicle other than
those operated by the Police and Fire Departments, sheriff or other peace
officer or an ambulance, nor upon any such vehicle except when responding to
emergency calls. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-12: WINDSHIELD AND REAR WINDOWS UNOBSTRUCTED:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any vehicle upon the windshield
or rear window of which there is attached any card, poster, sticker,
advertisement, sign or other device tending in any manner to obstruct the
operator's vision to the front or to the rear, except official certificates,
permits or licenses issued by a government agency or official. (1958 Code, ch.
IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-13: INJURIOUS MATERIAL IN STREETS:
No person shall throw or place in any street or alley any glass, nails or other
materials likely to puncture or injure the rubber tires of any vehicle; nor
shall any person throw any object or thing out of any moving or parked car.
(1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-14: INJURY TO PAVEMENT:
A vehicle shall not be driven on any paved street when such vehicle has wheels
so constructed or in such condition as to injure the pavement. (1958 Code, ch.
IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-15: WIDTH OF VEHICLES:
No vehicle, the width of which, with or without its load, exceeds eight feet
(8'), shall be driven or conveyed through any street unless a permit is
previously obtained from the City. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 14; 1978 Code)
9-9-16: OBSTRUCTION TO VISION AT INTERSECTIONS, ALLEYS AND DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall plant, install, create, maintain or possess on public or
private property an obstruction to the vision of a driver of a vehicle at an
intersection, alley or driveway which constitutes a traffic hazard.
Prima facie evidence of an obstruction constituting a traffic hazard shall
exist if any object, structure or thing, except buildings and residences which
are otherwise in conformance with law, is allowed to exist which exceeds three
feet (3') above the existing roadway center line elevation within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting roadway edges and a straight line
joining said roadway edges at points which are forty feet (40') distant from
the point of an intersection measured along said street edges. At alley and
street intersections, the dimensions shall be forty feet (40') along the street
edge and fifteen feet (15') along the alleyway edge. At driveway and street
intersections, the dimensions shall be one hundred feet (100') along the street
edge and ten feet (10') along the driveway edge on the left side of the
driveway as viewed when facing the property from the street, and the dimensions
shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125') along the street edge and ten feet
(10') along the driveway edge on the right side of the driveway as viewed when
facing the property from the street. Trees and utility facilities are allowed
in such triangular area provided that no tree limb or growth extending from
said limb shall be maintained or allowed to exist nearer than eight feet (8')
from the surface of the ground.
Any person convicted of violating this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or by a combination of
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2544, 3-24-1997)
9-9-17: LIGHTS DIMMED:
All vehicles shall be driven with lights dimmed or on low beam within the City.
(1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 14)
9-9-18: DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES:
The City Council shall designate by resolution routes for travel of trucks
within the City. (1958 Code, ch. IX, art. 14)
9-9-19: OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS:
No person shall plant, install, create, maintain or possess on or over public
or private property an obstruction of an official traffic-control sign to the
vision of a driver. Prima facie evidence of an obstruction constituting a
traffic hazard shall exist when any portion of an official traffic control sign
is obstructed from vision at the stopping sight distance as set forth below.
The point of measurement shall be three feet (3') right of the centerline or
three feet (3') right of the left edge of the outer lane of a multilane roadway
at a height of six feet (6'), and the appropriate stopping sight distance from
the official traffic control sign.
The stopping sight distance shall be based on the posted speed limit at the
particular sight obstruction. The following stopping sight distances shall be
used:
Speed Limit Stopping Sight Distance
Speed Limit Stopping Sight Distance
25 mph      145 feet
30 mph      185 feet
35 mph      230 feet
40 mph      280 feet
45 mph      335 feet
50 mph      395 feet
 
Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2378, 5-18-1992)
9-9-20: ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES:
No person shall operate any vehicle while said vehicle or vehicle operator is
utilizing an engine compression brake without an exhaust muffler sufficient to
prevent the creation of excessively loud noises by said vehicle, except when
the use of such engine compression brake is necessary in an emergency. This
section is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with
engine compression brakes, but rather to limit the use of such equipment to
emergencies. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction. (Ord.
2690, 4-30-2001)
9-9-21: USE OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES:
(Rep. by Ord. 3029, 6-18-2012)
9-9-22: OVERTAKING BICYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIANS:
The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicyclist or pedestrian on a
highway shall, whenever possible, leave a safe distance, but no less than three
feet (3'), when passing a bicycle or pedestrian and shall maintain that
distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or pedestrian. (Ord. 2994, 11-
8-2010)
9-9-23: HARASSMENT OF BICYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, maliciously and with the specific intent
to intimidate or harass or cause another person to crash, stumble, or fall
because that other person is walking along the roadway or operating a bicycle
along the roadway, to:
   (A)   Threaten, by word or act, to cause physical injury to the pedestrian
or bicyclist, or
   (B)   Throw or otherwise expel any object at or in the direction of the
pedestrian or bicyclist. (Ord. 2994, 11-8-2010)
9-9-24: TURNING IN FRONT OF BICYCLISTS PROHIBITED:
When a motor vehicle and a bicycle are traveling in the same direction on any
highway, street, or road, the operator of the motor vehicle overtaking such
bicycle traveling on the right side of the roadway shall not turn to the right
in front of the bicycle at an intersection, alley, or driveway until such motor
vehicle has overtaken the bicycle and has sufficient clearance to safely turn
without requiring the bicyclist to brake or take evasive action to avoid a
collision with the motor vehicle. (Ord. 2994, 11-8-2010)
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Signals
9-10-2: Crossing Regulations
9-10-3: Pedestrians to Yield
9-10-4: Prohibited Crossing
9-10-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore declared
in Chapter 5 of this Title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this Chapter.
9-10-2: CROSSING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Right of Way in Crosswalk:
      1.   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
if the pedestrian is in or approaching the driver's lane of traffic, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run
into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the
driver to yield. A pedestrian's right of way in a crosswalk is modified under
the condition and as stated in Section
9-5-5 of this Title.
      2.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
   (B)   Use Right Half of Crosswalk: Pedestrians shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks:
   (C)   Crossing at Right Angles: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any
place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.
9-10-3: PEDESTRIANS TO YIELD:
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   The foregoing rules in this Section have no application under the
conditions stated in Section
9-5-5 of this Title when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain
designated places.
9-10-4: PROHIBITED CROSSING:
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
of the through streets as set forth in this Code. (1958 Code, Ch. IX, Art. 8)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
(Rep. by Ord. 3108, 10-19-2015)
CHAPTER 12
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Abandonment Prohibited
9-12-3: Certification of Tow Truck Operator to Dispose of Vehicles
9-12-4: When a Vehicle May Be Impounded Without Prior Notice
9-12-5: When a Vehicle May Be Impounded After Notice
9-12-6: Post-Storage Notice Hearing
9-12-7: Notice To Department of Law Enforcement
9-12-8: Removal of Abandoned Vehicles From Real Property
9-12-9: Removal of Unauthorized Vehicles From Private Property; Posting
Requirements
9-12-10: Liens
9-12-11: Responsibility for Fees As To Standby Time, Stolen Vehicles, or
Vehicles Held for Investigatory Purposes
9-12-12: Disposal of Unredeemed Vehicles
9-12-13: Appraisal of Impounded Vehicles; Who May Appraise
9-12-14: Appraisal Procedure
9-12-15: Disposition of Low-Valued Vehicles
9-12-16: Disposition of Higher-Valued Vehicles
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle left within the limits of any
highway or upon the property of another without the consent of such property
owner for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer, except that a vehicle
shall not be considered abandoned if its owner-operator is unable to remove it
from the place where it is located and has notified a law enforcement agency
and requested assistance.
AUTHORIZED OFFICER: Any regularly employed and salaried City police officer or
other City employee designated to perform the function of impounding vehicles
by the City Council. or a qualified person deputized or appointed by the proper
authority as a City policeman, authorized within the jurisdiction in which the
vehicle to be impounded is located.
IMPOUNDMENT: Removal of a vehicle to a storage facility by an authorized
officer of the City of Twin Falls or by a contractor for towing and storage in
response to a request from such an authorized officer.
LEGAL OWNER: Any person notated as "lien holder of the respective vehicle,"
such notation appearing on the title records of the Idaho State Department of
Law Enforcement and on the respective certificate of title.
REGISTERED OWNER: Any person required to register a motor vehicle, whether or
not a lien holder appears on the title in the records of the motor vehicle
division of the Idaho State Department of Law Enforcement.
TO ABANDON: To leave a motor vehicle on private property without the permission
of the person having rights to the possession of the property, or on a public
street or other property open to the public for the purposes of vehicular
traffic or parking, or upon or within the right of way of any road or highway,
for twenty four (24) hours or longer.
9-12-2: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway.
   (B)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property.
   (C)   Violation of this prohibition shall constitute a misdemeanor.
9-12-3: CERTIFICATION OF TOW TRUCK OPERATOR TO DISPOSE OF VEHICLES:
The City may, as it sees fit, authorize any tow truck operator to engage in the
removal and storage of motor vehicles for the purposes of towing, removal, and
disposal of motor vehicles as provided in this Chapter, provided such tow truck
operator makes proper application to the City and, at the time of such
application, presents, as proof of compliance with the certification
requirements of Idaho Code section 49-3605, the certification issued him by the
Idaho State Department of Law Enforcement.
9-12-4: WHEN A VEHICLE MAY BE IMPOUNDED WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE:
A vehicle may be impounded without giving prior notice to its owner where an
emergency exists or public safety is endangered, or where a motor vehicle is:
   (A)   Blocking or impeding traffic;
   (B)   Causing a hazard;
   (C)   Has the potential of impeding any emergency vehicle;
   (D)   Impeding any snow removal or other road maintenance operation;
   (E)   Does not have current or any license plates attached;
   (F)   Discovered which has been reported as stolen and not recovered; and,
   (G)   Discovered which a police officer has probable cause to believe
constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment
is reasonably necessary in such instance to obtain or preserve such evidence.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a vehicle
without a warrant where a warrant would otherwise be required.
9-12-5: WHEN A VEHICLE MAY BE IMPOUNDED AFTER NOTICE:
   (A)   A vehicle not subject to impoundment under Section
9-12-4 may be impounded after a notice of intent to impound has been securely
attached to the vehicle in plain view for a period of forty eight (48) hours
prior to such impoundment for the following reasons:
      1.   When such vehicle is abandoned, as that term is defined in Section
9-12-1;
      2.   When such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law,
ordinance or regulation; or
      3.   When such vehicle is so mechanically defective as to be unsafe for
operation, provided however that this Section shall not be construed to prevent
the operation of such defective vehicle to a place for correction of equipment
defect in the manner directed by any peace officer or representative of the
Idaho State Division of Law Enforcement.
   (B)   The notice of intent to impound referred to in subsection (A) of this
Section shall contain the following information: The name of the officer who
prepared the notice; the name of the agency employing the officer; the time and
date that the notice is attached; the date of the proposed impoundment; the
telephone number and address of the agency where further information can be
obtained.
   (C)   The owner of any vehicle within the meaning of this Chapter which has
current license plates and registration as shown on the records of the
Department of Law Enforcement, shall be notified by telephone of the location
of the vehicle and the time and date of intent to remove the vehicle. If
telephone contact cannot be made, a copy of the notice of intent to remove
shall be attached to the door of the owner's residence. The inability of an
officer to notify the owner, as herein provided, shall not preclude the removal
of the vehicle at the expiration of the forty eight (48) hour period.
9-12-6: POST-STORAGE NOTICE HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever an authorized officer directs the impoundment or storage of a
vehicle, the Police Department shall provide the vehicle's registered and legal
owners of record, or their agents, with the opportunity for a post-storage
hearing to determine the validity of the storage.
   (B)   Within forty eight (48) hours from the time that a motor vehicle is
impounded pursuant to this Chapter, the Police Department shall give written
notice by certified mail to the registered and legal owners of such motor
vehicle as disclosed by the vehicle license number, if such be obtainable, and,
if a police officer who knows of the impoundment has reason to believe that an
owner is residing or in custody at some different address which is known to the
officer, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed or personally delivered to
such owner, as nearly as may be practicable, to give actual notice to him or
her. If the Chief of Police has reason to believe that the owner of the
impounded vehicle is in custody of the City or County jail, it shall be
presumed that the vehicle is not abandoned and such vehicle shall not be deemed
abandoned except upon a determination by the post-storage hearing officer, as
hereinafter provided for, after the prisoner has had an opportunity to be heard
regarding the validity or invalidity of the storage of the vehicle. However, if
a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be
mailed. Similar notice shall likewise be given at the time of releasing a
vehicle impounded for investigatory purposes pursuant to subsection
9-12-4(F) or (G), except that if a vehicle is redeemed following notice by
telephone and prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed.
In addition, the Police Department shall notify the tow truck operator, by
telephone or in writing, of the authorization to release such vehicle.
   (C)   The notice referred to in subsection (B) of this Section shall include
the following information:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing the
notice;
      2.   The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
which shall include, if available, the name or make, the identification number,
the license plate number, and the mileage;
      3.   The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and
      4.   Such notification shall also specify that, in order to receive a
post-storage hearing, such owners, or their agents, must make a written request
within ten (10) days of the date of the notice herein. Any such hearing shall
be conducted within forty eight (48) hours of the request, excluding weekends
and holidays. The City Manager may designate and authorize an employee to
conduct the hearing, so long as such hearing officer is not the same person who
directed the storage of the vehicle.
   (D)   The hearing officer designated according to subsection (C) of this
Section shall, at the conclusion of each hearing conducted pursuant to this
Section, determine whether the storage of the vehicle was valid or invalid. If
the storage is found to be valid, the owner may redeem the vehicle by paying
the costs of towing and storage, together with any sum due by reason of a
violation of this Code. If the storage is found to be invalid, the hearing
officer shall prepare and date a written finding to that effect, copies of
which shall be given to the owner of the vehicle and to the Police Department.
Upon receipt of the owner's copy of such finding, the Police Department shall
release the vehicle to the owner. If the owner fails to present his copy of
such finding to the Police Department within twenty four (24) hours after he
receives it, weekends and holidays excluded, he shall assume liability for all
subsequent storage charges.
   (E)   Failure of either the registered or legal owner, or his agents, to
request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing
requirement as to that person.
   (F)   Neither the governmental agency employing the authorized officer, nor
the authorized officer, individually, shall be responsible for the costs
incurred for impoundment or storage.
9-12-7: NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever an authorized officer removing a vehicle from a highway, or from
public or private property, for storage does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the
notice to the owner as provided in Section
9-12-6, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a
period of forty eight (48) hours, the authorized officer shall mail a written
report of removal to the Idaho State Department of Law Enforcement at Boise,
and shall file a copy of the report with the proprietor of the storage facility
at which the vehicle may be stored. Said report shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the
mileage on the vehicle at the time of removal, the grounds for removal and the
name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
9-12-8: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLE FROM REAL PROPERTY:
Any person having possession or control of real property who finds an abandoned
vehicle upon that property is authorized to have such vehicle removed by a
peace officer.
9-12-9: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY; POSTING
REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall have the right to tow, remove, impound or otherwise disturb any
motor vehicle other than an abandoned vehicle which may be parked, or otherwise
left on private property, owned or controlled by such person, unless there is
posted on or near the property in a clearly conspicuous location, in large
print, a sign or notice that unauthorized vehicles will be removed at the
owner's expense.
9-12-10: LIENS:
   (A)   The City shall have a possessory lien for just and reasonable storage
charges, upon any motor vehicle towed and stored under the provisions of this
Chapter, and may retain possession of the vehicle until such lien is discharged
in accordance herewith. If such lien is not so discharged, the City may cause
such vehicle to be sold at public auction.
   (B)   A lien which attaches under subsection (A) hereof may be discharged
only under the following circumstances:
      1.   Only the registered or legal owner, or his agent, may discharge such
a lien;
      2.   Any person so discharging such a lien shall pay to the tow truck
operator the costs of towing and storage, except as provided by Section
9-12-4;
      3.   Any person so discharging such a lien shall pay to the City any sum
due by reason of a violation of this Code; provided, however that such lien
shall be discharged if the storage is found to be invalid at a post-storage
hearing conducted pursuant to Section
9-12-6 and copies of such finding are provided to the Police Department in such
manner and at such time as provided in Section
9-12-6.
   (C)   A lien which is attached under subsection (A) shall be extinguished by
the sale at public auction of such vehicle by the City.
9-12-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FEES AS TO STANDBY TIME, STOLEN VEHICLES, OR
VEHICLES HELD FOR INVESTIGATORY PURPOSES:
   (A)   No fee shall be assessed against the owner of a vehicle for time
elapsed after the towing equipment has arrived at the location of the vehicle
to be towed and prior to the operation of the towing equipment or performance
of the impound service.
   (B)   No impoundment fee and/or towing or storage charges shall be assessed
against the owner of a vehicle impounded for investigatory purposes pursuant to
Section
9-12-4 of this Chapter, or of a stolen vehicle which has been verified by the
Police Department to have been stolen and which has been recovered by the
police, if such vehicle is redeemed by the owner on or before the fifth day
after impoundment; provided that such owner or his agent shall pay storage
charges commencing on the sixth day after impoundment for such purpose, and the
possessory lien provided for in Section
9-12-10 shall extend to such storage charges.
9-12-12: DISPOSAL OF UNREDEEMED VEHICLES:
The Police Department may authorize disposal of any impounded vehicle where:
   (A)   The vehicle is in such condition that there is no means of determining
its ownership;
   (B)   The vehicle is not redeemed within thirty (30) days of the mailing of
the notice required by Section
9-12-6; provided, however, that in the case of a vehicle impounded pursuant to
subsection
9-12-4(F) or
9-12-4(G), the thirty (30) days shall not begin until forty eight (48) hours
after the Police Department shall have notified both the owner and the tow
truck operator in accordance with subsection
9-12-6(C)2 that it has authorized the release of the vehicle.
9-12-13: APPRAISAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; WHO MAY APPRAISE:
   (A)   The following persons shall have authority to make appraisals for
purposes of this Chapter:
      1.   Any regularly employed and salaried police officer or other employee
designated by the Chief of Police of the City.
      2.   Any regularly salaried employee of the City designated by the City
Council.
   (B)   An appraiser, upon completion of an appraisal within the meaning of
this Chapter, shall notify the Idaho State Department of Law Enforcement of
such appraisal and of the facts upon which the appraisal was based.
9-12-14: APPRAISAL PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The Police Department shall cause every vehicle to be appraised which
shall have been impounded pursuant to Section
9-12-4, and shall:
      1.   Within forty eight (48) hours notify the Idaho State Department of
Law Enforcement of the removal of such vehicle;
      2.   Include on the Notice:
               (a)   The appraised value of the vehicle;
               (b)   Identification of the appraiser;
               (c)   Location of the vehicle;
               (d)   A description of the vehicle, including make, year, model,
identification number, license number, state of registration and, if a
motorcycle, an engine number; and
               (e)   The statutory authority for storage.
   (B)   The Police Department shall cause to be appraised every vehicle
impounded pursuant to Section
9-12-5, and such appraisal shall be made within three (3) days after the
removal of such vehicle.
9-12-15: DISPOSITION OF LOW-VALUED VEHICLES:
The provision of Idaho Code section 49-3619 shall govern notice or removal and
disposition of a vehicle appraised at a value not exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00).
9-12-16: DISPOSITION OF HIGHER-VALUED VEHICLES:
The provisions of Idaho Code section 49-3620 shall govern notice of removal and
disposition of a vehicle appraised at a value exceeding two hundred dollars
($200.00). (Ord. 2060, 1-17-83)
CHAPTER 13
PARADES
SECTION:
9-13-1: Short Title
9-13-2: Definitions
9-13-3: Permit Required
9-13-4: Application
9-13-5: Standards For Issuance
9-13-6: Notice Of Rejection
9-13-7: Revocation
9-13-8: Appeal Procedure (Rep. by Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-9: Alternative Permit (Rep. by Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-10: Notice To City And Other Officials
9-13-11: Contents Of Permit
9-13-12: Duties Of Permittee
9-13-13: Public Conduct During Parades
9-13-14: Penalties
9-13-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the PARADE ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF TWIN FALLS, IDAHO. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police (also known as the director of public
safety) of the city of Twin Falls.
CITY: The city of Twin Falls, Idaho.
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, walk-a-thon or
procession of any kind consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or a
combination thereof, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the city.
PARADE PERMIT: A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   Parade Permit Required: No person shall engage in, participate in,
aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained
from the chief of police.
   (B)   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Funeral processions;
      2.   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
      3.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-4: APPLICATION:
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file the application with
the chief of police on forms provided by such officer.
   (A)   Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed with
the chief of police not less than forty five (45) days nor more than one year
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   Contents: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade;
      2.   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization, and the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization;
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      4.   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      5.   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      6.   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles;
      7.   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
      8.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      9.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
      10.   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas;
      11.   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
      12.   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his
behalf;
      13.   Any additional information which the chief of police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit shall
issue.
   (C)   Fee: There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a
special event permit for the parade a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-5: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great
a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of
the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (F)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
   (G)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
   (H)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit;
   (I)   The parade is not for an unlawful purpose;
   (J)   The parade will not incite a breach of the peace. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-
1987)
9-13-6: NOTICE OF REJECTION:
If a permit is denied, or if the permit is approved on conditions with which
the applicant contests, the chief of police or his/her designee shall provide
the applicant with the written decision to deny or approve with conditions
within ten (10) business days. The applicant, within ten (10) business days
after denial or approval with conditions, may appeal the decision to the city
council for a final review based upon the documents and circumstances
presented. The applicant's appeal will be scheduled for consideration by the
city council at a regular meeting within fifteen (15) business days. (Ord.
3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-7: REVOCATION:
The chief of police or his/her designee may summarily suspend or revoke a
permit issued under this chapter for violation of any provision of this
chapter, for violation by the applicant of any federal, state or local laws or
ordinances during the special event, for a violation of the conditions of the
permit or for making any material false representation in an application for a
permit or for an exemption certificate. In deciding whether to suspend or
revoke a permit, the chief of police or his/her designee may consult with other
relevant members of the city staff. In the event of a suspension or revocation,
the appeal provisions above shall apply, commencing upon the date of the
suspension or revocation notice. (Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-9: ALTERNATIVE PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-10: NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
   (A)   The street department superintendent;
   (B)   The fire division commander. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-11: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (G)   Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-12: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   (A)   Compliance With Regulations: A permittee hereunder shall comply with
all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
      1.   Parade participants will be provided notice stating no candy,
liquids or other items will be thrown from floats to the spectators. Violations
will be cause to remove the participant from the parade.
   (B)   Possession Of Permit: The parade chairman or other person heading or
leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the
conduct of the parade. (Ord. 3093, 3-16-2015)
9-13-13: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES:
   (A)   Interference: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, block,
obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any
person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
      1.   No person (except participants of the parade) shall walk, run, or
ride a bicycle, skateboard or similar device between participants, vehicles or
animals in a parade.
      2.   No person shall drop, throw or roll any object toward, among or
between participants, vehicles or animals in a parade, which object could cause
injury or damage to a person, animal or vehicle struck by such object.
      3.   No person shall throw, squirt, dump or drop any liquid or gaseous
substance on, toward, among or between participants, vehicles or animals in a
parade.
      4.   No person shall grab at, take hold of, hit, pull or push any
participant, vehicle or animal in a parade or anything in the possession of any
participant in a parade.
      5.   No person shall vend or offer for sale any food or merchandise from
the street, curb to curb, of a parade route during the hours the parade route
is closed to normal motor traffic unless the person desiring to vend or sell
such merchandise has obtained the written permission of the person holding the
permit for the parade.
   (B)   Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles, persons, or animals comprising a parade when such vehicles,
persons, or animals are in motion and the facts and circumstances indicate that
such vehicles, persons or animals are part of a parade.
   (C)   Parking On Parade Route: The chief of police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along any street or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade.
The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
9-13-14: PENALTIES:
Violation of any of the terms or conditions of the parade permit by any person
is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2199, 4-20-1987)
TITLE 10
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Authority
10-1-3: Jurisdiction
10-1-4: Policy of City
10-1-5: Purpose
10-1-6: Interpretation
10-1-7: Conflicts of Law
10-1-8: Severability
10-1-9: Saving Provision
10-1-10: Amendments
10-1-11: Violation and Penalties
10-1-12: Effective Date
10-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the
development regulations of the City and shall include all zoning and
subdivision regulations governing developments under the jurisdiction of the
City.
10-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   (A)   Pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through the laws,
Statutes and regulations of the State of Idaho, the City Council does hereby
exercise the power and authority to adopt zoning and subdivision regulations to
regulate development of lands under its jurisdiction. Such regulation of the
development of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land
development is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the State to this
City. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid
down by said Council for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of
the land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the
Municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future property
owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
   (B)   Under the power and authority so vested, the Council hereby declares
that no building permit or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for
any parcel or plat of land subject to the regulations nor shall any excavation
or filling of land or construction of any public or private improvements take
place or be commenced thereon, except in conformity with these regulations and
no land subject to these regulations shall be subdivided and sold or offered
for sale until the owner has obtained approval of a final plat in accordance
with these regulations 1  and the approved plat is filed with the County
Recorder.
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-12-2-4 of this Title.
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
   (A)   These regulations shall apply to all lands and improvements within the
corporate City limits.
   (B)   They shall also apply to lands and improvements outside the corporate
City limits that:
      1.   Are within the designated "area of impact" 1  and are not
incorporated into an active agricultural unit of twenty (20) acres or more.
      2.   Are under written agreement by past or present owners to be
regulated in return for enjoying the benefits of certain services normally
available only to in-city lands.
   (C)   For subdivision regulation only, all lands within one mile of the
corporate City limits are subject by State law to the City's ordinances.
 
Notes
1 2. See Chapter 8 of this Title.
10-1-4: POLICY OF CITY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the development
of land within the jurisdiction of the City subject to the control of the City
and to adopt development regulations to facilitate accomplishment of the goals
and objectives of any comprehensive plans of the City for the orderly, planned,
efficient and economical development of the City. It shall be the general
policy of the City that:
   (A)   All land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire,
flood or other menace;
   (B)   Land shall not be subdivided until all available public facilities and
improvements exist or have been given proper consideration by the City Council
and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage and capital
improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities, transportation
facilities and improvements;
   (C)   All existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to any proposals shown in a comprehensive plan, official map
or capital budget and program of the City;
   (D)   All existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to any proposals shown in a comprehensive plan, official map
or capital budget and program of the City.
It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in any building and
housing codes 1 , zoning ordinances, comprehensive plans, official maps, land
use plans and capital budgets and programs adopted by the City.
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4 of this Code.
10-1-5: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to the general policy of the City, these regulations are adopted for
the following purposes:
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the Municipality.
   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the Municipality, in
accordance with any comprehensive plan of the City.
   (C)   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population.
   (D)   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the Municipality and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of all parts of the Municipality.
   (E)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Municipality
and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
   (F)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities.
   (G)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Municipality,
having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses
of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of
streets and building lines.
   (H)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use
of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided
land.
   (I)   To insure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve any proposed development.
   (J)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the Municipality in
order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the
value of the land.
   (K)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Municipality and
to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
   (L)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and
layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as
established in this Title. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-81)
   (M)   To minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions as
follows:
      1.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
      2.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      3.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      4.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      5.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      6.   To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and,
      7.   To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-82)
10-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
The Administrator 1  shall be responsible for the interpretation of these
regulations and any interpretation and application of the regulations shall be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare. This is not intended to abrogate any appeal rights provided
herein.
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-17-1 of this Code.
10-1-7: CONFLICTS OF LAW:
   (A)   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, Statute or other provision of
law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (B)   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant
or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that where the
provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or regulation than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or
restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the
provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose
duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the
requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the City Council or
the Municipality in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations,
and such private provisions are not consistent with these regulations or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder but will
not be enforced by the City.
10-1-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any part of provision of these regulations or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part,
provision or application directly involved in all controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other
persons or circumstances. The Council hereby declares that it would have
enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part,
provision or application.
10-1-9: SAVING PROVISION:
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as
waiving any right of the Municipality under any section or provision existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any
rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the
Municipality except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
10-1-10: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare,
the City may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these
development regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be
held by the City in the manner herein prescribed 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 14 of this Title.
10-1-11: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Whenever a violation of this Title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall fully state the
causes and basis of the same and shall be filed with the Administrator. The
Administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate the
same and take such action, or cause the same to be taken thereon as provided by
this Title 1 . The City Attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal
action is deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this
Title.
Any violation of the provisions of this Title or any failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues beyond notice shall be considered a separate offense. The land owner,
tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such continuing violation may be found
guilty of a separate offense for each day the violation continues as aforesaid.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council or any other public official
or private citizen from taking such lawful action as it necessary to restrain
or prevent any violation of this Title or the Idaho Code.
Provided, however, that where property has been made nonconforming or where an
existing nonconforming use has been increased by the exercise of eminent
domain, it shall not be a violation and no penalty, either civil or criminal,
shall result. Persons desiring to change or modify the use of said
nonconforming properties in a manner which would, but for the exercise of
eminent domain, be permitted outright, may apply for a special use permit,
which permit may be granted with due consideration given to the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the City.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be
punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, a fine
not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by both such fine and
imprisonment, or as the Court shall deem necessary in the interest of justice.
 
Notes
1 2. See Section 10-13-1-6 of this Code.
10-1-12: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The Zoning Code, as hereby adopted, shall be effective immediately upon its
passage and publication as required by law, and shall be in full force and
effect. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-81)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title certain words used herein shall mean what is
indicated in this chapter. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular number includes
the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
The word "shall" or "will" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement.
The word "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or arranged
to be used or occupied".
ACCESS EASEMENT: An easement across one or more adjacent properties to allow
vehicular access to an otherwise inaccessible area at any time. (Ord. 2012, 7-
6-1981)
ACCESSORY BUILDING, ATTACHED: An accessory building that is attached to or
within ten feet (10') of a dwelling. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
ACCESSORY BUILDING, DETACHED: An accessory building which is located a minimum
of ten feet (10') from a dwelling. The footprint of the building shall be used
to determine the maximum permitted size of a detached accessory building. (Ord.
2741, 11-4-2002)
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure that is incidental and
subordinate to the principal allowed use of a property and located on the same
lot as the principal allowed use.
ADMINISTRATOR 1 : A person who is legally vested with the right of
administration of this ordinance. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
AGRICULTURAL LAND: Land used for the raising of plant crops and animals on
pasture, but excluding feedlots and dairies. (Ord. 2275, 7-17-1989)
AGRITOURISM ACTIVITY: An accessory use/secondary activity carried out on an
active farm or ranch of ten (10) acres or more that allows members of the
general public, for recreational, entertainment or educational purposes, to
view or enjoy rural activities including, but not limited to, farming,
ranching, historic, cultural, on-site educational farming programs,
recreational farming programs that may include on-site hospitality services,
guided and self-guided tours, bed and breakfast accommodations, farm animal
petting zoos, short term farm festivals, corn mazes, "harvest-your-own" events,
hayrides, barn parties, horseback riding, fee fishing and camping. An activity
is an agritourism activity whether or not the participant paid to participate
in the activity. (Ord. 2018-007, 8-20-2018)
ALLEY: See definition of street.
ANIMAL, SMALL AND LARGE: An animal shall be considered small if it is a
domestic pet normally kept in a house and weighs less than one hundred fifty
(150) pounds at maturity. All other animals shall be classed as large animals.
APARTMENT HOTEL: A building or portion thereof designed for or containing both
individual guestrooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units.
APPLIANCE REPAIR: The repair of a household or office device operated by gas or
electrical current.
APPROVED: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean by the Council. All approvals
delegated herein to administrative personnel of the City are subject to review
and final determination by the Council. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any projection which is not intended for occupancy
and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building but shall
not include signs. Examples of such projections are cornices, eaves, canopies,
sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, etc. For carports or
canopies the architectural projection shall be measured from the support posts
unless said posts are located more than three feet (3') from the outer edge of
the carport or canopy roof. In such case a maximum of three feet (3') shall be
considered the architectural projection. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
AREA OF IMPACT: The area surrounding the city as established by mutual
agreement with the county in conformance with state law. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
(Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
AUTOMOBILE AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RENTAL/STORAGE YARDS: Parking and/or
storage of new and/or used automobiles and recreation vehicles, which may or
may not be capable of immediate operation under their own power. (Ord. 2741,
11-4-2002)
AUTOMOBILE IMPOUND FACILITY: A facility that provides temporary outdoor storage
for three (3) or more vehicles that are to be claimed by titleholders or their
agents, provided that no vehicle shall be stored at said facility for more than
forty five (45) days and must remain mechanically operable and licensed at all
times, or a parcel of land or a building that is used for the storage of
wrecked motor vehicles usually awaiting insurance adjustment or transport to a
repair shop and where motor vehicles are kept for a period of time not
exceeding fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
AUTOMOBILE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER AND FARM IMPLEMENT REPAIR: The repair
of automobiles, mobile homes, travel trailers and farm implements.
AUTOMOBILE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES AREAS: An open
area, other than a street used for the display, sale or rental of new or used
automobiles, mobile homes, travel trailers, or farm implements but not
including repair work except minor incidental repair of same to be displayed,
sold or rented on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of two (2) or more used motor
vehicles, mobile homes or trailers. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD AND JUNKYARD: Any area where automobile wrecking is
carried out and/or accumulation of parts thereof, are stored in the open; or
any land, building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such motor
vehicles or property containing any dismantled, abandoned, nonoperating,
junked, damaged or destroyed household goods and equipment, motor vehicles,
machinery or miscellaneous property. (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
BASEMENT: A portion of living space in a dwelling unit all or at least one-half
(1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Those methods, or practices to prevent or
reduce water pollution and include, but are not limited to, structural and
nonstructural controls, and operation and maintenance procedures. BMPs can be
applied before, during, and after pollution producing activities to reduce or
eliminate the introduction of pollutants into receiving waters. (Ord. 2481, 5-
1-1995)
BICYCLEWAY: A public way designed for the use of nonmotorized vehicles.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended or used for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, plants,
chattels, or property of any kind. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
BUILDING LINE: See definition of Line, Building. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official or other city employee appointed by
the building official. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
BUSINESS PARK: A development approved through the ZDA process that contains a
number of separate manufacturing, commercial, office and supporting uses and
open space. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
CALL CENTER: An operational center set up to utilize telecommunication and
computer technologies to automate various high volume inbound and/or outbound
telephone activities and services. (Ord. 2710, 12-3-2001)
CANYON RIM: The point below which the final slope toward Rock Creek or the
Snake River exceeds thirty percent (30%) for a distance of ten (10) or more
feet. The "final slope", as the term is used herein, excludes minor breaks in
the canyon wall which have a slope of less than thirty percent (30%) but are:
a) inaccessible from existing streets, and/or b) less than one hundred feet
(100') in width. There may be multiple rims meeting this definition, and the
requirements of the canyon rims overlay district apply to all such rims. The
location of the rim shall be determined before any excavation or grading
preparatory to development occurs. Any developer may, prior to filing an
application for approval, request that the city engineer delineate the rim on
his or her property.
CANYON RIM SETBACK: The shortest distance between the canyon rim and the
exterior wall of any building for which a canyon rim setback is required. (Ord.
2466, 2-6-1995)
CARPORT, ATTACHED: Having all or part of one wall common to the dwelling or to
a covered porch attached to the dwelling or located within ten feet (10') of a
dwelling.
CARPORT, DETACHED: A roofed structure of which all sides and ends are not
enclosed and which is located a minimum of ten feet (10') from a dwelling.
(Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
CASHIER'S BOOTH: A building not exceeding sixty (60) square feet which is used
solely for the receipt of money from automotive and petroleum products and
which contains no items for sale. (Ord. 2072, 7-5-1983)
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human or
animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the
boundaries of such cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is
provided. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
CHANGE OF USE: A change of use from one of the following categories to another:
   (A)   Agricultural.
   (B)   Agricultural processing.
   (C)   Communications and utilities.
   (D)   Cultural facilities.
   (E)   Governmental facilities.
   (F)   Manufacturing.
   (G)   Medical facilities.
   (H)   Miscellaneous.
   (I)   Parks.
   (J)   Public assembly.
   (K)   Residential.
   (L)   Retail trade.
   (M)   Services.
   (N)   Sports facilities.
   (O)   Transportation.
   (P)   Wholesale facilities. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
CITY: The city of Twin Falls.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager or other city employee appointed by the city
manager. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
COLLOCATION: The use of a single support system on the ground by more than one
carrier or several support systems on an existing building or structure by more
than one carrier. (Ord. 2678, 1-16-2001)
COMMERCIAL USE: A structure or area intended for the selling, bartering or
swapping of any merchandise, commodities, objects or services.
COMMISSION: The city of Twin Falls planning and zoning commission 2 .
COMMON AREA: Lands or real estate intended for the common use of a group of
persons all of whom have an undivided common interest in the real estate.
COMMON AREA (CONDOMINIUM): The separate interest in a condominium.
COMMON AREA, LIMITED: A common area within a condominium ownership that is
restricted in use to include only a part of the group of persons who have a
common interest in a condominium project.
COMMON, INTEREST IN: Every interest created in favor of several persons in
their own right is an interest in common, unless acquired by them in
partnership, for partnership purposes or unless declared in its creation to be
a joint interest or unless acquired as community property.
COMMON WALL: A wall located upon or at the division line between adjoining
premises and use, intended to be used or available to be used by both owners of
such premises in the construction or maintenance of improvements on their
respective properties.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The overall guiding document for all development within the
legal jurisdiction of the city.
CONCESSION: A building or structure having less than three hundred (300) square
feet of area that is used for the sale of food, beverages and/or souvenirs.
CONDOMINIUM OWNERSHIP: An estate consisting of: a) an undivided interest in
common in real property in an interest or interests in real property or in any
combination thereof, together with b) a separate interest in real property, in
an interest or interests in real property, or any combination thereof.
CONDOMINIUM PLAT: The drawing of a division of real property into individual
interests in common together with a separate interest in the real property for
the purpose of establishing condominium ownership together with the declaration
that is filed according to law with the county recorder. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
COTTAGE BUSINESS: A small, individually owned business or concern that
functions without altering the residential character of the neighborhood and
which does not create any negative impacts on the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the adjacent property owners. (Ord. 2657, 6-19-2000)
COUNCIL: The city of Twin Falls city council.
COUNTY: Twin Falls County, Idaho and its governing board.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES: Activities, programs, displays or performances, presented
for the enjoyment, education or other benefit of the general public, involving
art, music, literature, live theater, craft shows, history or humanities. (Ord.
2851, 3-6-2006)
DAYCARE SERVICE: Services offered by persons who are paid to supervise or care
for six (6) or more persons including the resident children, but excluding
those businesses or religious institutions which provide incidental daycare
service for patrons or attendees while parents are on the premises. (Ord. 2850,
2-21-2006)
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the public
by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes as by the recording
of a plat. Dedicated land becomes public land upon the acceptance by the local
governing authority. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
DETENTION FACILITY: Those methods or devices that temporarily collect and hold
the stormwater runoff and release the water at a metered rate over time. (Ord.
2481, 5-1-1995)
DEVELOPED: A developed property is a property for which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued to occupy a building on the property. (Ord. 2957, 12-
8-2008)
DEVELOPER: The owner, or his legally authorized agent, of lands that are being
platted or mapped. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
DEVELOPMENT: Lands within the boundaries of an area that is platted or mapped
in accordance with this title that are intended to be improved by the
construction or addition of buildings or other structures; by mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
DORMITORY: A rooming house or residence hall occupied by students.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment, excluding gasoline service
stations, in which business is conducted while the customers are vehicle
occupants. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including manufactured homes, but not including hotels, boarding and
lodging houses, trailers, camp cars or trailer houses. (Ord. 2110, 7-16-1984)
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof, designed for three (3) or
more households living independently of each other and including apartment
hotels.
DWELLING, ONE HOUSEHOLD: A detached building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO HOUSEHOLD: A building designed exclusively for occupancy for two
(2) households living independently of each other including duplexes,
semidetached houses and separately owned shared wall dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT: Space within the dwelling designed to accommodate all normal
cooking, sleeping and sanitation needs of the residents.
EASEMENT: A right of use for a stated purpose, falling short of ownership,
granted by a property owner to the public or to another person and restricting
the property owner's use of the property by prohibiting the construction of any
permanent building or structure over the easement and by prohibiting any other
stated restriction of use.
ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
EQUESTRIANWAY: A public way designed to be used for horseback riding. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
FACADE MOUNTED: Directly attached or affixed to the elevation of a building,
tank, or other structure. (Ord. 2678, 1-16-2001)
FARM: An area twenty (20) acres or more in the area of impact which is being
used for the purpose of producing food, fiber, seed stock, fodder or oil
producing crops. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
FEEDLOTS AND DAIRIES: A parcel or parcels of land under the same ownership or
management with more than five (5) animals per acre or a total of fifty (50)
animals, whichever is less. (Ord. 2275, 7-17-1989)
FINISH FLOOR: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working,
sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used
only for storage purposes is not a "finish floor".
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The official map on which the federal insurance
administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
FLOOD OR FLOODWATERS: A temporary overflow of water on lands not normally
covered by water. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat areas or lowlands adjoining the channel of a
watercourse, or areas where drainage is or may be restricted by manmade
structures which have been or may be covered partially or wholly by floodwater,
but shall compose an area not less than that area confined by the 50-year flood
and shall not exceed that area confined by the 100-year flood. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-
1981)
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS: The codes, ordinances and other regulations relating to
the use of land and construction within the channel and floodplain areas,
including zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, housing
codes, setback requirements, open area regulations and similar methods of
control affecting the use and development of the areas.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents
of buildings.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
(Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
FREESTANDING TOWER: A tower not physically attached to a building or structure.
A tower is attached to the ground by a foundation. (Ord. 2678, 1-16-2001)
FRONT: The front of a building shall be the wall so designated by the building
official which best conforms to the intent of this title. The front property
line shall be the lot line most nearly parallel to the front of a building. In
designating the front of a building, the building official shall base his
decision on the location of the door which provides the principal access into
the building and/or the location of the trafficway which provides the principal
access to the property. The decision of the building official may be appealed
to the city council for interpretation of the intent of this title and final
determination of the designated front.
FRONTAGE, ENTIRE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between
intersecting streets, or between a street and right of way, waterway, end of
dead end street or city boundary, measured along the street line. An
intersecting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the
side of the street which it intersects.
GARAGE, ATTACHED: A garage having all or part of one wall common to the
dwelling or to a covered porch attached to the dwelling.
GARAGE, DETACHED: A garage which is completely surrounded by open space.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or a portion of a building in which only motor
vehicles used by the tenants of the building on the premises are stored or
kept.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The city council of the city of Twin Falls, Idaho. (Ord.
2110, 7-16-1984)
GOVERNMENT OPEN STORAGE YARD: Storage of vehicles, equipment, and materials
accessory to the operation of an owned or leased governmental facility. (Ord.
3088, 2-2-2015)
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES: Facilities operated or occupied by a governmental
agency for the benefit of the general population. (Ord. 2379, 6-15-1992)
H-1 AND H-7(2) FACILITIES: Facilities for storage, handling, use or sale of
hazardous and highly flammable or explosive materials other than flammable
liquids as defined by the edition of the building code most recently adopted by
the city council. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the top of the
curb or future curb adjacent to the subject property. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision or portion thereof having an average
slope of ten percent (10%) or more.
HISTORIC SITES: Sites established by the city, county, state or federal
government as historic monuments that should be preserved. (Ord. 2110, 7-16-
1984)
HOME OCCUPATION: A service, excluding daycare, offered by the resident of a
household unit or the sale of items handcrafted on the premises by the resident
of a household unit providing the service, sale or handcrafting is performed
only by the resident therein and providing the area used in performing the home
occupation does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in area and providing
there is no exterior indication of the home occupation. Services which generate
no traffic to the premises or which use no vehicles which would not normally be
found incidental to a residential use shall be exempt from this definition. In
the C1, M1 and M2 zones, only existing on site residences may be used for home
occupations. (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
HORTICULTURAL SERVICES: Services which support horticultural activities such as
quality control laboratories and soil and chemistry testing. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-
1997)
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services, primarily for inpatient and
medical or surgical care of sick or injured, including outpatient departments,
training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. Hospitals
are assumed to be for humans unless otherwise indicated.
HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more rooms intended or designed to be
used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are
occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. (Ord. 2110, 7-16-1984; amd. Ord.
2227, 12-21-1987)
HOUSEHOLD: An individual or two (2) or more individuals related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption or guardianship, together with any servants, not to
exceed ten (10) persons, or a group of four (4) or less persons who are
unrelated and reside together for more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2710, 12-3-
2001)
HOUSEHOLD BUILDING: A single building containing one or more household units.
HOUSEHOLD UNIT: A room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking
and bathroom facilities intended for use and occupancy by one family.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally
lighted signs.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions
associated with subdivision and building site developments. (Ord. 2110, 7-16-
1984; amd. Ord. 2227, 12-21-1987)
IN HOME DAYCARE SERVICE: Daycare service in a home in which the provider lives
full time and is the main on site caregiver of the service. (Ord. 2850, 2-21-
2006)
INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A building in which recreational activities such
as ice or roller skating, bowling, dancing, card games, swimming, tennis, video
games, billiards, bingo and other similar activities take place. (Ord. 2550, 6-
2-1997)
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision which consists of sixty (60) or more
lots or dwelling units or which contains forty (40) acres or more. (Ord. 2140,
3-18-1985)
LATTICE TOWER: A support structure that consists of a network of crossed metal
braces, forming a tower that is usually triangular or square in cross section.
Roof mounted towers not exceeding two feet (2') in width in any cross section
and not exceeding fifty feet (50') in height shall not be considered lattice
towers. (Ord. 2700, 7-16-2001)
LESSEE: A person holding a legally enforceable lease.
LINE, BUILDING: One of four (4) perpendicular lines established by the building
official for the purpose of measuring setbacks. The lines shall be established
parallel to the predominate building walls and shall pass through the most
exterior point on the building walls, excluding architectural features not
intended for occupancy.
LINE, PROPERTY: The legal boundary of a parcel of real property.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or
contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts
upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LOT: Unless otherwise defined, a parcel of land with sufficient size to meet
the minimum requirements of this title for use, dimensional standards and off
street parking and which is owned by a single person with a separate interest
or a group of persons with a separate interest together with an interest in
common in the real property.
LOT AREA: The total area of a lot measured on a horizontal plane within the
boundary lines exclusive of public and private roads, and easements of access
to other property.
LOT, CONDOMINIUM: For the purposes of a condominium, a lot shall be the
farthest exterior boundary of the real property upon which the project is
situated.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT, DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the two (2) side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, PLATTED: A lot or individual parcel shown on a plat.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear.
MAINTENANCE EASEMENT: An easement granted for the purpose of providing access
for repair and maintenance of the appurtenant property in zero lot line
subdivisions.
MANAGEMENT BODY: A person or group of persons created in accordance with this
title to manage a development and maintain all common areas.
MANAGEMENT BODY (CONDOMINIUM): Any person or persons managing a project, and
includes the condominium owners acting themselves, a corporation or association
of which the owners are members or stockholders, a body of governors or
directors elected by the owners, or a management agent selected by the owners,
corporation or association, or by the board, or named in the declaration. (Ord.
2110, 7-16-1984)
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built since June 15, 1976, that bears the seal
of HUD indicating it has met the mobile home construction and safety standards
of the United States department of housing and urban development (HUD
standards) and is used as a permanent dwelling. Manufactured homes shall comply
with the following development standards:
   (A)   Shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide, with a minimum floor
area of nine hundred sixty (960) square feet.
   (B)   Shall have a nonmetallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a
minimum slope of three to twelve (3/12) and a minimum six inch (6") eave.
   (C)   Shall have horizontal aluminum, simulated wood or wood siding.
   (D)   Shall have a foundation fascia that is similar in appearance and
durability to the masonry foundation of site built dwellings and which
surrounds the entire perimeter of the structure and completely encloses the
space between the siding and the finished grade.
   (E)   Shall be permanently affixed and set upon a foundation base having an
anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure. The running
gear and towing hitch shall be removed.
   (F)   Shall obtain a building permit from the city building department to
ensure that the manufactured home is placed on site to HUD standards set forth
in circular letter 2-83, dated April 8, 1983, published by the Boise service
office of HUD regulating the perimeter foundation, the anchoring of the
structure to its foundation and other building requirements. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
MANUFACTURING USE: The fabricating or assembling of materials into finished or
partially finished products by hand or by the use of machinery, but excluding
home occupations, activities creating products in which the process does not
yield any vapor, liquid or solid waste materials, and crafts made in
conjunction with retail business which may include, but not be limited to,
ceramics, mosaics, fabrics, jewelry, leather goods, silk screening, dress
designing, sculpturing and wood carving.
MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure supported by the main building and
projecting over a public way. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan showing a carrier's expected network of
wireless communication facilities within the city and its area of impact. (Ord.
2678, 1-16-2001)
MOBILE HOME: A structure of over four hundred (400) square feet in interior
area that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities; not to include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any tract of land that is divided into rental spaces under
common ownership or management for the purpose of locating two (2) or more
mobile homes for dwelling purposes. (Ord. 2347, 9-3-1991)
MOBILE HOME, TEMPORARY: A nonself-propelled vehicle of less than four hundred
(400) square feet interior area designed, constructed or intended for temporary
residential use.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or
iron steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in section 50-1303 Idaho Code.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY BUILDING: A building containing more than two (2) businesses
or households. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure not conforming to the
provisions of this title but which was lawfully existing or under construction
at the time of the adoption of this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use not conforming to the provisions of this title but
which was lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this title. (Ord. 2140,
3-18-1985)
NONRESIDENTIAL USE: Any structure, activity, or use not included in the
definition of "residential use" contained in this section. A home builder model
home, temporary sales trailer, and an apartment leasing office are included in
this definition. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign mounted on property other than that occupied by the
use being advertised by said sign. This definition shall exclude signs located
within an approved ZDA advertising a nonresidential use or nonresidential uses
located within that ZDA and approved as part of a master sign plan through the
ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign mounted on property that is occupied by the use being
advertised by said sign. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
100-YEAR FLOOD: The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a 1 percent chance
of occurring each year). (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
OPEN SPACE: An area retaining a natural ground cover free of any buildings,
structures, streets or parking areas.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat or record on
file in the office of the county recorder, or an unplatted contiguous parcel of
land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date hereof. In cases
of "unrecorded matters of fact", the commission shall use its best judgment to
determine a fair designation.
ORPHANAGE: A rooming house or residence hall occupied by orphaned children.
OWNER: Any person or group of persons having legal title to real property which
is subject to this title.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: An enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area of not less
than twenty feet by nine feet (20' x 9') in size, together with access and
maneuvering space sufficient to permit a standard automobile to be parked
within the surfaced area, permanently reserved for the temporary parking or
storage of one automobile. The total space shall be not less than two hundred
seventy (270) square feet.
PATIO, COVERED: See definition of Carport, Attached.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public way designed to be used as a walkway for pedestrians.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the subdivider
will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved
plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages
up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
PERMANENT: Not less than six (6) months.
PERSON: Any individual or any corporation, joint venture, limited partnership,
partnership, firm, association, trustee or other similar entity or
organization.
PICK UP SHELTER: A structure used only by persons waiting for public
transportation.
PLAT: The drawings, certifications, descriptions and approvals of a division or
proposed division of real property into two (2) or more lots, blocks, parcels,
sites, plots, units, common areas, limited common areas or other descriptive
designations of real property for the purpose of offering for sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions to any person having a separate interest or an individual
interest in common together with a separate interest in any or all of the real
property. All as set forth by Idaho Code.
PORCH: A covered entrance to a building. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
PREMISES: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land with their
appurtenances and buildings which are under one ownership or control. (Ord.
2124, 10-15-1984)
PRIVATE: Belonging to an individual or group of persons and not for the public
or open to the public.
PRIVATE WAY: Any right of way or easement dedicated or platted across real
property owned by the person dedicating or platting the private way and
intended for the general or special use of a person or persons rather than the
general public. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Services offered by persons engaged in the legal,
engineering, architectural, design, planning, accounting, banking, auditing,
and related professions. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
PROHIBITED SIGN: Any sign listed in section
10-9-10 of this title, signs that do not comply with this or other applicable
ordinances, and signs that are otherwise prohibited. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
PROJECT: A development.
PROJECT (CONDOMINIUM): The entirety of the property divided or to be divided
into condominiums.
PROPERTY (CONDOMINIUM): The land described in the declaration recorded,
together with any building, improvement or structure thereon, and every
easement or right appurtenant thereto, and all personal property intended for
use in connection therewith or for the use, benefit or enjoyment of the
condominium owners.
PUBLIC: Owned by federal, state or local government or subdivisions thereof.
(Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
PUBLIC VIEW: A view from any public or city right of way or access easement.
(Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
PUBLIC WAY: Any right of way or easement dedicated or platted across real
property owned by the person dedicating or platting the public way and intended
for the general or special use of the public; or any right of way or easement
legally obtained by the city through the use thereof providing such public way
has not been vacated by the city council.
REAL PROPERTY: Real estate consisting of: a) lands, possessory rights to land,
ditch and water rights, and mining claims, both lode and placer; b) that which
is affixed to land; and c) that which is appurtenant to land.
REAR: The rear of a building and rear property line shall be the wall and lot
line most nearly parallel to the front wall and lot line. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND CAMPING PARK: Any tract of land that is divided into
rental spaces under common ownership or management for the purpose of locating
recreational vehicles, travel trailers or tents for dwelling purposes for a
period not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
RELIGIOUS FACILITIES: A building intended for the worship of a God and its
related facilities such as meeting halls, a household unit for persons employed
in the building, and schools for religious teachings.
RELIGIOUS QUARTERS: A rooming house or residence hall occupied by persons
employed by a single religious organization.
REPRODUCIBLE DRAWING: A permanent drawing prepared in black india ink or an
archival photographic image process conforming to the standards established by
the American National Standards Institute on a polyester material four-
thousandths of an inch (0.004") thick with a matte finish.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property,
which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension or
widening.
RESIDENCE HALL: A building without cooking facilities where one or more rooms
without cooking facilities are occupied by separate households for more than
thirty (30) days without board.
RESIDENTIAL HOTEL: A residence hall or rooming house having one or more rooms
occupied by separate households where more than seventy five percent (75%) of
the households reside for more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
RESIDENTIAL USE: Any detached single-family, attached single- family, duplex,
townhome, condominium, multi-family, agricultural, or other structure,
activity, or use occupied or operated primarily to provide the cooking,
sleeping, and sanitary needs of an individual or family. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
RETENTION FACILITY: Those methods or devices that collect and hold the
stormwater runoff for dissipation through infiltration and/or evaporation.
(Ord. 2481, 5-1-1995)
RETIREMENT HOME: A rooming house or residence hall occupied by retired persons.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way,
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
ROOF PROJECTIONS: Chimneys, smokestacks, church spires, flagpoles, radio and
television antennas or towers, masts, cooling towers, elevator shafts and other
similar projections.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building with common cooking facilities having one or more
rooms without cooking facilities occupied by separate households for more than
thirty (30) days with or without board.
SANATORIUM: A private hospital, whether or not such facility is operated for
profit.
SCHOOL: Any place primarily used for teaching.
SERVICE BUILDING: A permanent building or buildings designed to provide service
facilities to the inhabitants or users of any development.
SERVICE ROAD: A dedicated minor way which is used for vehicular access to back
or side of residential property otherwise abutting on a street.
SERVICE STATION: A building or portion thereof and land used for supplying
fuel, oil and minor accessories for motor vehicles at retail direct to the
customer and for making minor emergency repairs. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
SETBACK: The distance from a property line, centerline, canyon rim, right of
way, or structure within which a building is prohibited. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
SHELTER HOME: Building or facility however named, operated on either a profit
or nonprofit basis for the purpose of providing a home with necessary
supervision for three (3) or more persons not related to the owner and who are
unable to care for themselves.
SIDE: The side of a building and side property line shall be the wall and lot
line most nearly perpendicular to the front wall and lot line. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-
1981)
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public. This definition includes the signs
defined herein. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit granted by the commission for a permanent use that
is otherwise prohibited but may be allowed under specific provisions when not
in conflict with a comprehensive plan.
SPORT SHOOTING RANGE: Shooting range as defined by Idaho State Statute 55-2604,
or as amended, an area designed and operated for the use of rifles, shotguns,
pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, archery, or other similar
sport shooting.
SPORTING VEHICLES: Travel and tent trailers not over eight feet (8') wide or
thirty two feet (32') long and capable of being towed with safety behind a
passenger vehicle, campers designed to be mounted on a pickup truck, boats and
accessories, recreational type snow machines required to be licensed under the
laws of the state of Idaho and having a maximum seating capacity for three (3)
persons and motorcycles and related items designed to be used off the highway
system.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications as specified in this title or as
officially adopted by the city council.
STATE: State of Idaho. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt, and surface runoff and drainage. (Ord.
2481, 5-1-1995)
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also
includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard,
land, place and other such terms.
   (A)   Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
   (B)   Local: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to
abutting properties.
   (C)   Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic
from local streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
   (D)   Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or
heavy traffic.
   (E)   Loop: A local street with both terminal points on the same street of
origin.
   (F)   Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to another street at one end only as
provided with a turnaround space at its terminus.
   (G)   Frontage: A local street parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street to provide access to abutting properties.
   (H)   Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the
required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
   (I)   Stub Street: A street which terminates without provisions for a
turnaround area.
   (J)   Half Street: A street comprised of one-half (1/2) of the width
required to conform with a standard city street section.
   (K)   Private: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance
which provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
STREET GRADE: The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot
fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the
street shall be taken as the street grade.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
STRUCTURES: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences
and billboards, but exclude utility poles and streetlights. (Ord. 2999, 1-24-
2011)
SUBDISTRICTS, BASIC AND SECONDARY: A zoning designation that provides
flexibility for the development of a homogeneous unit without compromising the
health, safety or general welfare of the community.
SUBDIVIDER: The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this title. The subdivider need not be the owner of the property;
however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient property rights
in the property to represent the owner. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel
of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
development; which shall also include the dedication of public streets and
other rights of way and the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However,
this title shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
   (B)   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal "condemnation" as
defined and allowed in the Idaho Code 1 ;
   (C)   Widening of existing streets to conform to a comprehensive plan;
   (D)   The acquisition of a street right of way by a public agency in
conformance with a comprehensive plan; and
   (E)   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage. (Ord.
2901, 4-16-2007)
SURVEYOR: A land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state of
Idaho. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
THEATER, OUTDOOR: An open developed lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant
facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures, theatrical or
musical productions/concerts, on a paid admission basis, to patrons seated in
automobiles or on outdoor seats or on the ground. (Ord. 2016-5, 3-7-2016)
TOTAL STRUCTURE (CONDOMINIUM): The structure within which is contained all of
the units of the condominium.
TOURIST COURT: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units designed for, or used temporarily by, automobile
tourists or transients, with parking spaces conveniently located to each unit
and including auto courts, motels or motor lodges.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling with party walls and no side yards between
abutting dwellings.
TRAFFICWAY: A public way or a private way whose primary use is for movement of
motorized vehicles.
TRAILER, CAMP CAR OR TRAILER HOUSE: Any unit used for living or for sleeping
purposes which is equipped with wheels or similar device used for the purpose
of transporting said unit from place to place, whether by motor power or other
means, and such vehicles that are used as aforesaid that have had the wheels or
equipment removed.
TRANSIENT LODGING: A rooming house or residence hall having one or more rooms
occupied by separate families where less than seventy five percent (75%) of the
families reside for more than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
UNATTENDED VEHICLE: A vehicle parked for more than twenty four (24) hours in
one location. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
UNDEVELOPED: An undeveloped property is a property for which a certificate of
occupancy has not been issued to occupy a building on the property. (Ord. 2957,
12-8-2008)
UNIT: A separate interest in real property in a condominium or townhouse
ownership.
UNPLATTED AREA: Any area that has not been subdivided according to law.
USE: An activity or purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let
or leased. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
UTILITY POLE: A telephone, power, light, cable television, or flag pole. Light
poles shall include street, stadium and security light poles. (Ord. 2678, 1-16-
2001)
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-
1981)
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or personal property is or
may be transported. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other descriptive
means the relationship of a proposed development to other nearby developments,
trafficways or other landmarks within the general area in order to better
locate and orient the area in question.
WALL: The full width or length of a building, including recessed windows or
doors. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals, including antennas, microwave dishes, parabolic
antennas, directional antennas and other types of equipment for the
transmission or reception of such signals, towers or similar structures
supporting the equipment, equipment buildings, shelters, cabinets, and other
facilities. (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
YARD: An open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot
and from the front lot line to the nearest part of a building, excluding
architectural projections. Any street frontage is considered a front yard.
(Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
YARD, REAR: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of the lot
and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building, excluding
architectural projections.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot line
on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing the
front and rear yards, excluding architectural projections.
ZERO LOT LINE: A line created by the placement of a building line upon a side
lot line or the creation of a side lot line which bisects a common wall. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
ZIP LINE: An aerial trail system providing recreation and education activity
that preserves and protects the natural environment and habitat by enabling
people to traverse terrain by means of cable and trolley. (Ord. 2997, 12-13-
2010)
ZONING DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A written commitment by a property owner or
developer concerning the use or development of a subject parcel. A zoning
development agreement may be required as a condition of rezoning and/or
development of a subject parcel when a property is located adjacent to major
arterial or collector streets and/or where a variety of uses may be desired in
a preplanned environment with more flexible standards than normally apply to
the use of land in a standard zoning district. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014; amd. Ord.
2021-010, 5-3-202)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-17-1 of this title.
2 1. See section
  10-17-2 of this title.
1 1. IC § 7-701 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAP
SECTION:
10-3-1: Zoning District Designation
10-3-2: Zoning District Map
10-3-3: Conformance With Zoning Districts
10-3-4: Nonconforming Uses Or Buildings
10-3-1: ZONING DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community there is hereby established the following zoning districts for the
city:
Zoning Districts Short Title Section
Zoning Districts                       Short Title Section
Agricultural                           AG          10-4-1
Suburban-urban interface               SUI         10-4-2
Residential single household           R1-VAR      10-4-3
Residential single household or duplex R2          10-4-4
Residential medium density             R4          10-4-5
Residential multi-household            R6          10-4-6
Commercial central business            CB          10-4-7
Commercial highway                     C1          10-4-8
Manufacturing, light                   M1          10-4-9
Manufacturing, heavy                   M2          10-4-10
Open space                             OS          10-4-11
Airport                                AP          10-4-12
Old Town                               OT          10-4-13
Commercial mixed use                   CM          10-4-14
Residential mixed use                  RM          10-4-15
College Of Southern Idaho              CSI         10-4-16
Residential business                   RB          10-4-23
  
 
Overlay Districts               Short Title Section
Mobile home overlay-one         MHO-1       10-4-17
Professional office overlay     PRO         10-4-18
Canyon Rims overlay             CRO         10-4-19
Wellhead protection overlay     WPO         10-4-20
Neighborhood commercial overlay NCO         10-4-21
Warehouse historic overlay      WHO         10-4-22
 
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2608, 5-3-1999; Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004; Ord.
2998, 1-3-2011)
10-3-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
That certain document entitled the "revised zoning map", and designated "master
copy", as the same is hereto attached and incorporated herein as if the same
were set out in full, be and is hereby approved and adopted and set out in
full, and the same shall be and does constitute the official zoning map for the
city. (Ord. 2017, 7-6-1981)
10-3-3: CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Any land located within a zoning district designated on the "official
zoning map" shall only be used or occupied and any building, structure or
improvement thereon shall only be used, occupied, placed, replaced, erected,
reerected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended, enlarged, modified,
removed or moved as this title permits for the zoning district in which the
same is located.
   (B)   No use, dimensional requirement, sign, off street parking area or
improvement existing on or after the effective date hereof shall be reduced or
altered below the minimum requirements of this title except as provided herein.
(Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-3-4: NONCONFORMING USES OR BUILDINGS:
A building or use made nonconforming but which was lawfully existing or under
construction at the time of adoption hereof may continue to be used or
occupied, subject to the provisions of this section. The requirements of this
section may be waived for residences and residential uses by motion and minute
entry of the city council.
   (A)   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Uses And Buildings:
      1.   Uses: For any of the following reasons, a nonconforming use shall be
discontinued and further use of the property shall conform to the provisions of
this title:
               a.   When a nonconforming use involving a building is
discontinued from use for a period of one year.
               b.   When a nonconforming use not involving a building is
discontinued from use for a period of six (6) months.
               c.   When a nonconforming use is replaced by a nonpermitted use,
constituting a change of use, in which case both the initial and subsequent use
shall be discontinued. The initial nonconforming use may not be reinstated.
               d.   When a nonconforming use involving a building or structure
having an appraised value less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or
involving no building or structure is still in existence two (2) years after
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
               e.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a legal nonconforming use
involving a building may be resumed or replaced by another nonconforming use by
special use permit if said legal nonconforming use has not been discontinued
for more than five (5) years. In addition to the general standards applicable
to special uses, the applicant must show that the existing building cannot
reasonably be converted to a conforming use. (Ord. 2555, 7-21-1997)
      2.   Buildings: A nonconforming building shall be discontinued and
removed or brought into conformance with the provisions of this title within
two (2) years after the effective date hereof if the building or structure has
an appraised value less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or if the
modification to bring it into conformance with the provisions of this title
will cost less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (B)   Replacement Of Nonconforming Building: A nonconforming building or
conforming building housing a nonconforming use damaged by fire, collapse,
explosion or act of God, subsequent to the effective date hereof, may be
replaced or repaired providing: 1) the new building does not have a
nonconforming feature that the original building did not have, 2) the new
building does not exceed the size of the original building except as provided
by subsection (D) of this section, 3) a nonconforming use is not expanded or
changed, and 4) a building permit for the replacement or repair is issued
within six (6) months of the date of the damage. The planning and zoning
commission may approve requests for extensions within the original six (6)
months. (Ord. 2275, 7-17-1989)
   (C)   Expansion Of Nonconforming Building Or Nonconforming Use: Except as
provided hereafter:
      1.   No building or structural alteration, improvement or reconstruction
shall be made which expands a nonconforming building or conforming building
housing a nonconforming use beyond any part of the existing wall or roofline.
      2.   No additional buildings or structures may be constructed or
relocated on the property to house the same or any other nonconforming use.
Under no circumstances may the person or entity responsible for a nonconforming
building or use expand such building or use by the acquisition of additional
real property.
      3.   No person or entity may acquire additional real property to bring
the nonconforming building or use into conformance with this title unless the
use shall also conform to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (D)   Permits To Expand Nonconforming Buildings Or Conforming Buildings
Housing A Nonconforming Use: The city planning and zoning commission may
authorize the issuance of a nonconforming building expansion permit.
      1.   Application Requirements: The application for a nonconforming
building expansion permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator and
shall include and require, as a minimum:
               a.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
               b.   Legal description of property.
               c.   Description of the existing use.
               d.   The reason the property, building or use is nonconforming
to the requirements of this title.
               e.   Existing zoning district.
               f.   A narrative statement of the type of proposed expansion,
including a descriptive statement of the intended expansion, the reason
therefor and the cost thereof.
               g.   Site development plans to scale showing building locations,
landscaping, permanent existing trees, ground treatment, fences, off street
parking and circulation, location and size of adjacent streets, north arrow and
property lines, drawings of major exterior elevations, building materials,
existing grade and proposed new grades.
               h.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining
property and a discussion on the general compatibility with the adjacent and
other properties in the district.
               i.   A narrative statement evaluating the costs of a total
relocation of the nonconforming building or use to an appropriately zoned site.
      2.   Review Of Application: The commission shall review the application
against the following considerations:
               a.   Will the proposed expansion be harmonious with and in
accordance with the general objectives of the comprehensive plan and/or zoning
regulation?
               b.   Will the proposed expansion be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity?
               c.   Will the proposed expansion involve uses, activities,
processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be
detrimental to any person, property or to the general welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors?
               d.   Will the proposed expansion have any other adverse impact
upon the surrounding neighborhood?
               e.   Considerations relating to traffic safety and traffic
congestion:
                  (1)   The effect of the site development plan on traffic
conditions on contiguous streets.
                  (2)   The layout of the site with respect to locations and
dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways.
                  (3)   The arrangement and adequacy of off street parking
facilities to prevent traffic congestion.
                  (4)   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck
loading and unloading facilities.
                  (5)   The circulation patterns within boundaries of the
development.
                  (6)   The surfacing and lighting of off street parking
facilities.
               f.   Considerations relating to outdoor advertising and noise:
                  (1)   The number, location, color, size, height, lighting and
landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and structures in relation to the
creation of traffic hazards and the appearance and harmony with adjacent
developments.
                  (2)   The nuisance effect of additional noise.
               g.   Considerations relating to landscaping:
                  (1)   The location, height and materials of walls, fences,
hedges and screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent developments or to
conceal storage areas, utility installation or other unsightly development.
                  (2)   The planting of ground cover or surfacing to prevent
dust and erosion.
                  (3)   The unnecessary destruction of existing healthy trees.
                  (4)   The restoration of natural vegetation.
                  (5)   The aesthetic effects on motorists, bicyclists and
pedestrians passing along public rights of way adjacent to or included with the
development.
               h.   Considerations relating to buildings and site layout: The
considerations of exterior design in relation to adjoining structures in
height, bulk and area openings, breaks in the facades and facing on streets,
line and pitch of roof and arrangement of structure on the parcel.
               i.   Considerations relating to drainage and utilities:
                  (1)   The effect of the site development plan in relation to
the adequacy of the storm and surface water drainage proposals.
                  (2)   The use of city sewer and water.
                  (3)   The underground placement of utilities. (Ord. 2161, 12-
2-1985)
      3.   Hearing Process:
               a.   Prior to granting a nonconformance building expansion
permit, at least one public hearing shall be held before the planning and
zoning commission. At said hearings, all interested persons shall have the
opportunity to be heard. Notice for public hearings shall be provided as set
forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
      4.   Restrictions: The commission may impose special conditions designed
to lessen the impact of the proposed expansion on the surrounding neighborhood
and in order to make the proposed expansion more compatible with the same.
Violation of such special conditions, when made a part of the terms under which
the nonconforming building expansion permit is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this title.
      5.   Action By The Commission:
               a.   Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the
commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application as presented. If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the commission shall direct the administrator to issue a
nonconforming building expansion permit listing the specific conditions
specified by the commission for approval.
               b.   Prior to granting a nonconforming building expansion
permit, the commission may request studies from the planning staff or public
agencies concerning social economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the
proposed nonconforming building expansion permit. A nonconforming building
expansion permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to
grant other nonconforming building expansion permits.
               c.   Upon granting or denying an application, the commission
shall specify:
                  (1)   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the
application.
                  (2)   The reasons for approval or denial.
                  (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
obtain a permit.
               d.   The applicant or any affected person who appeared in person
or in writing before the commission may appeal the decision of the commission
to the council, provided a written appeal is submitted to the council within
fifteen (15) days from the commission's action.
      6.   Notification To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has
been rendered, the administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request.
      7.   Transfer, Review And Discontinuance Of Permits: A nonconforming
building expansion permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to
another, but may be transferable from one owner to another, provided all
conditions of the nonconforming building expansion permit continue to be met.
Nonconforming building expansions which have not been completed within one year
of the date of issuance of the nonconforming building expansion permit may be
reviewed by the commission to determine if the facts and circumstances have
changed. The commission may call for a new nonconforming building expansion
permit application.
      8.   Appeal To The Council: Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of
the commission, the council shall set a hearing date, under the same provisions
as the commission hearing, to consider all information, testimony and the
commission's minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision to uphold,
conditionally uphold or overrule the decision of the commission. (Ord. 2161,
12-2-1985)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: AG, Agricultural District
10-4-1.1: Purpose
10-4-1.2: Use Regulations
10-4-1.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-2: SUI, Suburban-Urban Interface District
10-4-2.1: Purpose
10-4-2.2: Use Regulations
10-4-2.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-3: R1-VAR, Residential Single Household District
10-4-3.1: Purpose
10-4-3.2: Use Regulations
10-4-3.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-4: R2, Residential Single Household Or Duplex District
10-4-4.1: Purpose
10-4-4.2: Use Regulations
10-4-4.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-5: R4, Residential Medium Density District
10-4-5.1: Purpose
10-4-5.2: Use Regulations
10-4-5.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-6: R6, Residential Multi-Household District
10-4-6.1: Purpose
10-4-6.2: Use Regulations
10-4-6.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-7: CB, Commercial Central Business District
10-4-7.1: Purpose
10-4-7.2: Use Regulations
10-4-7.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-8: C1, Commercial Highway District
10-4-8.1: Purpose
10-4-8.2: Use Regulations
10-4-8.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-9: M1, Light Manufacturing District
10-4-9.1: Purpose
10-4-9.2: Use Regulations
10-4-9.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-10: M2, Heavy Manufacturing District
10-4-10.1: Purpose
10-4-10.2: Use Regulations
10-4-10.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-11: OS, Open Space District
10-4-11.1: Purpose
10-4-11.2: Use Regulations
10-4-11.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-12: AP, Airport District
10-4-12.1: Purpose
10-4-12.2: Use Regulations
10-4-12.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-13: OT, Old Town District
10-4-13.1: Purpose
10-4-13.2: Use Regulations
10-4-13.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-14: CM, Commercial Mixed Use District
10-4-14.1: Purpose
10-4-14.2: Use Regulations
10-4-14.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-15: RM, Residential Mixed Use District
10-4-15.1: Purpose
10-4-15.2: Use Regulations
10-4-15.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-16: CSI, College Of Southern Idaho District
10-4-16.1: Purpose
10-4-16.2: Use Regulations
10-4-16.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-17: MHO-1, Mobile Home Overlay District-One
10-4-17.1: Purpose
10-4-17.2: Use Regulations
10-4-17.3: District Size
10-4-17.4: Property Development Standards
10-4-18: PRO, Professional Office Overlay District
10-4-18.1: Purpose
10-4-18.2: Use Regulations
10-4-18.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-19: CRO, Canyon Rims Overlay District
10-4-19.1: Purposes
10-4-19.2: Location
10-4-19.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-20: WPO, Wellhead Protection Overlay District
10-4-20.1: Short Title And Purpose
10-4-20.2: Definitions
10-4-20.3: Establishment Of Wellhead Protection Overlay District
10-4-20.4: Prohibited Uses Within District Ia Of The Wellhead Protection Area
10-4-20.5: Prohibited Uses Within District Ib Of The Wellhead Protection Area
10-4-20.6: Prohibited Uses Within District II Of The Wellhead Protection Area
10-4-20.7: Prohibited Uses Within District III Of The Wellhead Protection
Overlay District
10-4-20.8: Notice Of Proposed Action To Operator Of Public Or Community Water
Supply
10-4-20.9: Nonconforming Uses
10-4-20.10: Enforcement
10-4-20.11: Amendments
10-4-21: NCO, Neighborhood Commercial Overlay District
10-4-21.1: Purpose
10-4-21.2: Use Regulations
10-4-21.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-22: WHO, Warehouse Historic Overlay District
10-4-22.1: Purpose
10-4-22.2: Use Regulations
10-4-22.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-23: RB, Residential Business District
10-4-23.1: Purpose
10-4-23.2: Use Regulations
10-4-23.3: Property Development Standards
10-4-1: AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
10-4-1.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to preserve the rural integrity of areas adjacent to
the City. (Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
10-4-1.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures, or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
               b.   Farms - plants and trees.
               c.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more
without residential facilities.
               d.   Agritourism activities located more than three hundred feet
(300') from residentially zoned property or residential uses
      2.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Historic sites and monuments.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,500 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - detached single household. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996; amd. Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2018-007, 8-20-2018)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - fish.
               b.   Agritourism activities located within three hundred feet
(300') of any residentially zoned property or residential uses, or any
agritourism activity involving outdoor amplified sound or music.
      2.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Cemeteries.
               c.   Zoos.
      4.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Public assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - public.
      7.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,500 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Home occupations.
               c.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      8.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      9.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Equestrian facilities and/or riding stables.
               c.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               d.   Golf driving ranges.
               e.   Miniature golf courses.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               g.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               h.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      10.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; Ord. 2018-007, 8-20-
2018)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-1.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the AG District: (Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per household dwelling and per farm shall be
twenty (20) acres.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this Code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than forty percent (40%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height except those used for the storage of farm produce. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than thirty
feet (30') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets the
required front yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of thirty feet
(30') shall be provided on both streets. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than thirty feet (30') to other street frontages, except when
the accessory building is more than one hundred feet (100') from any public
access road or to the front property line, whichever is further. (Ord. 2850, 2-
21-2006)
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than seven feet
(7') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings or attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than four feet (4') to the side
property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than thirty feet
(30') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right-of- way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential/nonagricultural uses shall have five
percent (5%) of the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of
section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply to the provisions of chapter 10
of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights-of-way without first obtaining written approval from the City.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this Code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-2: SUI, SUBURBAN-URBAN INTERFACE DISTRICT:
10-4-2.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide a transition district from agricultural
land uses to residential land uses in the area of impact. This district is also
intended as a holding zone for future higher density residential zones, to be
annexed and developed when City water and sewer services become available.
(Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
10-4-2.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures, or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
               b.   Farms - plants and trees.
               c.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more
without residential facilities.
               d.   Agritourism activities located more than three hundred feet
(300') from residentially zoned property or residential uses.
      2.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      4.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,500 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - detached single household. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996; amd. Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2018-007, 8-20-2018)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - public.
               d.   Wedding chapel and/or reception hall with three (3) acres
or more.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,500 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Home occupations.
               d.   Residential ZDA, not to exceed SUI density.
               e.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      7.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      8.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      9.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
      10.   Agricultural:
               a.   Agritourism activities located within three hundred feet
(300') of any residentially zoned property or residential uses, or any
agritourism activity involving outdoor amplified sound or music. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006;
Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014; Ord. 2018-008, 4-2-2018; Ord. 2018-007, 8-20-2018)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-2.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the SUI District:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per household dwelling shall be one acre, or as
set forth in the "Technical Guidance Manual for Individual and Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems" as adopted by the South Central District Board of
Health, whichever is larger. (Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this Code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than forty percent (40%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than thirty
feet (30') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets the
required front yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of thirty feet
(30') shall be provided on both streets. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than thirty feet (30') to other street frontages, except when
the accessory building is more than one hundred feet (100') from any public
access road or to the front property line, whichever is further. (Ord. 2850, 2-
21-2006)
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than seven feet
(7') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings or attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than four feet (4') to the side
property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than thirty feet
(30') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right-of- way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have five percent (5%) of
the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights-of-way without first obtaining written approval from the City.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this Code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-3: R1-VAR, RESIDENTIAL SINGLE HOUSEHOLD DISTRICT:
10-4-3.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to promote and preserve residential development and
to provide a low density residential environment to allow the present and
future residents to live and play in an area with ample space for personal
privacy, private open space and free from encroachment by commercial and
industrial activities. The principal land use is single household dwellings and
uses incidental or accessory thereto. Centralized water and sewer facilities
are required. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-3.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - public.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Home occupations.
               c.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      7.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      8.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      9.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-3.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the R1-VAR district except as provided by section
10-12-5-6 of this title for zero lot line subdivisions:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each dwelling, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per household dwelling shall be eight thousand
(8,000) square feet for lots fronting on arterial streets as defined in
subsection
10-7-6(A) of this title. (Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004)
      2.   All other lots within a proposed subdivision shall have a minimum
lot area of at least eighty five percent (85%) of the average lot size of
platted or developed lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') of said lots.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no lot shall be required to be larger than
eighteen thousand five hundred (18,500) square feet except where contiguous to
an SUI or AG zoning district, in which case no lot shall be required to be
larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. In no case shall the lot area
be less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet nor shall a lot be required to
be larger than the largest contiguous lot. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord.
2796, 6-14-2004)
      3.   A permitted use that conforms to all provisions of this title may be
allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than seven feet
(7') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings and attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than four feet (4') to the side
property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than twenty five
feet (25') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have ten percent (10%) of
the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-4: R2, RESIDENTIAL SINGLE HOUSEHOLD OR DUPLEX DISTRICT:
10-4-4.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to promote and preserve residential development and
to provide a low density residential environment with a mix of both single
household and duplex dwellings in an area with ample space for personal
privacy, private open space and free from encroachment by commercial and
industrial activities. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-4.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private academic.
               d.   Schools - public.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Home occupations.
               c.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      7.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      8.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      9.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-4.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the R2 district except as provided by section
10-12-5-6 of this title for zero lot line subdivisions:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for a
single household dwelling and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for a duplex
dwelling.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to the other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than seven feet
(7') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings or attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than four feet (4') to the side
property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have ten percent (10%) of
the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off
street parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply to the provisions of chapter 10
of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-5: R4, RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT:
10-4-5.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to promote and preserve medium density residential
development and to provide a residential environment to allow the present and
future residents to live and play in an area with space for personal privacy,
minimum vehicular traffic, and free from encroachment by commercial and
industrial activities. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-5.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private academic.
               d.   Schools - public.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex.
               d.   Home occupations.
      7.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      8.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Golf driving ranges.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               e.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      9.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-5.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the R4 district except as provided by section
10-12-5-6 of this title for zero lot line subdivisions:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per single household dwelling shall be four
thousand (4,000) square feet, seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a duplex
and the lot area for multiplex dwelling units will increase over the duplex
area by two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit or one thousand
(1,000) square feet per unit above or below the ground level unit.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory building shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than five feet
(5') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided in section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings and attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than two and one-half feet (21/2') to
the side property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (G)   Landscaping: All uses, excluding single household and duplex
buildings, shall have ten percent (10%) of the site landscaped and shall comply
with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-6: R6, RESIDENTIAL MULTI-HOUSEHOLD DISTRICT:
10-4-6.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to promote and preserve residential development and
to provide a high density residential environment free from encroachment by
major commercial and industrial activities with a proportional increase in
amenities as density rises. Centralized water and sewer facilities are
required. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-6.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex.
               e.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
               f.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses unless special provisions are taken.
Special use permits may be granted for the following uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Governmental office buildings.
               c.   Judicial facilities.
               d.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
               a.   Ambulance service.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private academic.
               d.   Schools - public.
      7.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Home occupations.
               d.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               e.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
               f.   Shelter homes.
      8.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      9.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      10.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters. (Ord. 2620, 8-
2-1999; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-6.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the R6 district except as provided by section
10-12-5-6 of this title for zero lot line subdivisions:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that incudes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per single household dwelling shall be four
thousand (4,000) square feet, six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet for
a duplex and the lot area for multiplex dwelling units will increase over the
duplex area by two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit or one
thousand (1,000) square feet per unit above or below the ground level unit.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to the property line on other street
frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than five feet
(5') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided in section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings and attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than two and one-half feet (21/2') to
the side property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the rear property line for residential uses and fifteen feet
(15') for other uses.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided in section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot, the rear yard setback may be reduced to
the side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way, unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All uses, excluding single household and duplex
buildings, shall have ten percent (10%) of the site landscaped and shall comply
with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off
street parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-7: CB, COMMERCIAL CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
10-4-7.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for commercial activities of various sizes
from large retail stores to small specialty shops with residential
opportunities for persons wishing to work and live in a unified environment.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-7.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and
receiving towers.
               b.   Telegraph centers and telegraph stations.
               c.   Telephone exchange stations.
               d.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               e.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Governmental office buildings.
               c.   Judicial facilities.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
               a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central
district health department or other state regulatory agency.
               b.   Ambulance service.
               c.   Doctors' offices.
               d.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
               e.   Hospitals and clinics.
               f.   Rehabilitation services.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Park concessions.
               c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Funeral chapels.
               c.   Schools - private, single purpose.
               d.   Schools - private vocational and/or academic.
               e.   Schools - public.
               f.   Theaters - indoor.
               g.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      7.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
               d.   Home occupations.
               e.   Household units existing at the time this title was
adopted.
               f.   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
               g.   Household units in upper floors of commercial or
professional buildings.
               h.   Motels and transient hotels.
               i.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               j.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
      8.   Retail Trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on premises where sold.
               b.   Apparel and accessories.
               c.   Automobile parts store.
               d.   Bakery.
               e.   Bookstore.
               f.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
               g.   Eating places.
               h.   Farm and garden supplies.
               i.   Florist shop.
               j.   Food, drugs, etc.
               k.   General merchandise.
               l.   Hardware store.
               m.   Hobby and toy store.
               n.   Home furnishings and equipment.
               o.   Ice cream store.
               p.   Import store.
               q.   Laundering and dry cleaning.
               r.   Laundromats.
               s.   Music store.
               t.   Pawnshop.
               u.   Pet shop.
               v.   Sporting goods store.
               w.   Taxidermy studio.
      9.   Services:
               a.   Advertising.
               b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
               c.   Beauty and barber shops.
               d.   Building care contracting offices.
               e.   Business associations.
               f.   Construction trade offices.
               g.   Consumer credit collection offices.
               h.   Copy center - self-service.
               i.   Daycare services.
               j.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
               k.   Employment agencies.
               l.   Finance and investment offices.
               m.   Horticultural services.
               n.   In home daycare services.
               o.   Insurance and related business.
               p.   Labor unions and organizations.
               q.   Photography studios.
               r.   Professional organizations.
               s.   Professional services.
               t.   Real estate and related business.
               u.   Tourist information center.
      10.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
               b.   Taxicab office.
               c.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such proposed use
which broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a
building shall also require a special use permit. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd.
Ord. 2635, 11-15-1999; Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Jails, detention centers, work release centers.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Manufacturing:
               a.   Handcrafted furniture.
      5.   Medical facilities:
               a.   Animal hospital - small animals.
               b.   Prosthetics - sales, service and construction.
      6.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      7.   Parks:
               a.   Amusement parks.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      8.   Public assembly:
               a.   Exhibition halls.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Sports arena.
               d.   Theaters - outdoor.
      9.   Residential:
               a.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings.
               b.   Dwellings - duplex.
               c.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex.
               d.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet)
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               e.   Shelter homes.
      10.   Retail trade:
               a.   Agricultural equipment sales and service.
               b.   Automobile and truck sales and/or rentals.
               c.   Car wash facilities.
               d.   Commercial greenhouses.
               e.   Equipment rental.
               f.   Fuel sales (bulk).
               g.   Gasoline service stations.
               h.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
               i.   Manufactured/mobile home sales and/or rentals.
               j.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
               k.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
               l.   Storage unit rentals.
               m.   Tire shops.
      11.   Services:
               a.   Appliance repair.
               b.   Automobile and truck service and/or repair.
               c.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
               d.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
               e.   Furniture repair/upholstery.
               f.   Publishing and printing business.
               g.   Sporting vehicle and motorcycle service and/or repair.
               h.   Tattoo parlors or dermagraphic studios approved by the
South Central district health department or other state regulatory agency.
               i.   Testing laboratories.
               j.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      12.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               c.   Golf driving ranges.
               d.   Indoor recreation facility.
               e.   Miniature golf courses.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               g.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               h.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      13.   Transportation:
               a.   Freight transfer points.
               b.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
               c.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
               d.   Packing and crating.
               e.   Trucking facilities.
      14.   Wholesale:
               a.   Wholesale distribution and warehousing, excluding H-
1 facilities. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-
2006; Ord. 2865, 6-12-2006; Ord. 3033, 6-25-2012)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-7.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the CB district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   Commercial Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to provide
for the building, off street parking and landscaping.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall provide the minimum lot area of the R6
district.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Commercial Use: No requirement.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the lot occupancy requirements of
the R6 district.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height
except as provided by section
10-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (D)   Yards: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
      1.   Commercial Uses: No property line setbacks are required.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the yard standards of the R6
district.
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Commercial uses shall provide landscaping equal to five percent (5%)
of the total parking area.
      2.   Household buildings five (5) units or more shall provide landscaping
equal to ten percent (10%) of the lot area. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each commercial use shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10
of this title.
      2.   Residential uses under five (5) units per building shall provide two
(2) off street parking spaces for each residential unit.
      3.   Residential units in commercial buildings shall provide one off
street parking space for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-8: C1, COMMERCIAL HIGHWAY DISTRICT:
10-4-8.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for commercial activities of various sizes
from large malls to small shops, fast food restaurants and tourist
accommodations. This district is designed for application on major streets or
portions thereof. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-8.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and receiving
towers.
         b.   Telegraph centers and telegraph stations.
         c.   Telephone exchange stations.
         d.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
         e.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty five (25)
square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
         a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
         b.   Historic sites and monuments.
         c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
         d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
         a.   Fire stations and police stations.
         b.   Governmental office buildings.
         c.   Judicial facilities.
      4.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Business park ZDA only.
      5.   Medical Facilities:
         a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central district
health department or other state regulatory agency.
         b.   Ambulance service.
         c.   Doctors' offices.
         d.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
         e.   Hospitals and clinics.
         f.   Rehabilitation services.
      6.   Parks:
         a.   Open space.
         b.   Park concessions.
         c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
         d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting facilities.
         e.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting facilities.
      7.   Public assembly:
         a.   Auditoriums.
         b.   Funeral chapels.
         c.   Religious facilities.
         d.   Schools - private, single purpose.
         e.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
         f.   Schools - public.
         g.   Theaters - indoor.
         h.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      8.   Residential:
         a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
         b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
         c.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
         d.   Home occupations.
         e.   Household units existing at the time this title was adopted.
         f.   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
         g.   Household units in upper floor of commercial or professional
buildings.
         h.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
         i.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
      9.   Retail trade:
         a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on premises where sold and if
located three hundred feet (300') or more from residential property.
         b.   Apparel and accessories.
         c.   Automobile parts store.
         d.   Bakery.
         e.   Bookstore.
         f.   Commercial greenhouses.
         g.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
         h.   Eating places.
         i.   Farm and garden supplies.
         j.   Florist shop.
         k.   Food, drugs, etc.
         l.   General merchandise.
         m.   Hardware store.
         n.   Hobby and toy store.
         o.   Home furnishings and equipment.
         p.   Ice cream store.
         q.   Import store.
         r.   Laundering and dry cleaning.
         s.   Laundromats.
         t.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
         u.   Music store.
         v.   Pawnshop.
         w.   Pet shop.
         x.   Sporting goods store.
         y.   Taxidermy studio.
         z.   Temporary automobile, truck and recreational vehicle sales
permitted with staff approval, provided that there shall be state approval, no
parking or display of vehicles in landscaped areas, and no sight obstructions.
      10.   Services:
         a.   Advertising.
         b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
         c.   Beauty and barber shops.
         d.   Building care contracting offices.
         e.   Business associations.
         f.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
         g.   Construction trade offices.
         h.   Consumer credit collection offices.
         i.   Copy center - self-service.
         j.   Daycare services.
         k.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
         l.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
         m.   Employment agency.
         n.   Finance and investment offices.
         o.   Horticultural services.
         p.   In home daycare services.
         q.   Insurance and related business.
         r.   Labor unions and organizations.
         s.   Photography studios.
         t.   Professional organizations.
         u.   Professional services.
         v.   Real estate and related business.
         w.   Tourist information center.
         x.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      11.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Athletic areas.
         b.   Miniature golf courses.
         c.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating facilities.
         d.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
         e.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      12.   Transportation:
         a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
         b.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
         c.   Taxicab office.
         d.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such proposed use
which broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a
building shall also require a special use permit. (Ord. 2786, 6-1-2004; amd.
Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; Ord. 2958, 12-22-2008; Ord. 2999, 1-
24-2011; Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations with wireless communications
facilities.
         b.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area or more than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
         a.   Cemeteries.
         b.   Zoos.
      3.   Government facilities:
         a.   Jails, detention centers, work release centers.
         b.   Water treatment plants.
         c.   Government open storage yard.
      4.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Handcrafted furniture.
      5.   Medical facilities:
         a.   Animal hospital - large animals.
         b.   Animal hospital - small animals.
         c.   Prosthetics - sales, service and/or construction.
      6.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      7.   Parks:
         a.   Amusement parks.
      8.   Public assembly:
         a.   Exhibition halls.
         b.   Fairgrounds.
         c.   Sports arena.
         d.   Theaters - outdoor.
      9.   Residential:
         a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet) i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings.
         b.   Motels and transient hotels.
         c.   RV and camping parks.
         d.   Shelter homes.
      10.   Retail trade:
         a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on the premises where sold if
located less than three hundred feet (300') from residential property.
         b.   Automobile and recreational vehicle rental/storage yard.
         c.   Automobile and truck sales and/or rentals.
         d.   Car wash facilities.
         e.   Equipment rental.
         f.   Fuel sales (bulk).
         g.   Gasoline service stations.
         h.   Large implement and heavy equipment sales and/or rentals.
         i.   Manufactured/mobile home sales and/or rentals.
         j.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         k.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
         l.   Storage unit rentals.
         m.   Tire shops.
      11.   Services:
         a.   Appliance repair.
         b.   Auctions and/or public sales.
         c.   Automobile and truck service and/or repair.
         d.   Furniture repair/upholstery.
         e.   Publishing and printing business.
         f.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - service and repair.
         g.   Tattoo parlors or dermagraphic studios approved by the South
Central district health department or other state regulatory agency.
         h.   Testing laboratories.
      12.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Go-cart tracks.
         b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
         c.   Golf driving ranges.
         d.   Indoor recreation facility.
         e.   Sport shooting range - indoor.
      13.   Transportation:
         a.   Freight transfer points.
         b.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
         c.   Packing and crating.
         d.   Trucking facilities.
      14.   Wholesale:
         a.   Wholesale distribution and warehousing, but excluding H-
1 facilities.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996; amd. Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003;
Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011; Ord. 3088, 2-
2-2015; Ord. 2021-010, 5-3-2021)
10-4-8.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the C1 district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   Commercial Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to provide
for the building, the required setbacks, off street parking and landscaping.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall provide the minimum lot area of the R6
district.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Commercial Uses: No requirement.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the lot occupancy requirements of
the R6 district. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height
except as provided by section
10-7-3 of this title.
   (D)   Yards: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater:
      1.   Commercial Uses And Residential Uses With Five Or More Units Per
Building:
         a.   Front Yards: A setback of thirty five feet (35') shall be
maintained on major arterials and fifteen feet (15') on all other streets. In
developed areas which have building lines already established, this requirement
may be reviewed and adjusted by the commission, subject to the following
exceptions:
            (1)   A gasoline service station pump island, including cashier's
booth, and canopy setback may be less than the required thirty five feet (35')
property line setback on arterial streets, providing the property line setback
is not less than thirty feet (30') for a pump island nor less than twenty feet
(20') for the outer edge of a canopy. Gasoline service station pump islands,
including cashier's booths, and canopies, shall not be used to adjust setbacks
in developed areas which have building lines already established.
            (2)   Outdoor or patio seating, including associated canopies or
coverings, at a food service establishment providing the outdoor seating area
including any canopies or coverings does not exceed a property line setback of
twenty feet (20') or the minimum required arterial landscaping is provided,
whichever is greater. Any outdoor or patio seating area proposed within a
required setback must be approved by the planning and zoning commission.
         b.   Side And Rear Yards: No property line setbacks are required on
side yard or rear yards when adjacent to existing commercial uses, existing
residential uses with five (5) or more units per building, vacant property that
is zoned for nonresidential development, or vacant property that is designated
on the future land use plan for nonresidential development. A property line
setback of twenty five feet (25') shall be maintained on the side yard and rear
yard for buildings adjacent to existing residential uses with four (4) or fewer
units per building, vacant property that is zoned for residential development
or vacant property that is designated on the future land use plan for
residential development.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the yard standards of the R6
district. (Ord. 3077, 8-11-2014)
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Commercial uses shall provide landscaping equal to ten percent (10%)
of the total required parking area or three percent (3%) of the total land
area, whichever is greater.
      2.   Household buildings over five (5) units shall provide landscaping
equal to ten percent (10%) of the lot area.
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each commercial use shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10
of this title.
      2.   Residential uses under five (5) units per building shall provide two
(2) off street parking spaces for each residential unit.
      3.   Residential units in commercial buildings shall provide one off
street parking space for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-9: M1, LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
10-4-9.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for light nonpolluting and major traffic
producing industries as well as commercial uses without residential
encroachment. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-9.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
         a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
         b.   Farms - plants and trees.
         c.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more without
residential facilities.
      2.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and receiving
towers.
         b.   Telegraph centers and telegraph stations.
         c.   Telephone exchange stations.
         d.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
         e.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty five (25)
square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Cultural facilities:
         a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
         b.   Cemeteries.
         c.   Historic sites and monuments.
         d.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
         e.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      4.   Governmental facilities:
         a.   City, county, highway district - shops.
         b.   Fire stations and police stations.
         c.   Governmental office buildings.
         d.   Judicial facilities.
         e.   Water treatment plants.
      5.   Medical facilities:
         a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central district
health department or other state regulatory agency.
         b.   Ambulance service.
         c.   Animal hospital - small animals.
         d.   Doctors' offices.
         e.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
         f.   Prosthetics - sales, service and/or construction.
         g.   Rehabilitation services.
      6.   Parks:
         a.   Open space.
         b.   Park concessions.
         c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
         d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting facilities.
         e.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting facilities.
      7.   Public assembly:
         a.   Auditoriums.
         b.   Exhibition halls.
         c.   Fairgrounds.
         d.   Funeral chapels.
         e.   Religious facilities.
         f.   Schools - private, single purpose.
         g.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
         h.   Sports arena.
         i.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      8.   Residential:
         a.   Home occupations.
         b.   Household units existing at the time this title was adopted.
         c.   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
      9.   Retail trade:
         a.   Apparel and accessories.
         b.   Automobile and truck sales and/or rentals.
         c.   Automobile parts store.
         d.   Bakery.
         e.   Bookstore.
         f.   Car wash facilities.
         g.   Commercial greenhouses.
         h.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
         i.   Eating places.
         j.   Equipment rental.
         k.   Farm and garden supplies.
         l.   Florist shop.
         m.   Food, drugs, etc.
         n.   Fuel sales (bulk).
         o.   Gasoline service stations.
         p.   General merchandise.
         q.   Hardware store.
         r.   Hobby and toy store.
         s.   Home furnishings and equipment.
         t.   Ice cream store.
         u.   Import store.
         v.   Large implement and heavy equipment sales and/or rentals.
         w.   Laundering and dry cleaning.
         x.   Laundromats.
         y.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
         z.   Music store.
         aa.   Pawnshop.
         bb.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         cc.   Pet shop.
         dd.   Sporting goods store.
         ee.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
         ff.   Storage unit rentals.
         gg.   Taxidermy studio.
         hh.   Tire shops.
         ii.   Truck stop.
      10.   Services:
         a.   Advertising.
         b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
         c.   Appliance repair.
         d.   Beauty and barbershops.
         e.   Building care contracting offices.
         f.   Business associations.
         g.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
         h.   Construction trade offices.
         i.   Consumer credit collection offices.
         j.   Copy center - self-service.
         k.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
         l.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
         m.   Employment agency.
         n.   Finance and investment offices.
         o.   Horticultural services.
         p.   Insurance and related business.
         q.   Labor unions and organizations.
         r.   Photography studios.
         s.   Professional organizations.
         t.   Professional services.
         u.   Publishing and printing business.
         v.   Real estate and related business.
         w.   Testing laboratories.
         x.   Tourist information center.
         y.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      11.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Athletic areas.
         b.   Miniature golf courses.
         c.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating facilities.
         d.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
         e.   Outdoor public and commercial tennis courts.
      12.   Transportation:
         a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
         b.   Freight transfer points.
         c.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
         d.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
         e.   Open parking lot for trucks and equipment.
         f.   Packing and crating.
         g.   Taxicab office.
         h.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
         i.   Trucking facilities.
      13.   Wholesale:
         a.   Wholesale distribution and warehousing, but excluding H-
1 facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such proposed use
which broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a
building shall also require a special use permit. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd.
Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
         a.   Farms - fish.
      2.   Agricultural processing:
         a.   Dairy product processing.
         b.   Fish, meat and poultry processing.
         c.   Grain and seed processing.
      3.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations with wireless communications
facilities.
         b.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      4.   Cultural facilities:
         a.   Zoos.
      5.   Governmental facilities:
         a.   City, county, highway district - open storage yards.
         b.   Jails, detention centers, work release centers.
      6.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Apparel and related items.
         b.   Building materials.
         c.   Concrete products.
         d.   Food products.
         e.   Furniture and fixtures.
         f.   Handcrafted furniture.
         g.   Metal products.
         h.   Miscellaneous products.
         i.   Paper products.
         j.   Petroleum products.
         k.   Plastic products.
         l.   Professional and scientific products.
         m.   Recycling center.
         n.   Rubber products.
         o.   Sand and gravel.
         p.   Textile products.
      7.   Medical facilities:
         a.   Animal hospital - large animals.
         b.   Hospitals and clinics.
      8.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
         b.   Construction yards.
      9.   Parks:
         a.   Amusement parks.
      10.   Public assembly:
         a.   Schools - public.
         b.   Theaters - indoor.
         c.   Theaters - outdoor.
      11.   Residential:
         a.   Mobile homes, if accessory to and located on the same property of
an allowed use and occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
         b.   RV and camping parks.
         c.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
         d.   Shelter homes.
      12.   Retail trade:
         a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on premises where sold.
         b.   Automobile and recreational vehicle rental/storage yard.
         c.   Manufactured/mobile home sales and/or rentals.
      13.   Services:
         a.   Auctions and/or public sales.
         b.   Automobile and truck service and/or repair.
         c.   Daycare services.
         d.   Furniture repair/upholstery.
         e.   In home daycare services.
         f.   Sporting vehicle and motorcycle service and/or repair.
         g.   Tattoo parlors or dermagraphic studios approved by the South
Central district health department or other state regulatory agency.
      14.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Go-cart tracks.
         b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
         c.   Golf driving ranges.
         d.   Indoor recreation facility.
         e.   Sport shooting range - indoor.
      15.   Transportation:
         a.   Railroad buildings, equipment and yards.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the distinction between them is of little
consequence.. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; Ord. 2741, 11-4-
2002; Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011; Ord. 2021-010, 5-3-2021)
10-4-9.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the M1 district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   Commercial Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to provide
for the building, the required setbacks, off street parking and landscaping.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses not attached to a commercial
building shall provide the minimum lot area of the R6 district.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Commercial uses: No requirement.
      2.   Residential uses: Same as that in the R6 district.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height
except as provided by section
10-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (D)   Yards: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
      1.   Commercial And Manufacturing Uses: No property line setbacks are
required on side or rear yard. A setback of thirty five feet (35') on arterials
and fifteen feet (15') on other streets is required. In developed areas which
have building lines already established, this requirement may be reviewed and
adjusted by the commission. A gasoline service station pump island, including
cashier's booth, and canopy setback may be less than the required thirty five
foot (35') property line setback on arterial streets, providing the property
line setback is not less than thirty feet (30') for a pump island nor less than
twenty feet (20') for the outer edge of a canopy. Gasoline service station pump
islands, including cashier's booths, and canopies, shall not be used to adjust
setbacks in developed areas which have building lines already established.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses shall conform to the yard
standards of the R6 district.
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Nonresidential uses shall provide landscaping equal to two (2)
square feet per linear foot of street frontage and shall be placed between the
building and the street. This requirement may be waived by the commission for
existing facilities where buildings exist with zero setback on street frontage.
      2.   Household units not attached to nonresidential uses. No requirement.
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each commercial use shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10
of this title.
      2.   Residential uses shall provide two (2) off street parking spaces for
each residential unit.
      3.   Residential units in nonresidential buildings shall provide one off
street parking space for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-10: M2, HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
10-4-10.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide industrial users ample room in the city to
develop and expand without encroachment by noncompatible uses. (Ord. 2526, 5-
20-1996)
10-4-10.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
         a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
         b.   Farms - fish.
         c.   Farms - plants and trees.
         d.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more without
residential facilities.
      2.   Agricultural processing:
         a.   Dairy product processing.
         b.   Fish, meat and poultry processing.
         c.   Grain and seed processing.
         d.   Livestock sales.
      3.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and receiving
towers.
         b.   Telegraph centers and telegraph stations.
         c.   Telephone exchange stations.
         d.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
         e.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty five (25)
square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      4.   Cultural Facilities:
         a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
         b.   Cemeteries.
         c.   Historic sites and monuments.
         d.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
         e.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      5.   Governmental Facilities:
         a.   City, County, highway district - open storage yards.
         b.   City, County, highway district - shops.
         c.   Fire stations and police stations.
         d.   Governmental office buildings.
         e.   Jails, detention centers, work release centers.
         f.   Judicial facilities.
         g.   Water treatment plants.
      6.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Apparel and related items.
         b.   Building materials.
         c.   Concrete products.
         d.   Food products.
         e.   Furniture and fixtures.
         f.   Handcrafted furniture.
         g.   Metal products.
         h.   Miscellaneous products.
         i.   Paper products.
         j.   Petroleum products.
         k.   Plastic products.
         l.   Professional and scientific products.
         m.   Rubber products.
         n.   Sand and gravel yards.
         o.   Textile products.
      7.   Medical Facilities:
         a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central District
Health Department or other State regulatory agency.
         b.   Ambulance service.
         c.   Animal hospital - large animals.
         d.   Animal hospital - small animals.
         e.   Doctors' offices.
         f.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
         g.   Prosthetics - sales, service and/or construction.
         h.   Rehabilitation services.
      8.   Parks:
         a.   Open space.
         b.   Park concessions.
         c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd-attracting
facilities.
         d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting facilities.
         e.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting facilities.
      9.   Public Assembly:
         a.   Auditoriums.
         b.   Exhibition halls.
         c.   Fairgrounds.
         d.   Funeral chapels.
         e.   Religious facilities.
         f.   Schools - private, single purpose.
         g.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
         h.   Sports arena.
         i.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      10.   Residential:
         a.   Home occupations.
         b.   Household units existing at the time this Title was adopted.
         c.   Household units in the same buildings as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
      11.   Retail Trade:
         a.   Apparel and accessories.
         b.   Automobile and truck sales and/or rentals.
         c.   Automobile parts store.
         d.   Bakery.
         e.   Bookstore.
         f.   Car wash facilities.
         g.   Commercial greenhouses.
         h.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
         i.   Eating places.
         j.   Equipment rental.
         k.   Farm and garden supplies.
         l.   Florist shop.
         m.   Food, drugs, etc.
         n.   Fuel sales (bulk).
         o.   Gasoline service stations.
         p.   General merchandise.
         q.   Hardware store.
         r.   Hobby and toy store.
         s.   Home furnishings and equipment.
         t.   Ice cream store.
         u.   Import store.
         v.   Large implement and heavy equipment sales and/or rentals.
         w.   Laundering and dry-cleaning.
         x.   Laundromats.
         y.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
         z.   Manufactured/mobile home sales and/or rentals.
         aa.   Music store.
         bb.   Pawnshop.
         cc.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         dd.   Pet shop.
         ee.   Sporting goods store.
         ff.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
         gg.   Storage unit rentals.
         hh.   Taxidermy studio.
         ii.   Tire shops.
         jj.   Truck stop.
      12.   Services:
         a.   Advertising.
         b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
         c.   Appliance repair.
         d.   Beauty and barber shops.
         e.   Building care contracting offices.
         f.   Business associations.
         g.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
         h.   Construction trade offices.
         i.   Construction yards.
         j.   Consumer credit collection offices.
         k.   Copy center - self-service.
         l.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
         m.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
         n.   Employment agency.
         o.   Finance and investment offices.
         p.   Furniture repair/upholstery.
         q.   Horticultural services.
         r.   Insurance and related business.
         s.   Labor unions and organizations.
         t.   Photography studios.
         u.   Professional organizations.
         v.   Professional services.
         w.   Publishing and printing business.
         x.   Real estate and related business.
         y.   Sporting vehicle and motorcycle service and/or repair.
         z.   Testing laboratories.
         aa.   Tourist information center.
         bb.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      13.   Sports Facilities:
         a.   Athletic areas.
         b.   Go-cart tracks.
         c.   Miniature golf courses.
         d.   Racetracks.
      14.   Transportation:
         a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
         b.   Freight transfer points.
         c.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
         d.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
         e.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and equipment.
         f.   Packing and crating.
         g.   Railroad buildings, equipment and yards.
         h.   Taxicab office.
         i.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
         j.   Trucking facilities.
      15.   Wholesale:
         a.   Wholesale distribution and warehousing, but excluding H-1 and H-7
(2) facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such proposed use
which broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a
building shall also require a special use permit. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd.
Ord. 2635, 10-12-1999; Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2999,
1-24-2011)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations with wireless communications
facilities.
         b.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
         a.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
         a.   Sewage treatment plants.
      4.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Chemicals and chemical products (H-1 and H-7(2)) facilities not
closer than three hundred feet (300') to a dwelling but excluding the
residential uses allowed by subsections (A)10c and (B)9a of this section.
         b.   Recycling centers.
         c.   Wrecking yards, automobile salvage yards and junkyards, but
prohibited within canyons, within two hundred feet (200') of canyon rims and on
land with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) grade.
      5.   Medical facilities:
         a.   Hospitals and clinics.
      6.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      7.   Parks:
         a.   Amusement parks.
      8.   Public assembly:
         a.   Schools - public.
         b.   Theaters - indoor.
         c.   Theaters - outdoor.
      9.   Residential:
         a.   Mobile homes, if accessory to and located on the same property of
an allowed use and occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
      10.   Retail trade:
         a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on the premises where sold.
         b.   Automobile and recreational vehicle rental/storage yard.
      11.   Services:
         a.   Auctions and/or public sales.
         b.   Daycare services.
         c.   In home daycare services.
         d.   Tattoo parlors or dermagraphic studios approved by the South
Central district health department or other state regulatory agency.
         e.   Automobile and truck service and/or repair.
         f.   Automobile impound facility.
      12.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
         b.   Golf driving ranges.
         c.   Gun clubs.
         d.   Indoor recreation facility.
         e.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating facilities.
         f.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
         g.   Outdoor public and commercial tennis courts.
         h.   Sport shooting range - indoor.
      13.   Wholesale:
         a.   H-1 and H-7(2) facilities not closer than three hundred feet
(300') to a dwelling but excluding the residential uses allowed by subsections
(A)10c and (B)9a of this section.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996; amd. Ord. 2635, 11-15-1999; Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002; Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003;
Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011; Ord. 2021-010, 5-3-2021)
10-4-10.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the M2 district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   Nonresidential Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to
provide for the building, the required setbacks, off street parking and
landscaping.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses not attached to an allowed use
shall provide the minimum lot area of the R6 district.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Commercial Uses: No requirement.
      2.   Residential Uses: Same as that in the R6 district.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height
except as provided by section
10-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (D)   Yards: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
      1.   Commercial Uses: No property line setbacks are required on side and
rear yards. Setbacks on arterial frontages shall be thirty five feet (35') from
property line and fifteen feet (15') on other streets. In developed areas which
have building lines already established, this requirement may be reviewed and
adjusted by the commission. A gasoline service station pump island, including
cashier's booths, and canopy setback may be less than the required thirty five
foot (35') property line setback on arterial streets, providing the property
line setback is not less than thirty feet (30') for a pump island nor less than
twenty feet (20') for the outer part of a canopy. Gasoline service station pump
islands, including cashier's booths, and canopies, shall not be used to adjust
setbacks in developed areas which have building lines already established.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses shall conform to the yard
standards of the R6 district.
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Nonresidential uses shall provide landscaping equal to two (2)
square feet per linear foot of frontage and shall be placed between the
building and the street. This requirement may be waived by the commission for
existing facilities where buildings exist with zero setback on street
frontages.
      2.   Household units not attached to nonresidential uses: No requirement.
   (G)   Off-Street Parking:
      1.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
10 of this Title.
      2.   Residential uses shall provide two (2) parking spaces for each
residential unit.
      3.   Residential units in commercial buildings shall provide one off-
street parking space for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (H)   Signs: See Chapter 9 of this Title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: no wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the City.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of Section
9-9-16 of this Code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (J)   H-1 Facilities: H-1 facilities shall be secured at all times from
trespass by unauthorized persons. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-11: OS, OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
10-4-11.1: PURPOSE:
This District is intended to protect canyon areas and to provide open space for
passive and active recreation.
10-4-11.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
building and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
               b.   Farms - plants and trees.
               c.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more
without residential facilities.
      2.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility-owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      4.   Residential:
               a.   Household units existing at the time this Title was
adopted. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses unless special provisions are
taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - fish.
      2.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility-owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
               b.   Transmission and receiving towers over thirty five feet
(35') tall, provided that they are located near other tall structures.
      3.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Cemeteries.
               c.   Historic sites and monuments.
               d.   Zoos.
      4.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Sewage treatment plants.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings except those physically attached garages
that are built at the same time the home is built.
               c.   Residential ZDA (not to exceed SUI density).
      7.   Services:
               a.   Tourist information center.
      8.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Equestrian facilities and/or riding stables.
               c.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               d.   Golf driving ranges.
               e.   Miniature golf courses.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               g.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               h.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
               i.   Zip lines operated by outfitters and guides licensed by the
Idaho outfitters and guides licensing board. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd. Ord.
2796, 6-14-2004; Ord. 2997, 12-13-2010; Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-11.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the OS district:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a lot shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per household dwelling shall be eight thousand
(8,000) square feet if serviced by centralized sewer and forty three thousand
(43,000) square feet if on septic tanks.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof, and
conformed to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was
created, except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household
unit per building.
      3.   Each nonresidential use shall have a minimum lot area established by
the commission.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   No household dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than forty percent (40%) of a lot.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall have a minimum lot occupancy
established by the commission.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Household dwellings shall conform to the yard setbacks of the R1-VAR
district.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall have a yard established by the
commission.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have the landscaping
requirement established by the commission.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-12: AP, AIRPORT DISTRICT:
10-4-12.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to prevent the encroachment into air space required
for flight safety and, in doing so, to also consider the safety of residential
and other uses on the ground. Horizontal and vertical spacing is generally
based on federal aviation agency recommendations. Electromagnetic restrictions
are provided to prevent disorientation of electronic aviation aids. Light,
glare and smoke requirements are intended to prevent visual loss of contact
with ground, structures or other obstructions. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-12.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - animals on pasture.
               b.   Farms - plants and trees.
               c.   Intensive agricultural units of five (5) acres or more
without residential facilities.
      2.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      3.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
      4.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Governmental office buildings.
               c.   Water treatment plants.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,500 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               c.   Household units existing at the time this title was
adopted.
      7.   Retail trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on the premises where
sold.
      8.   Transportation: Supplemental uses shall be allowed on Joslin Field,
Magic Valley regional airport in conjunction with the use of the airport as
recommended by the airport advisory commission and approved by the city council
and county commissioners. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2635, 11-15-1999;
Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Agricultural:
               a.   Farms - fish.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Cemeteries.
      3.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public assembly:
               a.   Sports arena.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (more than 1,500 square feet), i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings except those physically attached garages
that are built at the same time the home is built.
               b.   Home occupations.
      7.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               c.   Golf driving ranges.
               d.   Gun clubs.
               e.   Racetracks.
      8.   Transportation: Airport and related facilities.
      9.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-
1999; amd. Ord. 2635, 11-15-1999; Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004; Ord. 2999, 1-24-2011)
   (C)   Temporary Special Uses: (Rep. by Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004)
   (D)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-12.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the AP district, except on Joslin Field, Magic Valley Regional
Airport property, which development standards shall be as established by the
airport advisory commission and approved by the city council and county
commissioners: (Ord. 2635, 11-15-1999)
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per household dwelling and per farm shall be
twenty (20) acres.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created,
except that residential uses shall be limited to a single household unit per
building.
      3.   Each nonresidential and nonfarm use shall have a minimum lot area
established by the commission.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than forty percent (40%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except the commission may authorize additional height for structures as
provided in federal aviation agency regulations part 77. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than thirty
feet (30') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot, the required front yard of thirty feet
(30') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than thirty feet (30') to other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than seven feet
(7') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings or attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than four feet (4') to the property
line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than thirty feet
(30') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (G)   Landscaping:
      1.   Commercial uses shall provide landscaping equal to ten percent (10%)
of the total required parking area or three percent (3%) of the total land
area, whichever is greater.
      2.   Household buildings over five (5) units shall provide landscaping
equal to ten percent (10%) of the lot area. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (K)   Additional Restrictions:
      1.   Lighting:
               a.   Any pulsating, flashing, rotating, oscillating or other
type of lighting intended as an attention getting device is prohibited.
               b.   Floodlights, spotlights or other lighting devices shall be
so arranged or shielded as not to cast illumination in an upward direction
above an imaginary line extended from the light source parallel to the grounds.
      2.   Glare:
               a.   Glare producing building materials shall not be allowed on
any structure or any other use of the land.
      3.   Electromagnetic:
               a.   No use may be made of land which results in electromagnetic
radiation which interferes with radio communications between aircraft or
between aircraft and airport, or interferes with established radio navigation
aids.
      4.   Smoke:
               a.   No use may be made of land which emits smoke, dust or any
visible fumes or vapors into the atmosphere.
      5.   Avigation Easement:
               a.   An avigation easement shall be required from any property
owner applying for a building permit. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-13: OT, OLD TOWN DISTRICT:
10-4-13.1: PURPOSE:
This district (located east of Shoshone Street South, north of the railroad
tracks, west of Fourth Street South, and south of the alley between Second
Avenue South and Third Avenue South in the city of Twin Falls) is intended to
promote the redevelopment of this historic warehouse area and to provide for
small retail shops, moderately sized commercial activities, and compatible
light manufacturing and service industry businesses, with residential
opportunity for persons wishing to work and live in a unified environment. It
is intended that buildings in this area maintain the historic character of the
existing buildings.
To encourage redevelopment of existing properties, the city planning
administrator may waive strict conformance to the requirements for parking,
landscaping, and/or surface water retention when such waiver would not be
contrary to the public interest. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-13.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
         a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and receiving
towers.
         b.   Telegraph centers and telegraph stations.
         c.   Telephone exchange stations.
         d.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
         e.   Utility-owned buildings and structures less than twenty five (25)
square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
         a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
         b.   Historic sites and monuments.
         c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
         d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
         a.   Governmental office buildings.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
         a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central District
Health Department or other state regulatory agency.
         b.   Doctors' offices.
         c.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
         d.   Hospitals and clinics.
         e.   Prosthetics - sales, service and construction.
         f.   Rehabilitation services.
         g.   Ambulance service.
      5.   Parks:
         a.   Open space.
         b.   Park concessions.
         c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
         d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting facilities.
      6.   Public Assembly:
         a.   Auditoriums.
         b.   Exhibition halls.
         c.   Funeral chapels.
         d.   Schools - private, single purpose.
         e.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
         f.   Schools - public.
         g.   Theaters - indoor.
         h.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      7.   Residential:
         a.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
         b.   Household units in same building as an allowed use and occupied
by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
         c.   Household units in upper floors of commercial or professional
buildings.
      8.   Retail Trade:
         a.   Apparel and accessories.
         b.   Automobile parts store.
         c.   Bakery.
         d.   Bookstore.
         e.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
         f.   Eating places.
         g.   Farm and garden supplies.
         h.   Florist shop.
         i.   Food, drugs, etc.
         j.   General merchandise.
         k.   Hardware store.
         l.   Hobby and toy store.
         m.   Home furnishings and equipment.
         n.   Ice cream store.
         o.   Import store.
         p.   Laundering and dry-cleaning.
         q.   Laundromats.
         r.   Music store.
         s.   Pawnshop.
         t.   Pet shop.
         u.   Sporting goods store.
         v.   Taxidermy studio.
      9.   Services:
         a.   Advertising.
         b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
         c.   Appliance repair.
         d.   Beauty and barbershops.
         e.   Building care contracting office.
         f.   Business associations.
         g.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
         h.   Construction trade offices.
         i.   Consumer credit collection offices.
         j.   Copy center - self-service.
         k.   Daycare services.
         l.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
         m.   Employment agency.
         n.   Finance and investment offices.
         o.   Horticultural services.
         p.   In-home daycare services.
         q.   Insurance and related business.
         r.   Labor unions and organizations.
         s.   Photography studios.
         t.   Professional organizations.
         u.   Professional services.
         v.   Publishing and printing business.
         w.   Real estate and related business.
         x.   Testing laboratory.
         y.   Tourist information center.
         z.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      10.   Transportation:
         a.   Bus facilities, including pick up shelters.
         b.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
         c.   Taxicab office.
         d.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such use which
broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a building
shall also require a special use permit.
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
         a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Governmental facilities:
         a.   Fire stations and police stations.
         b.   Water treatment plants.
      3.   Manufacturing:
         a.   Apparel and related items.
         b.   Furniture and fixtures.
         c.   Handcrafted furniture.
         d.   Miscellaneous products.
         e.   Paper products.
         f.   Plastic products.
         g.   Professional and scientific products.
         h.   Rubber products.
         i.   Textile products.
      4.   Medical facilities:
         a.   Animal hospital - small animal.
      5.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      6.   Public assembly:
         a.   Exposition and recreational vehicle shows.
         b.   Farmers' markets, flea markets.
         c.   Religious facilities.
         d.   Sports arena.
         e.   Theater, outdoor.
      7.   Residential:
         a.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings.
         b.   Dwellings - duplex.
         c.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex.
         d.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
         e.   Motels and transient hotels.
         f.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
         g.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
         h.   Shelter homes.
      8.   Retail trade:
         a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on the premises where sold.
         b.   Equipment rental.
         c.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
         d.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         e.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
         f.   Storage unit rentals.
      9.   Services:
         a.   Auction and/or public sales.
         b.   Automobile and truck service and/or repair.
         c.   Sporting vehicle and motorcycle service and/or repair.
      10.   Sports facilities:
         a.   Athletic areas.
         b.   Indoor recreation facility.
         c.   Miniature golf course.
         d.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating facilities.
         e.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
         f.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      11.   Transportation:
         a.   Freight transfer points.
         b.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
         c.   Packing and crating.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. Also prohibited
is the storage of manufacturing materials and/or supplies outside an enclosed
structure. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; Ord. 3033, 6-25-
2012; Ord. 2016-5, 3-7-2016; Ord. 2023-005, 3-11-2024)
10-4-13.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the OT district:
   (A)   Lot Area: The lot shall be of sufficient size to provide for the
building, off street parking, landscaping, and surface water retention.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy: No requirement. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height
except as provided in section
10-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 3077, 8-11-2014)
   (D)   Yards: No requirement.
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street unless a secondary means of permanent access has been provided.
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Public Rights Of Way:
               a.   Landscaping and lighting shall be provided which meet the
requirements of the old town master landscaping plan.
      2.   Public And Private Parking Lots:
               a.   Ten percent (10%) of the total parking area shall be
landscaped.
               b.   At least eighty percent (80%) of the trees and shrubs
planted in the parking lots shall be from the master list of approved species
as stated in the old town master landscaping plan.
               c.   A thirty inch (30") high masonry wall, hedge or shrub
planting shall be provided between the parking lot and a public sidewalk. Such
wall, hedge or shrub planting shall be continuous except for pedestrian or
vehicle access.
               d.   Fifty percent (50%) of all shrubs and twenty five percent
(25%) of all trees shall be evergreen.
               e.   Planted dividers at least six feet (6') wide shall be
provided between parking rows. Such dividers shall be planted with shade trees
at least eight feet (8') in height when planted.
               f.   One shade tree shall be provided within planted dividers,
islands within parking lots, or along the parking lot periphery for every ten
(10) parking spaces.
               g.   Dumpster areas, loading sites and other unsightly areas
shall be screened with landscaped plantings, or wooden or masonry sight
obscuring fencing.
               h.   Parking lots shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures
installed at the rate of one per every eighteen (18) cars. Such lighting shall
be in conformance with the old town master landscaping plan.
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Household units shall have a minimum of one off street, on site,
parking space per unit.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title and the P3 parking overlay. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-14: CM, COMMERCIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT:
10-4-14.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for a mixture of commercial, professional
and residential uses in a unified environment planned and approved through the
ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-4-14.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Governmental office buildings.
               c.   Judicial facilities.
      4.   Medical facilities:
               a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central
district health department or other state regulatory agency.
               b.   Doctors' offices.
               c.   Hospitals and clinics.
               d.   Rehabilitation services.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Park concessions.
               c.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               d.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Public assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Funeral chapels.
               c.   Religious facilities.
               d.   Schools - private, single purpose.
               e.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
               f.   Schools - public.
               g.   Theaters - indoor.
               h.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      7.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex.
               e.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
               f.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex.
               g.   Home occupations.
               h.   Household units in same building as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
               i.   Household units in the upper floors of commercial or
professional buildings.
               j.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               k.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
      8.   Retail Trade:
               a.   Apparel and accessories.
               b.   Automobile parts store.
               c.   Bakery.
               d.   Bookstore.
               e.   Commercial greenhouses.
               f.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
               g.   Eating places.
               h.   Farm and garden supplies.
               i.   Florist shop.
               j.   Food, drugs, etc.
               k.   General merchandise.
               l.   Hardware store.
               m.   Hobby and toy store.
               n.   Home furnishings and equipment.
               o.   Ice cream store.
               p.   Import store.
               q.   Laundering and dry-cleaning.
               r.   Laundromats.
               s.   Music store.
               t.   Pawnshop.
               u.   Pet shop.
               v.   Sporting goods store.
               w.   Taxidermy studio.
      9.   Services:
               a.   Advertising.
               b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
               c.   Appliance repair.
               d.   Beauty and barbershops.
               e.   Building care contracting offices.
               f.   Business associations.
               g.   Construction trade offices.
               h.   Consumer credit collection offices.
               i.   Copy center - self-service.
               j.   Daycare services.
               k.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
               l.   Employment agency.
               m.   Finance and investment offices.
               n.   Horticultural services.
               o.   In-home daycare services.
               p.   Insurance and related business.
               q.   Labor unions and organizations.
               r.   Photography studios.
               s.   Professional organizations.
               t.   Professional services.
               u.   Real estate and related business.
               v.   Tourist information center.
      10.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pickup shelters.
               b.   Taxicab office.
               c.   Ticket and arrangement facilities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such use which
broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a building
shall also require a special use permit.
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the District unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility-owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Cemeteries.
               b.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
               a.   Animal hospital - small animal.
               b.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
               c.   Prosthetics - sales, service and/or construction.
      5.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      6.   Parks:
               a.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      7.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Exhibition halls.
               b.   Fairgrounds.
               c.   Sports arena.
               d.   Theaters - outdoor.
      8.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet) i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings except those physically attached garaged
built at the same time the home is built.
               b.   Motels and transient hotels.
               c.   RV and camping parks.
               d.   Shelter homes.
      9.   Retail Trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages, when consumed on the premises where
sold.
               b.   Automobile and truck sales and/or rentals.
               c.   Car wash facilities.
               d.   Equipment rental.
               e.   Fuel sales (bulk).
               f.   Gasoline service stations.
               g.   Lumber, plumbing and/or electrical supply stores.
               h.   Manufactured/mobile home sales and/or rentals.
               i.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
               j.   Sporting vehicles and motorcycles - sales and/or rentals.
               k.   Storage unit rentals.
               l.   Tire shops.
      10.   Services:
               a.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
               b.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
               c.   Publishing and printing business.
               d.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      11.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               c.   Golf driving ranges.
               d.   Indoor recreation facility.
               e.   Miniature golf courses.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and rollerskating
facilities.
               g.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               h.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      12.   Transportation:
               a.   Freight transfer points.
               b.   Open parking lot or garage for automobiles.
               c.   Open parking lot or garage for trucks and buses.
               d.   Packing and crating.
               e.   Trucking facilities.
      13.   Wholesale Facilities:
               a.   Wholesale distribution and warehousing, but excluding H-
1 facilities. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this Title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence.
10-4-14.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the C1 district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   Commercial Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to provide
for the building, the required setbacks, off street parking and landscaping.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall provide the minimum lot area of the R6
district or as determined by the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Commercial Uses: No requirement.
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the lot occupancy requirements of
the R6 district.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height except as provided by section
10-7-3 of this title.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Commercial Uses And Residential Uses With Five Or More Units Per
Building: No property line setbacks are required on side yard or rear yard. A
setback of thirty five feet (35') shall be maintained on major arterials and
fifteen feet (15') on all other streets. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
      2.   Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not
attached to a commercial use shall conform to the yard standards of the R6
district or as determined through the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (E)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Commercial uses shall provide landscaping equal to ten percent (10%)
of the total required parking area or three percent (3%) of the total land
area, whichever is greater or as determined by the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-
8-2014)
      2.   Household buildings over five (5) units shall provide landscaping
equal to ten percent (10%) of the lot area.
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each commercial use shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10
of this title.
      2.   Residential uses under five (5) units per building shall provide two
(2) off street parking spaces for each residential unit.
      3.   Residential units in commercial buildings shall provide one off
street parking space for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-15: RM, RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT:
10-4-15.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for a mixture of residential housing types
in a unified environment planned and approved through the ZDA process. (Ord.
3082, 12-8-2014)
10-4-15.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex.
               e.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
               f.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
               e.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      5.   Public assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - public.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet), i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings except those built at the same time the
home is built.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Home occupations.
               d.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               e.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
      7.   Services:
               a.   In home daycare services.
      8.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               b.   Golf driving ranges.
               c.   Miniature golf courses.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               e.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts. (Ord. 2620,
8-2-1999)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-15.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the RM district:
   (A)   Use Of Lots: Each building, except accessory structures, shall be
located on a separate lot and each such lot and the buildings or structures
thereon shall conform to the minimum dimensional standards contained herein.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "lot" shall be one or more lots platted in
accordance with this title or shall be a parcel that includes parts of platted
or unplatted lands existing at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per single household dwelling shall be four
thousand (4,000) square feet, seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a duplex
and the lot area for multiplex dwelling units will increase over the duplex
area by two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit or one thousand
(1,000) square feet per unit above or below the ground level unit.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory building shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than five feet
(5') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided in section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings and attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than two and one-half feet (21/2') to
the side property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have ten percent (10%) of
the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-16: CSI, COLLEGE OF SOUTHERN IDAHO DISTRICT:
10-4-16.1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to promote development which will serve or complement
the College Of Southern Idaho while allowing for a mixture of land uses in a
unified environment planned and approved through the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082,
12-8-2014)
10-4-16.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Dwellings - attached single household dwellings on lots
fronting on an arterial or collector street.
               c.   Dwellings - detached single household.
               d.   Dwellings - duplex.
               e.   Dwellings - multiple household (5 units or more).
               f.   Dwellings - triplex and fourplex.
               g.   Household units in upper floors of commercial or
professional buildings. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
               e.   Zoos.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
               a.   Doctors' offices.
               b.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
               c.   Hospitals and clinics.
               d.   Rehabilitation services.
      5.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      6.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      7.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
               d.   Schools - public.
      8.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet) i.e.,
garages and other accessory buildings except those physically attached garages
that are built at the time the home is built.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Home occupations.
               d.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               e.   Residence halls, residence hotels, rooming houses.
      9.   Services:
               a.   Daycare services.
               b.   Finance and investment offices.
               c.   In-home daycare services.
               d.   Insurance and related business.
               e.   Professional services.
               f.   Real estate and related business.
      10.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Athletic areas.
               b.   Golf courses and country clubs.
               c.   Golf driving ranges.
               d.   Miniature golf courses.
               e.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and rollerskating
facilities.
               f.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               g.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts. (Ord. 2620,
8-2-1999)
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-16.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the CSI district: (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (A)   Use Of Lots: As provided for in the ZDA development plan. (Ord. 3082,
12-8-2014)
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area per single household dwelling shall be four
thousand (4,000) square feet, seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a duplex
and the lot area for multiplex dwelling units will increase over the duplex
area by two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit or one thousand
(1,000) square feet per unit above or below the ground level unit.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy: No dwelling, including its accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yards shall conform to the following standards, or
section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               a.   The front building line shall not be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the front property line.
               b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the
required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided on both streets.
               c.   On a corner lot the required front yard of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided on both streets.
               d.   No accessory building shall be constructed in the front
yard nor closer than twenty feet (20') to other street frontages.
      2.   Side Yard:
               a.   The side building line shall not be closer than five feet
(5') to the side property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the side property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the side property line except as
provided in section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   Architectural projections of main buildings and attached
accessory buildings shall not be closer than two and one-half feet (21/2') to
the side property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
               a.   The rear building line shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to the rear property line.
               b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than three
feet (3') to the rear property line nor closer than ten feet (10') to a main
building except as provided by section
10-7-5 of this title. Architectural projections of detached accessory buildings
shall not be closer than two feet (2') to the rear property line except as
provided by section
10-7-5 of this title.
               c.   On a corner lot the rear yard setback may be reduced to the
side yard setback.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping: All nonresidential uses shall have ten percent (10%) of
the site landscaped and shall comply with the provisions of section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each residential dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street
parking spaces.
      2.   Each nonresidential use shall comply with the provisions of chapter
10 of this title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences, Hedges, Trees, Shrubs And Landscaping Structures:
Walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and landscaping structures shall be
permitted on the property line or within the required side or rear yard and
shall be permitted in the front yard with the following restriction: No wall,
fence, hedge, trees, shrubs or landscaping structures shall be placed within
public rights of way without first obtaining written approval from the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all walls, fences, hedges, trees, shrubs and
landscaping structures shall comply with the provisions of section
9-9-16 of this code. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-4-17: MHO-1, MOBILE HOME OVERLAY DISTRICT-ONE:
10-4-17.1: PURPOSE:
This overlay district is intended to provide housing alternatives of both
conventional homes and manufactured homes in a low density environment with
ample space for personal privacy, private open space and free from encroachment
by commercial and industrial activities. Centralized water and sewer facilities
are required. This district may overlay an existing developed R4 or R6
district. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-17.2: USE REGULATIONS:
         (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used
and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged
only for the following uses:
      1.   Any use permitted in the basic district upon which the overlay is
placed.
      2.   Manufactured homes which meet the following standards:
               a.   Must be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
               b.   Must not be less than seven hundred (700) square feet.
               c.   Permanent foundations must be provided that meet or exceed
current Idaho manufactured home standards, as adopted by the state of Idaho
division of building safety, manufactured housing section or have been
rehabilitated pursuant to chapter 25, title 44 of the Idaho Code.
               d.   Must be built to HUD manufactured home specifications.
               e.   Modifications shall conform to the uniform building code as
adopted by the city. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Any use permitted by special use permit in the basic district upon
which the overlay is placed.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-17.3: DISTRICT SIZE:
The minimum overlay district shall be ten (10) acres. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-17.4: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in mobile home overlay district one:
The property development standards shall be the same as those of the basic
district upon which the overlay is placed. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-18: PRO, PROFESSIONAL OFFICE OVERLAY DISTRICT:
10-4-18.1: PURPOSE:
This overlay district is intended to provide for professional office uses along
or near specifically designated major arterials where increased traffic has
impacted residential uses and in areas that are near large public or private
medical facilities. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required. This
overlay may be placed on an R2, R4 or R6 district. (Ord. 2657, 6-19-2000)
10-4-18.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Any use permitted in the basic district upon which the overlay is
placed.
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Basic district uses: Any use allowed by special use permit in the
basic district upon which the overlay is placed.
      2.   Medical facilities:
               a.   Doctors' offices.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by owner or an employee of the allowed use.
               b.   Assisted Living/Nursing Home.
      4.   Services:
               a.   Beauty salons/barbershops.
               b.   Consumer credit collection.
               c.   Employment agency.
               d.   Finance and investment offices.
               e.   Insurance and related business.
               f.   Professional services.
               g.   Photography studios.
               h.   Real estate and related business.
               i.   Commercial daycare facilities and preschools.
      5.   Additional land uses: The following additional land uses may be
allowed by special use permit in the following historic areas of the city:
Addison Avenue and Blue Lakes Boulevard:
               a.   Residential:
            (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
            (2)   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by owner or an employee of the allowed use.
            (3)   Household units in upper floors of commercial or professional
buildings.
               b.   Retail trade:
            (1)   Bookstore.
            (2)   Cottage businesses.
            (3)   Craft shop.
            (4)   Florist shop.
            (5)   Hobby and toy store.
            (6)   Art galleries and frame shops.
            (7)   Antique shop.
            (8)   Fabric and pattern shop.
            (9)   Home decor, excluding appliances.
               c.   Services:
            (1)   Photography studios.
            (2)   Seamstress.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2943, 6-16-
2008; amd. Ord. O-2025-011, 7-21-2025)
10-4-18.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the professional office overlay district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot size as required by the basic district upon which
the overlay is placed.
      2.   For professional offices, the lot size shall be of sufficient size
to provide for the building, off street parking and landscaping.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay is placed.
      2.   For professional offices, there is no occupancy requirement.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yards:
               a.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay
is placed.
      2.   Side yards:
               a.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay
is placed.
      3.   Rear yards:
               a.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay
is placed.
               b.   For professional offices, the rear yard may be reduced to
the side yard setback of the basic district.
   (E)   Access: Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay is
placed.
   (F)   Landscaping:
      1.   Residential uses: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
      2.   Professional uses: Professional offices shall provide landscaping
equal to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area.
   (G)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay is placed.
      2.   Each professional office shall provide one parking space per three
hundred (300) square feet of total building area measured from the exterior of
the building, or as required by subsection
10-10-3(A) of this title. (Ord. 2657, 6-19-2000)
   (H)   Signs: See chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011)
   (I)   Walls, Fences And Hedges:
      1.   Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay is placed.
      2.   Professional offices shall provide a fence not less than six feet
(6') in height that will act as a sight and sound barrier between the
professional office use and any contiguous residential lot or use.
   (J)   Additional Standards: The following additional property development
standards shall apply to Addison Avenue and Blue Lakes Boulevard:
      1.   Buildings: Existing residences will not be razed and new buildings
constructed unless said new buildings are designed in such a way as to conform
with the general residential nature of the neighborhood, consistent with the
existing architectural style and design.
      2.   Parking: All off street parking shall be placed on the alley side of
the lots so that the portion of the property that fronts the side streets and
arterial streets shall continue to have lawn and landscaping consistent with
surrounding properties as opposed to asphalt, rock or pavement. Also, any use
that has a parking requirement, as determined by section
10-10-6 of this title, in excess of fifteen (15) spaces is prohibited.
      3.   Landscaping: Twenty five percent (25%) of each property shall be
maintained in landscaping.
      4.   Driveway Access: No driveway will open onto the side street for
access or ingress to the properties containing the professional offices or
commercial uses, nor can any additional curb cuts be made on the side street
curbs. However, if there presently exists a driveway that goes to the side
street, then the presently existing driveway may be maintained, but the use may
not be expanded to include other parking places. (Ord. 2657, 6-19-2000)
10-4-19: CRO, CANYON RIMS OVERLAY DISTRICT:
10-4-19.1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of the canyon rims overlay district are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public and private property owners from the natural
hazards of rock fall and slope failure along the Snake River Canyon and Rock
Creek Canyon.
   (B)   To protect views and create a unique visual environment along the
canyon rims.
   (C)   To preserve and improve the aesthetic appearance of the canyon rims
for the enhancement of the quality of life in the community.
   (D)   To provide development standards that enhance the value of canyon rim
areas to the developer and the community. (Ord. 2022-017, 9-12-2022)
10-4-19.2: LOCATION:
The canyon rims overlay district shall include all of that area within the city
and its area of impact located within two hundred feet (200') of the Rock Creek
Canyon rim and within seven hundred feet (700') of the Snake River Canyon rim
which carries a residential or C-I zoning designation. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996;
Ord. 2022-017, 9-12-2022)
10-4-19.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the canyon rims overlay district:
   (A)   Lot Area: Same as the basic zoning district upon which the overlay is
placed.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy: Same as the basic zoning district upon which the
overlay is placed.
   (C)   Building Height:
      1.   Within the Cl Zoning District: No building shall exceed maximum
building height of Twenty-five feet (25') in height measured at fifty linear
feet (50') from the canyon rim and rising evenly to thirty-five feet (35') in
height measured at one hundred linear feet (100') from the canyon rim, and
thereafter rising evenly to fifty feet (50') in height measured at one hundred
fifty linear feet (150') from the canyon rim.
      2.   All other applicable Districts: No building shall exceed maximum
building height of Twenty-five feet (25') in height measured at fifty linear
feet (50') from the canyon rim and rising evenly to thirty-five feet (35') in
height measured at one hundred linear feet (100') from the canyon rim.
      3.   All heights are to be measured from the existing canyon rim
elevation, or the existing ground level elevation at the building site,
whichever elevation is greater.
      4.   Additional Height: Additional height may be requested for those
areas beyond the fifty-foot (50') Canyon Rim Setback. See Additional Building
Height Process City Code
10-7-3.
   (D)   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Yards: Same as that of the basic zoning district upon which the
overlay is placed.
      2.   Geological Report: The minimum canyon rim setback in the CRO
district shall be one hundred feet (100') without a geological report meeting
the following requirements:
         a.   The name, address, and telephone number of the responsible Idaho
licensed geological engineer;
         b.   The qualifications of the Idaho licensed geological engineer,
including a list of similar studies and references;
         c.   A certificate of professional liability insurance for the
individual or firm preparing the report;
         d.   A location map, showing the relation of the site studied to the
surrounding area, including the topography and drainage pattern of that area,
and the location of any off site observations (wells, soil observation pits,
etc.) used in preparing the findings of the report;
         e.   A parcel map, showing the parcel boundaries, the proposed canyon
rim setback, building envelope, or building location, the proposed location of
any on site sewage disposal facilities, any watercourses or drainageways across
or adjacent to the parcel, and the location of any soil observation pits,
wells, or other observations used in preparing the findings of the report;
         f.   A description of the geologic setting of the parcel;
         g.   A description of the methods used to arrive at the findings,
including the sampling procedure used to determine the sites used for
observations; and
         h.   A clear statement that buildings behind the proposed canyon rim
setback, within the proposed envelope, or at the proposed building location are
not subject to significant hazard from slope movements and that construction on
the site will not present a significant hazard to people or properties.
         i.   The findings shall be qualified, as necessary, with
recommendations for site stabilization, drainage, and building construction
techniques or specifications that will minimize any potential hazard.
         j.   The information used as a basis for the findings may be
integrated with the findings or presented separately.
      3.   Canyon Rim Setback: The minimum canyon rim setback in the CRO
district with a geological report meeting the requirements set forth above
shall be either the minimum setback recommended in the geological report or the
minimum setback set out below, whichever is greater:
         a.   Rock Creek Canyon: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Snake River Canyon from Rock Creek Canyon to the centerline of
3300 East, extended: Fifty feet (50').
         c.   Snake River Canyon east of the centerline of 3300 East, extended:
One hundred feet (100').
   (E)   Landscaping: Overall, twenty percent (20%) of the total area included
in any commercial or mixed-use development in the canyon rims overlay district
shall be devoted to landscaped open space. That space shall meet the
requirements of section of this title and shall include the following elements:
      1.   Street Buffers: Commercial uses shall provide a minimum thirty foot
(30') landscaped buffer along arterial and collector streets. Residential uses
shall provide a minimum fifty foot (50') landscaped buffer along arterial
streets.
      2.   Use Buffers: There shall be a minimum fifty foot (50') landscaped
buffer between residential and commercial elements of a mixed-use canyon rims
overlay district development.
      3.   Use Of Buffers: Roads and utilities may cross landscaped buffers,
sidewalks and trails may run-through them, and permitted freestanding signs and
minor utility installations may be based in them.
      4.   Parking Areas: Parking areas including twenty-four (24) or more
spaces shall be broken into separate bays by landscaped areas and pedestrian
walks that comprise at least ten percent (10%) of the area devoted to parking.
      5.   Canyon Rim Setback Area: The canyon rim setback area may be included
as part of the twenty percent (20%) landscaping requirement if the area is
landscaped to meet the minimum requirements of subsection (A) of this title or
if planted with native vegetation.
   (F)   Signs: See the sign code in of this title.
   (G)   Additional Development Standards:
      1.   Form: Buildings that have a footprint of more than three thousand
(3,000) square feet shall be designed to reduce their apparent mass using one
or more of the following techniques:
         a.   Varying Height: Buildings may be "stepped back" in height from
the setback line to reduce their apparent mass and visual competition with the
canyon wall.
         b.   Varying Setback: The building line facing the canyon rim may be
varied (i.e., different portions of the building would be different distances
from the setback line).
         c.   Landscaping: Mass plantings and earthworks can be designed and
sited to effectively break the apparent mass of a building.
      2.   Outdoor Sales And Storage: There shall be no outdoor sales or
display areas in the canyon rims overlay district. All outdoor storage,
including solid waste containers, shall be fully screened from public view by
some combination of location on the site, fences or walls, and landscaped
buffers. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996; Ord. 2851, 3-6-2006; Ord. 3005, 6-6-2011; Ord.
3082, 12-8-2014; Ord. 2022-017, 9-12-2022)
10-4-20: WPO, WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT:
10-4-20.1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   This section shall be known as the WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to
contamination of the public water supply, and to formalize groundwater
protection/pollution abatement and control procedures. Specific goals are to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Ensure that the public is provided with a sustainable, safe potable
water supply;
      3.   Minimize expenditure of public money for pollution remediation
projects;
      4.   Minimize regulations on land use; and
      5.   Minimize business interruptions. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-20.2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this section the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
AGRICULTURAL RUNOFF WASTEWATER: Water diverted for irrigation but not applied
to crops, or runoff of irrigation tail water from the cropland as a result of
irrigation.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public system which serves at least fifteen (15)
service connections used by year round residents or regularly serves at least
twenty five (25) year round residents.
COMMUNITY WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports,
seals, valves and other attachments.
FACILITY: Refers to any business or corporation that is built, installed, or
established to serve a particular purpose.
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: A hazardous waste treatment, storage, or
disposal facility which receives hazardous material as described in part 40
chapter 260.1 of the code of federal regulations.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material which, because of its
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
   (A)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or,
   (B)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed; or,
   (C)   Any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance
defined by part 40 chapter 261.3 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or any
material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance by the State
of Idaho, acting through the Division of Environmental Quality or any successor
agency.
INJECTION: The subsurface emplacement of fluids.
LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT OPERATION: As defined in the County Zoning Ordinance.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public water system that is not a community water
system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system that provides the public with piped water for
human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections
or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five (25) individuals daily
at least sixty (60) days out of the year. Such term includes: 1) any
collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities under control of
the operator of such system, and used primarily in connection with such system,
and 2) any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such control
that are used primarily in connection with such system. A public water system
is either a "community water system" or a "noncommunity water system" as
defined herein.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A solid waste disposal operation where the wastes are spread
on land in thin layers, compacted to the smallest practical volume, and covered
with cover material once each day of operation in order to safeguard against
environmental pollution, nuisances, and health hazards.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water discharged as a result of rain, snow, or other
precipitation.
TIME OF TRAVEL DISTRICTS (TOT): The time required for a contaminant to move in
the ground from a specific point to a well.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL: Any excavation or artificial opening into the
ground which meets the following three (3) criteria:
   (A)   It is a bored, drilled or dug hole, or is a driven mine shaft or a
driven well point; and,
   (B)   It is deeper than its largest straight-line surface dimension; and,
   (C)   It is used for or intended to be used for injection.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (WHO): A land use designation on the Land
Use Map, or a zoning designation on a zoning map, that modifies the basic
underlying designation in some specific manner. The Wellhead Protection Overlay
District will also appear in the hazardous component of the Comprehensive Plan.
A map will define specific area districts centering around wells supplying
drinking water to a public water system. The map is delineated using one of the
following methods:
   (A)   Calculated fixed radius; or,
   (B)   Arbitrary fixed radius; or,
   (C)   Simplified variable shapes; or,
   (D)   Semi-analytical, and analytical methods; or,
   (E)   Hydrogeologic mapping; or,
   (F)   Numerical modeling;
and follow the guidelines established in the Idaho Wellhead Protection Plan.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT Ia: A minimum fixed radius extending no
less than fifty feet (50') radially from the wellhead supplying potable water
to the public water supplies.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT Ib: A three (3) year "time of travel
district (TOT)" as defined in this Section.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT II: A six (6) year "time of travel
district (TOT)" as defined in this Section.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT III: A ten (10) year "time of travel
district (TOT)" as defined in this Section.
10-4-20.3: ESTABLISHMENT OF WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT:
There is hereby established a Wellhead Protection Overlay District identified
and described as all the area within the ten (10) year TOT district around
public water supplies as shown on the Official Zoning Map. It is further
established that these areas be composed of four (4) districts: "Wellhead
Protection Overlay District Ia," "Wellhead Protection Overlay District Ib",
"Wellhead Protection Overlay District II", and "Wellhead Protection Overlay
District III", as they are defined in this Chapter. The City may record with
the County Recorder's office a metes and bounds description of the Wellhead
Protection Overlay District.
10-4-20.4: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN DISTRICT Ia OF THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA:
Uses permitted within District Ia shall be limited to necessary public water
supply wellhead equipment including the following: wellhead facility buildings,
water storage tanks, disinfection equipment, disinfection chemical storage and
approved landscaping. All other uses shall be prohibited.
10-4-20.5: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN DISTRICT Ib OF THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within
District Ib of the Wellhead Protection areas:
   (A)   Sanitary landfills.
   (B)   Livestock confinement operations.
   (C)   Hazardous waste disposal facility.
   (D)   Injection wells except for the following:
      1.   Closed systems.
   (E)   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on ground water.
   (F)   Existing sewer lines shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100')
of a wellhead or of new sanitary systems and sewer lines shall not be closer
than one hundred fifty feet (150') of a wellhead.
   (G)   Existing septic tanks or drain fields shall not be closer than one
hundred feet (100') of a wellhead and new installation of septic tanks or drain
fields shall not be closer than two hundred feet (200') away from the wellhead.
   (H)   Junk or salvage yards.
   (I)   Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires and all other petroleum
products.
   (J)   Land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing ground water
quality as deemed by the Zoning Administrator during review process of
applications.
10-4-20.6: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN DISTRICT II OF THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within District II
of the Wellhead Protection Overlay District:
   (A)   Sanitary landfills;
   (B)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities;
   (C)   Injection wells except for the following:
      1.   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth):
               a.   Geothermal heat;
               b.   Heat pump return;
               c.   Cooling water return.
      2.   Shallow well injection only (less than 18 feet in depth):
               a.   Storm runoff;
               b.   Agricultural runoff waste water;
               c.   Special drainage water;
               d.   Aquifer recharge;
               e.   Aquifer remediation;
               f.   Septic systems (general).
   (D)   Land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing ground water
quality as deemed by the Zoning Administrator during review process of
applications.
10-4-20.7: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN DISTRICT III OF THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION
OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within District
III of the Wellhead Protection Overlay District:
   (A)   Injection wells except for the following:
      1.   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth):
               a.   Geothermal heat;
               b.   Heat pump return;
               c.   Cooling water return.
      2.   Shallow well injection only (less than 18 feet in depth):
               a.   Storm runoff;
               b.   Agricultural runoff waste water;
               c.   Special drainage water;
               d.   Aquifer recharge;
               e.   Aquifer remediation;
               f.   Septic systems (general).
   (B)   Land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing ground water
quality as deemed by the Zoning Administrator during review process of
applications.
10-4-20.8: NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION TO OPERATOR OF PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY WATER
SUPPLY:
Whenever there is a request which requires approval from the Planning and
Zoning Commission for land lying within a Wellhead Protection District, written
notice of the hearing shall be given to the entity operating the public or
community water supply within that overlay district.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a granting of easements for
monitoring wells if the Commission deems it appropriate for protection of the
public water supply.
10-4-20.9: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any legal use existing at the time of the adoption of this section and listed
as a prohibited use herein, shall become a legal nonconforming use and may not
be expanded or improved except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-20.10: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, government entity or business
to occupy or use the land within the area designated in the wellhead protection
overlay district I, II, and III contrary to, or in violation of, any of the
provisions of this section
10-4-20. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-20.11: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments will require approval from all of the counties and municipalities
that this section
10-4-20 affects. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
10-4-21: NCO, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT:
10-4-21.1: PURPOSE:
This overlay district is intended to provide for limited commercial and service
activities within residential zoning districts and serving the local
neighborhood, and which are integrated into a residential setting. Development
of this overlay is allowed only through the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-4-21.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               b.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      3.   Residential:
               a.   Household units in upper floors of commercial or
professional buildings.
      4.   Retail trade:
               a.   Bakery.
               b.   Bookstore.
               c.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
               d.   Eating places.
               e.   Florist shop.
               f.   Food, drugs, etc.
               g.   General merchandise.
               h.   Hardware store.
               i.   Hobby and toy store.
               j.   Ice cream store.
               k.   Import store.
               l.   Laundering and dry cleaning.
               m.   Laundromats.
               n.   Music store.
               o.   Pet shop.
               p.   Sporting goods store.
      5.   Services:
               a.   Beauty and barbershops.
               b.   Copy center - self-service.
               c.   Daycare services.
               d.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
               e.   In-home daycare services.
               f.   Photography studios.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such use which
broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a building
shall also require a special use permit. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the District unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications And Utilities:
               a.   Utility-owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural Facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
               d.   Planetariums and aquariums.
      3.   Governmental Facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Governmental office buildings.
               c.   Water treatment plants.
      4.   Medical Facilities:
               a.   Doctors' offices.
               b.   Hospitals and clinics.
               c.   Rehabilitation services.
      5.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
      6.   Parks:
               a.   Park concessions.
               b.   Public parks and playgrounds with crowd attracting
facilities.
      7.   Public Assembly:
               a.   Auditoriums.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private, single purpose.
               d.   Schools - private, vocational and/or academic.
               e.   Schools - public.
               f.   Theaters - indoor.
      8.   Retail Trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages, when consumed on the premises where
sold.
               b.   Apparel and accessories.
               c.   Car wash facilities.
               d.   Commercial greenhouses.
               e.   Farm and garden supplies.
               f.   Gasoline service stations.
               g.   Taxidermy studio. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
      9.   Services:
               a.   Advertising.
               b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
               c.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
               d.   Employment agency.
               e.   Finance and investment offices.
               f.   Insurance and related business.
               g.   Professional organizations.
               h.   Professional services.
               i.   Real estate and related business.
               j.   Tattoo parlors or dermagraphic studios approved by the
South Central District Health Department or other State regulatory agency.
               k.   Welfare and charitable facilities. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
      10.   Sports Facilities:
               a.   Indoor recreation facility.
               b.   Miniature golf courses.
               c.   Outdoor, public and commercial ice and roller skating
facilities.
               d.   Outdoor, public and commercial swimming pools.
               e.   Outdoor, public and commercial tennis courts.
      11.   Transportation:
               a.   Bus facilities, including pickup shelters.
               b.   Taxicab office.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this Title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence.
10-4-21.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the NCO District:
   (A)   District Size And Spacing: An NCO District shall not be less than five
(5) acres nor more than twenty (20) acres. Only one overlay is allowed in each
area generally described on the Comprehensive Plan Map as a Neighborhood
Commercial Center.
   (B)   Lot Area:
      1.   Nonresidential uses shall provide a lot area of sufficient size to
provide for the building, required setbacks, off-street parking and
landscaping.
      2.   Residential uses shall provide the lot area required by the
underlying residential zone.
   (C)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   Nonresidential Uses: No requirement.
      2.   Residential Uses: Same as the underlying district.
   (D)   Building Height:
      1.   Nonresidential Uses: No building shall exceed twenty five feet (25')
in height.
      2.   Residential Uses: Same as the underlying district.
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Nonresidential uses: Same as the underlying district, except
buildings exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet shall have a yard of
fifty feet (50') from the property line on street frontages.
      2.   Residential uses: Same as the underlying district.
   (F)   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a fifty foot (50') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on the subdivision plat.
   (G)   Landscaping:
      1.   Nonresidential uses shall have, as a minimum, twenty percent (20%)
of the site landscaped.
               a.   Parking rows shall be separated by landscaping of at least
five feet (5') in width for the entire length of the parking rows except for
walkways.
               b.   Landscaping of thirty feet (30') in depth behind the
sidewalk or property line should be provided surrounding the project. Such
landscaping shall have fifty percent (50%) of the area bermed to a height of
three feet (3').
      2.   Residential uses: Same as the underlying district.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All uses shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10 of this
title. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (I)   Signs: See the sign code in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 3005, 6-6-
2011)
   (J)   Walls, Fences And Landscaping: Same as the underlying district.
   (K)   Additional Requirements:
      1.   Nonresidential uses: The following additional requirements shall
also be met:
               a.   All buildings shall be of a residential architectural style
with gable or hip roof with a minimum three to twelve (3/12) pitch and twelve
inch (12") eave.
               b.   Hours of store operation within the NCO district shall be
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
               c.   Single occupancy buildings not to exceed twenty five
thousand (25,000) square feet.
               d.   No exterior display of merchandise/goods (or storage).
               e.   Totally enclosed refuse containers. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
               f.   Additional requirements as may be determined by the city
council through the ZDA process. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
      2.   Residential uses: Same as the underlying district. (Ord. 2526, 5-20-
1996)
10-4-22: WHO, WAREHOUSE HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT:
10-4-22.1: PURPOSE:
This overlay district is intended to provide recognition and protection of the
nationally registered Twin Falls historic warehouse district through the
implementation of design guidelines for modifications, demolition or
construction of buildings within the district. This overlay may be placed on
the CB, OT, M1 or M2 zoning district. (Ord. 2608, 5-3-1999)
10-4-22.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Any use permitted in the basic district upon which the overlay is
placed.
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use permit may be granted for a permanent use
that is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted
outright because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Any use allowed by special use permit in the basic district upon
which the overlay is placed.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2608, 5-3-
1999)
10-4-22.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the warehouse historic overlay district:
   (A)   Lot Area: The minimum lot size as required by the basic district upon
which the overlay is placed.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
   (C)   Building Height: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yards: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
      2.   Side yards: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
      3.   Rear yards: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed.
   (E)   Access: Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay is
placed.
   (F)   Landscaping: Same as that of the basic district upon which the overlay
is placed or such additional or other landscaping as required by the historic
preservation commission.
   (G)   Off Street Parking: Same as that of the basic district upon which the
overlay is placed. (Ord. 2608, 5-3-1999)
   (H)   Design Guidelines: No exterior portion of any building or other
structure (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or
other appurtenant features) nor aboveground utility structures nor any type of
outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or
demolished within this district until after an application for a certificate of
appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by
the historic preservation commission. The historic preservation commission
shall review the "Warehouse Historic District Design Guidelines" as they exist
or as amended for compliance before issuing a certificate of appropriateness.
Such a certificate is to be issued by the historic preservation commission
prior to the issuance of a building permit or other permit granted for purposes
of construction or altering structures. A certificate of appropriateness shall
be required whether or not a building permit is required. A decision of the
historic preservation commission regarding an application for a certificate of
appropriateness may be appealed by the applicant to the city council. (Ord.
3025, 2-6-2012)
10-4-23: RB, RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
10-4-23.1: PURPOSE:
This zoning district is intended to allow conversion of residential structures
located on arterial and collector roads in areas of transition to an
appropriate mix of residential, light retail and service commercial uses that
provide good transitions with nearby residential uses and neighborhoods. This
zone allows existing residential uses to remain and be improved, while also
allowing low scale, low intensity commercial and business operations to be
developed as part of infill projects. Centralized water and sewer facilities
are required.
Development in the residential business zoning district should:
   (A)   Be low in scale and intensity,
   (B)   Share design characteristics with nearby residential uses,
   (C)   Provide a good neighborhood "fit", and
   (D)   Exude a distinct residential character. (Ord. 2998, 1-3-2011)
10-4-23.2: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Buildings, structures or premises shall be used and
buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only
for the following uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Radio and television stations without transmission and
receiving towers.
               b.   Underground and aboveground transmission lines.
               c.   Utility owned buildings and structures less than twenty
five (25) square feet in area and less than three feet (3') aboveground.
      2.   Cultural facilities:
               a.   Botanical gardens and arboretums.
               b.   Historic sites and monuments.
               c.   Libraries, museums and art galleries.
      3.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Governmental office buildings.
      4.   Medical facilities:
               a.   Acupuncture facilities approved by the South Central
district health department or other state regulatory agency.
               b.   Doctors' offices.
               c.   Drug and alcohol treatment centers.
               d.   Rehabilitation services.
      5.   Parks:
               a.   Open space.
               b.   Private parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
               c.   Public parks and playgrounds without crowd attracting
facilities.
      6.   Public assembly:
               a.   Funeral chapels.
               b.   Religious facilities.
               c.   Schools - private, single purpose.
               d.   Schools - private vocational and/or academic.
               e.   Schools - public.
               f.   Wedding chapels and/or reception halls.
      7.   Residential:
               a.   Accessory buildings (less than 1,000 square feet), personal
swimming pools and other accessory uses.
               b.   Bed and breakfast facilities.
               c.   Home occupations.
               d.   Household units existing at the time this title was
adopted.
               e.   Household units in the same building as an allowed use and
occupied by the owner or an employee of the allowed use.
               f.   Household units in upper floors of commercial or
professional buildings.
      8.   Retail trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on premises where sold if
located three hundred feet (300') or more from residential property.
               b.   Antique shop.
               c.   Apparel and accessories.
               d.   Art galleries and frame shops.
               e.   Automobile parts store.
               f.   Bakery.
               g.   Bookstore.
               h.   Cottage businesses.
               i.   Craft shop, in conjunction with retail business.
               j.   Eating places.
               k.   Fabric and pattern shop.
               l.   Florist shop.
               m.   Food, drugs, etc.
               n.   General merchandise.
               o.   Hardware store.
               p.   Hobby and toy store.
               q.   Home furnishings and appliances.
               r.   Ice cream store.
               s.   Import store.
               t.   Laundering and dry cleaning.
               u.   Laundromats.
               v.   Music store.
               w.   Pet shop.
               x.   Sporting goods store.
               y.   Taxidermy studio.
      9.   Services:
               a.   Advertising.
               b.   Apparel repair and alteration.
               c.   Beauty and barber shops.
               d.   Building care contracting offices.
               e.   Business associations.
               f.   Civic, social and fraternal organizations.
               g.   Construction trade offices.
               h.   Consumer credit collection offices.
               i.   Copy center - self-service.
               j.   Duplicating and stenographic offices.
               k.   Finance and investment offices.
               l.   Horticultural services.
               m.   In home daycare services.
               n.   Insurance and related business.
               o.   Labor unions and organizations.
               p.   Photography studios.
               q.   Professional organizations.
               r.   Professional services.
               s.   Real estate and related business.
               t.   Seamstress shop.
               u.   Tourist information center.
Notwithstanding the foregoing list of permitted uses, any such proposed use
which broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a
building shall also require a special use permit.
   (B)   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for the following
uses:
      1.   Communications and utilities:
               a.   Utility owned buildings and structures more than twenty
five (25) square feet in area or more than three feet (3') above ground.
      2.   Governmental facilities:
               a.   Fire stations and police stations.
               b.   Water treatment plants.
      3.   Manufacturing:
               a.   Handcrafted furniture.
      4.   Medical facilities:
               a.   Ambulance service.
               b.   Animal hospital - small animals.
               c.   Prosthetics - sales, service and construction.
      5.   Miscellaneous:
               a.   Any facility with drive-through service.
               b.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such proposed use which
broadcasts amplified music or sound by speakers to the exterior of a building
shall also require a special use permit.
      6.   Residential:
               a.   Detached accessory buildings (more than 1,000 square feet),
i.e., garages and other accessory buildings.
               b.   Nursing homes and rest homes.
               c.   Shelter homes.
      7.   Retail trade:
               a.   Alcoholic beverages when consumed on premises where sold if
located less than three hundred feet (300') from residential property.
               b.   Permitted retail/trade uses operating outside the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      8.   Services:
               a.   Commercial childcare facilities and preschools.
               b.   Daycare services.
               c.   Dog grooming and/or kennels.
               d.   Employment agency.
               e.   Publishing and printing business.
               f.   Testing laboratories.
               g.   Welfare and charitable facilities.
      9.   Sports facilities:
               a.   Indoor recreation facility.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified above are prohibited unless
administrative determination in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(F) of this title is made that the use is similar enough to a use listed
above that distinction between them is of little consequence. (Ord. 2998, 1-3-
2011)
10-4-23.3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the residential business district:
   (A)   Lot Area:
      1.   The lot size shall be of sufficient size to provide for the
building, off street parking, stormwater retention and landscaping.
   (B)   Lot Occupancy:
      1.   No building shall occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of a lot.
   (C)   Building Height: No building shall exceed two (2) stories and shall
not exceed thirty five feet (35') in total height.
   (D)   Building Size:
      1.   No building shall have a total floor area square footage of greater
than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yards: Front yards shall conform to the following standards,
or section
10-7-6 of this title, whichever is greater:
               a.   No structure shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
front property line for nonresidential uses.
      2.   Side Yards:
               a.   No structure shall be closer than five feet (5') to the
side property line (minimum of 10 feet between any structure/building) for
nonresidential uses.
      3.   Rear Yards:
               a.   For nonresidential uses, the rear yard may be reduced to
the side yard setback of five feet (5').
   (F)   Access:
      1.   Only One Access Allowed Per Lot: Upon redevelopment of an existing
property, if more than one access exists it will be coordinated with the city
engineer which access(es) shall be eliminated. Adjoining properties should have
joint accesses whenever possible.
      2.   Driveway Access: No driveway with access to more than two (2)
parking spaces will open onto the side street for access or ingress to the
properties containing the nonresidential uses, nor can any additional curb cuts
be made on the side street curbs. However, if a driveway presently exists that
goes to the side street, then the presently existing driveway may be
maintained, but the use may not be expanded to include other parking places.
      3.   Modifications: When an existing residential structure is converted
to a nonresidential use, the driveway requirements above may be modified by the
administrator if it can be shown that strict compliance to these development
standards is not possible.
   (G)   Landscaping: Landscaping shall conform to the following standards, or
sections
10-7-10 and/or
10-7-12 of this title, whichever is greater:
      1.   Twenty percent (20%) of each property shall be maintained in
landscaping.
      2.   New development shall encourage planter boxes, barrel planters, and
other landscaping in parking areas to reduce the visual impact of parking lots
from the road.
   (H)   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Any use that has a parking requirement, as determined by section
10-10-6 of this title, in excess of twenty four (24) spaces is prohibited.
      2.   Off street parking shall conform to the requirements contained in
section
10-10-3 of this title. When an existing residential structure is converted to a
nonresidential use, the parking requirements may be modified by the planning
and zoning commission if it can be shown that strict compliance to these
development standards is not possible. Before the parking requirements may be
modified, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing,
publish notice, post the property and give written notice to all parties, as
required for variance permits.
   (I)   Signs:
      1.   Shall comply with chapter 9, "Sign Regulations", of this title.
Multiple occupancy buildings shall have a sign plan approved by the
administrator.
   (J)   Walls, Fences And Hedges:
      1.   Nonresidential Use: Any nonresidential use shall provide a fence not
less than six feet (6') in height that will act as a sight and sound barrier
between the nonresidential use and any contiguous residential lot or use.
      2.   Minimum Standards:
               a.   Screening shall be a minimum six foot (6') fence or wall or
a landscaped area or any combination thereof. If it be a fence or wall it shall
be constructed of wood, solid vinyl, metal (not chainlink), concrete or
concrete block. If it be a landscaped area, it shall be evergreen bushes or
trees and may include an earthen berm.
               b.   Whenever bushes or trees are used as screening, the
screening height may not be less than three feet (3') at the time of planting,
providing a minimum height of six feet (6') is achieved within five (5) years
after planting.
               c.   Screening shall completely obscure objects inside the
screened area when viewed from any angle outside the screened area and shall be
constructed so as to reduce noise, lights and blowing trash.
   (K)   Building Design Standards:
      1.   Buildings: Existing residences will not be razed and new buildings
constructed unless said new buildings are designed in such a way as to conform
to the general residential nature of the neighborhood, consistent with the
existing architectural style and design. Where possible, existing residences
located in the residential business zoning district should be preserved in
their present form and use. Where this is not feasible, individual residences
should be allowed to convert into residential business developments. In cases
where existing structures and site conditions are prohibitive for conversion,
two (2) or more existing lots may be assembled and developed as residential
business uses, thereby consolidating site access and creating a more rational
parking layout. Once a particular property has been converted to a residential
business use, it shall not be allowed to revert to a residential use.
      2.   Roofs: Roofs are required to be pitched, with a minimum pitch of
four to twelve (4:12), and residential in nature.
      3.   Architectural Standards: All building faces shall include windows,
setbacks, awnings, parapet variations, material variations, color variations or
other architectural treatments to break up large uniform surfaces.
      4.   Commercial Buildings: Commercial buildings on street frontages shall
have functional entrances that face the street and have between ten percent
(10%) and forty percent (40%) of the facade as windows. Windows shall be
nonreflective glass. (Ord. 3073, 8-24-2015)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING SUBDISTRICTS, MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Designation Of Zoning Subdistricts
10-5-2: Zoning Subdistrict Map
10-5-3: Conformance With Zoning Subdistricts
10-5-1: DESIGNATION OF ZONING SUBDISTRICTS:
There are hereby established the following zoning subdistricts for the city:
 
Zoning Subdistrict         Short Title
 
   Zoning development agreemeZDA
   Mobile home park          MHP
   Mobile home subdivision   MHS
 
In designating a zoning subdistrict a prefix is added which corresponds to one
of the basic zoning district regulations. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-5-2: ZONING SUBDISTRICT MAP:
In addition to showing the boundaries of all basic zoning subdistricts on the
"official zoning map", there shall also be established a map of all basic
zoning subdistricts which is designated "development map" which, together with
the ordinance creating the basic zoning subdistrict, shall be on file in the
office of the city clerk. The ordinance and map together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon shall establish the conditions
and requirements under which the basic zoning subdistrict designation was
granted and when adopted according to law shall become effective and by
reference shall become a part of this title. The number of the ordinance
creating the basic zoning subdistrict shall be clearly shown on the "official
zoning map", "development map" and any other official document relating to a
particular zoning subdistrict.
The ordinance and map may encompass one or more zoning districts and one or
more basic zoning subdistricts together with any appurtenant secondary zoning
districts all within one particular zoning district whenever it can be shown to
the satisfaction of the council that the mixture of zoning districts and
subdistricts is compatible with the intent of the zoning subdistrict provisions
and forms a homogeneous unit. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-5-3: CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING SUBDISTRICTS:
   (A)   Any land located within a zoning subdistrict designated on the
"official zoning map" shall only be used or occupied and any building,
structure or improvement thereon shall only be used, occupied, placed,
replaced, erected, reerected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended,
enlarged, modified, removed or moved as this title permits for the zoning
subdistrict in which the same is located and as shown on the development map
established by the creation of the zoning subdistrict in which the same is
located.
   (B)   No use, dimensional requirement, sign, off street parking area,
improvement or other condition or requirement shown on a development map shall
be changed or modified or left uncompleted except as herein provided. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING SUBDISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: ZDA, Zoning Development Agreement
10-6-1.1: Purpose
10-6-1.2: Underlying Zoning District
10-6-1.3: Use Regulations
10-6-1.4: ZDA Standards
10-6-1.5: ZDA Conceptual Development Plan
10-6-1.6: Conformance To The Conceptual Development Plan
10-6-1.7: Procedure
10-6-2: MHP, Mobile Home Park Subdistrict
10-6-2.1: Purpose
10-6-2.2: Overlay Districts
10-6-2.3: Use Regulations
10-6-2.4: Property Development Standards
10-6-3: Business Park ZDA
10-6-1: ZDA, ZONING DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
10-6-1.1: PURPOSE:
A zoning development agreement (ZDA) is designed to accommodate appropriate
combinations of uses that may be planned, developed, and operated as integral
land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. A ZDA is
intended to accomplish some, or all of the following:
   (A)   Foster and promote a variety of appropriate land use combinations in a
preplanned development pattern;
   (B)   Encourage developers to use a creative approach in land development;
   (C)   Retain and conserve natural land and topographic features;
   (D)   Promote greater use of streetscape and pedestrian oriented aesthetics;
   (E)   Promote the creation and efficient use of open spaces;
   (F)   Create flexibility and variety in the location of improvements on
lots;
   (G)   Provide flexibility in development standards to facilitate creative
land development concepts. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.2: UNDERLYING ZONING DISTRICT:
Each ZDA shall accompany a request to rezone a subject property to one or more
underlying zoning districts that shall comply with the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.3: USE REGULATIONS:
Land uses in a ZDA shall conform to the standards and regulations of the
underlying zoning district(s), unless otherwise approved and included within
the ZDA. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.4: ZDA STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in a ZDA:
   (A)   Development requirements for each ZDA shall be set forth in the
written commitment document and shall include, but not be limited to: uses,
density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building
height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access,
multiuse transportation access and pathways, screening, landscaping,
architectural standards, project phasing or scheduling, management
associations, and other requirements as the planning and zoning commission and/
or the city council may deem appropriate.
   (B)   The ZDA shall conform to all sections of this title unless
specifically addressed in the written commitment document. All applications to
the city shall list all requested variations from the standard requirements.
Applications without this list shall be considered incomplete.
   (C)   A ZDA subject parcel shall be a minimum of two (2) acres unless the
planning and zoning commission recommends and the city council finds that
property of less than two (2) acres is suitable as a ZDA by virtue of:
      1.   Unique character; or
      2.   Infill development; or
      3.   Topography or landscaping features; or
      4.   Qualifying as an isolated problem area. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.5: ZDA CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A ZDA shall include a conceptual development plan that illustrates the
standards contained therein. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant at
the time the zoning and ZDA request is submitted. The plan shall show the
applicant's intent for the use(s) of the land within the proposed ZDA in a
visual manner and be supported by written documentation of proposals and
standards for development. Dependent on the nature of the ZDA request, this
plan may be submitted as a residential plan, nonresidential plan, or a mixed
use combination plan. For a mixed use development, the plan shall comply with
requirements for both the residential and nonresidential plans.
   (A)   Residential Conceptual Development Plan: A conceptual development plan
for residential land use shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to
adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. The plan
shall include, but is not limited to, the proposed general land use, streets,
thoroughfares, storm drainage, and preliminary lot arrangements. The applicant
shall submit text material to further explain the characteristics of the plan,
which may include, but shall be not limited to, multiuse transportation access
and pathways, density, building height, screening, landscaped areas, project
scheduling, parks and open space, and other pertinent development data. The
applicant shall also submit color renderings or elevations to illustrate
proposed architectural standards or requirements.
   (B)   Nonresidential Conceptual Development Plan: A conceptual development
plan for nonresidential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner
to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. The
applicant shall also submit text material to further explain the
characteristics of the plan. The plan and text material shall include, but is
not limited to, the types of use(s), topography and boundary of ZDA subject
parcel, the size, type and location of buildings and building sites, proposed
ingress and egress, physical features of the site, existing streets, stormwater
management, alleys and easements, location of future public facilities,
multiuse transportation access and pathways, building height and location,
parking, landscaping, screening, project scheduling and other information to
adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval
that is to be used in preparing the final development plan(s). The applicant
shall also submit color renderings or elevations to illustrate proposed
architectural standards or requirements. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.6: CONFORMANCE TO THE CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Final development plans, including plats, construction plans, and/or site
plans, submitted for the development of the ZDA subject parcel shall conform to
the approved conceptual development plan. Details on the final development plan
(s) with minor variations from the conceptual development plan may be approved
by the administrator, or designated city official without public hearing. If it
is determined that a proposed change(s) constitutes a departure from the
conceptual development plan and/or the development standards, the ZDA written
commitment document shall be adequately amended using the initial approval
process contained herein. Changes to any of the following items constitute a
departure from the conceptual development plan and/or development standards,
thus changing the basic relationship of the proposed development to the
adjacent property:
   (A)   The permitted uses,
   (B)   Increase in density,
   (C)   Increase in building height,
   (D)   Increase in building coverage of the site,
   (E)   Reduction in the off street parking ratio,
   (F)   Reducing the building setbacks provided at the boundary of the site,
   (G)   Reduction of any open space plans, or
   (H)   Alteration of the overall design theme, primary architectural
elements, or building materials. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-1.7: PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Any applicant requesting approval of a ZDA shall schedule a
presubmittal meeting with the administrator, or his/her designee.
   (B)   The procedure for establishing a ZDA shall follow the procedure for
zoning map amendments as set forth in chapter 14 of this title with the
following addition: The planning and zoning commission shall complete a
preliminary review of the proposed conceptual development plan at a meeting
prior to the public hearing for a zoning district and zoning map amendment.
   (C)   Each ZDA written commitment document shall be signed and notarized by
the property owner(s) and shall include the following:
      1.   A legal description of the ZDA subject parcel boundary, including
legal descriptions of each underlying zoning district, if multiple underlying
districts are included.
      2.   A statement as to the purpose and intent of the ZDA.
      3.   A list of the ZDA development requirements that vary from the
standard development requirements of the underlying zoning district.
      4.   A color conceptual development plan.
      5.   An expected development schedule. If no development has occurred on
the ZDA subject parcel within the time identified, the planning and zoning
commission and city council may review the original ZDA development
requirements and conceptual development plan to ensure their continued
validity. If the city determines the concept is no longer valid, then:
               a.   The city may initiate a process to change the zoning
classification, or
               b.   New ZDA development requirements and/or a new conceptual
development plan may be required to be approved prior to the city issuing a
building permit for any portion of the ZDA subject parcel.
      6.   A statement, signed by the property owner(s) and notarized,
indicating a commitment to develop the subject parcel in conformance with the
ZDA.
   (D)   The city council shall not adopt an ordinance rezoning the subject
parcel until the property owner/developer has submitted a complete and signed
ZDA written commitment document. The signed ZDA written commitment document
shall be attached as an exhibit to the rezoning ordinance and recorded in the
office of the county recorder.
   (E)   Approval of a ZDA shall be based on the following standards:
      1.   The proposed uses shall not be detrimental to any surrounding uses;
nor shall they be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
      2.   Any variation from the underlying zoning district development
requirements must be warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the
conceptual development plan.
      3.   The underlying zoning district and the conceptual development plan
shall conform to the comprehensive plan.
      4.   Existing and/or proposed streets and utility services must be
suitable and adequate for the proposed development. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
10-6-2: MHP, MOBILE HOME PARK SUBDISTRICT:
10-6-2.1: PURPOSE:
This subdistrict is intended to provide for placement of individually owned
mobile homes on real property under a single ownership. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981;
amd. Ord. 2110, 7-16-1984)
10-6-2.2: OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
An MHP subdistrict may overlay R4, R6 and R6 MHO zoning districts. (Ord. 2012,
7-6-1981; amd. Ord. 2110, 7-16-1984)
10-6-2.3: USE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Residential:
               a.   Permanent mobile homes.
               b.   Accessory buildings, personal swimming pools and other
accessory uses.
      2.   Private parks and playgrounds.
      3.   Other uses as allowed by the commission and council to service only
the mobile home park. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981; amd. Ord. 2110, 7-16-1984)
10-6-2.4: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all lands and
buildings in mobile home park subdistricts:
   (A)   Project Size: The minimum project size shall be five (5) acres.
   (B)   Density Per Acre: The density per acre of a mobile home park
subdistrict shall be in substantial conformity with that of the underlying
zoning district. Buildings may be clustered and individual lot sizes may be
reduced below the requirements of the underlying zoning district, provided the
total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number permitted in the
underlying district per acre, multiplied by the number of acres in the
development. The remaining land not contained in individual lots shall be set
aside for parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Building Height: The building height of a mobile home park subdistrict
shall not exceed that of the underlying zoning district.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Along the periphery of a mobile home park subdistrict a twenty five
foot (25') landscaped strip shall be provided and a minimum six foot (6') high
screening fence shall be required within the twenty five foot (25') strip
except along street frontages.
      2.   Spacing between principal buildings shall be at least equivalent to
such spacing as would be required between buildings similarly developed under
the terms of this title on separate zoning lots, due consideration being given
to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys.
      3.   All buildings shall have a trafficway set back from centerline of
forty five feet (45') on a public street and twenty five feet (25') on a
private street.
      4.   Accessory structure envelopes shall be shown on the site plan of
projects approved after the date of approval of this amendment. Projects
approved prior to the adoption of this amendment may have accessory structures
placed so as to meet setback requirements of this section, but such structures
shall not be placed in the front yard nor in the twenty five foot (25')
landscaped buffer around the perimeter of the project. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
   (E)   Approval Of An MHP Subdistrict:
      1.   Preliminary Development Plan: The petitioner for a mobile home park
subdistrict may, after preapplication conferences with the planning staff,
submit a preliminary development plan to the commission for review, which
development plan shall include the following:
               a.   The proposed site plan, showing building locations and land
use areas;
               b.   Proposed traffic circulation, parking areas, pedestrian
walks and landscaping;
               c.   Proposed construction sequence for buildings, streets,
spaces and landscaped areas;
               d.   Existing zoning district boundaries;
               e.   A survey of the property, including topography, buildings,
watercourses, trees over six inches (6") in trunk diameter, streets, utility
easements, drainage patterns, right of way and land use;
               f.   Other requirements that the planning department, planning
commission, or legislative body may request.
      2.   Public Hearing: After commission review, a public hearing shall be
held before the commission and council for a zoning district and zoning map
amendment.
      3.   Final Development Plan: Within one year after approval of the
preliminary development plan, the petitioner shall submit to the planning
commission a final development plan. This plan shall include the following
information:
               a.   A survey of the property, including topography, buildings,
watercourses, trees over six inches (6") in trunk diameter, streets, utility
easements, drainage patterns, right of way and land use;
               b.   A site plan showing proposed building locations, open
spaces and land use area;
               c.   Traffic circulation, parking areas and pedestrian walks;
               d.   Landscaping plans;
               e.   Land indicated as open space, streets and sidewalks and the
plan shall provide that they be permanently maintained as such either by
private covenants attached to and made a part of the plan, or, if suitable and
mutually agreeable, by public dedication. In the event the open space is to be
maintained through private covenants, the planning commission shall require,
prior to the approval of any final plat, the establishment of a homeowners'
association, and either:
            (1)   Specific performance of the open space portion of the
proposed plan, or
            (2)   Posting a bond sufficient to assure specific performance.
               f.   Such final development plan shall be in general conformance
with the approved preliminary development plan.
               g.   Final approval shall be binding on the development and
changes from the final plan shall be subject to approval by the planning
commission and legislative body.
               h.   The applicant may request extension of the time limit not
later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the base year limit.
(Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
      4.   Findings Required: The planning commission shall recommend to the
council approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the final
development plan. Upon approval, the plan shall constitute the zoning
requirements and subdivision plat for the land in the zoning development
agreement subdistricts.
      5.   Approval: Approval of a zoning development agreement subdistrict
shall be based on the following standards: (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
               a.   The proposed uses shall not be detrimental to present any
potential surrounding uses; nor shall they be detrimental to the health, safety
and general welfare of the public. (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
               b.   The density of the zoning development agreement shall be in
substantial conformity with the density of surrounding zoning districts. (Ord.
3082, 12-8-2014)
               c.   Any variation from the basic zoning district requirements
must be warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the final
development plan.
               d.   The final development plan must be in conformance with the
comprehensive land use plan.
               e.   Existing and proposed streets and utility services must be
suitable and adequate for the proposed development.
               f.   The execution of an MHP agreement signed by the developer
and the city which delineates commitments of the developer to the city and of
the city to the developer. (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
10-6-3: BUSINESS PARK ZDA:
A "business park", as defined herein, may be established through the ZDA
process, with the following development requirements: (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (A)   All manufacturing activity shall take place inside an enclosed
building.
   (B)   No outside storage of any product, material, or vehicles used in the
loading, unloading or transportation of manufactured goods.
   (C)   No fumes, odors, noise or vibrations shall be allowed at the perimeter
of the business park that are above typical residential background levels that
are detectable from the outside of the building. (Ord. 2786, 6-1-2004)
   (D)   Landscaping equal to ten percent (10%) of the site shall be provided
with a master landscape plan approved through the ZDA process. Parking lots of
more than twenty five (25) vehicles shall have landscaped islands within the
parking lot breaking up large asphalt areas. A thirty five foot (35') wide
landscaped buffer with berming at least four feet (4') high shall be required
on any street fronting any residential property.
   (E)   A master sign plan shall be approved as part of the ZDA.
   (F)   Architectural standards shall be approved through the ZDA process for
buildings within the business park. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (G)   The business park shall be located adjacent to major arterial and
collector streets, with no direct access to local residential streets.
   (H)   There shall be a one hundred foot (100') building setback and a thirty
five foot (35') parking lot setback from any street fronting a residential
subdivision or adjacent to residential property or a residential zoning
district. Buildings approved over thirty five feet (35') in height shall have
four feet (4') additional setback for each foot of additional height over
thirty five feet (35'). No building will exceed fifty feet (50') in height
without a special use permit.
   (I)   The business park shall include a mixture of manufacturing and
commercial uses.
   (J)   The business park shall be designed to encourage pedestrian and
bicycle usage if located within one-half (1/2) mile of residential
subdivisions.
   (K)   No hazardous materials exceeding the exempt quantities as provided by
the international building code and international fire code shall be
manufactured or warehoused in the business park. Only hazardous materials used
in the manufacturing process are allowed. (Ord. 2786, 6-1-2004)
CHAPTER 7
ZONING SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Effect Of Supplementary Regulations
10-7-2: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space
10-7-3: Additional Height In CB, C1, OT, M1 And M2 Zoning Districts And
Subdistricts
10-7-4: Canyon Rim Setback (Rep. by Ord. 2466, 2-6-1995)
10-7-5: Detached Accessory Building Setbacks In Residential Zoning Districts
And Subdistricts
10-7-6: Front Yard Setbacks
10-7-7: Swimming Pools (Rep. by Ord. 2288, 10-2-1989)
10-7-8: Separate Ownership Of Units In Duplexes
10-7-9: Filling Of Canyons
10-7-10: Special Landscaping Requirements For Properties Fronting The College
Of Southern Idaho (CSI) Property
10-7-11: Adult Entertainment Businesses
10-7-12: Special Landscaping Requirements For Gateway Arterials
10-7-13: Vehicle Stacking Requirements For Drive-Through Facilities (Rep. by
Ord. 2016-7, 4-18-2016)
10-7-14: Outside Storage And Display
10-7-15: Placement Of Satellite Dishes
10-7-16: Recreational Vehicles On Residential Lots
10-7-17: Wireless Communications Facilities
10-7-18: Commercial Painting
10-7-19: City Services
10-7-20: Public Hearings Notice Requirements
10-7-21: Sport Shooting Range - Indoor
10-7-1: EFFECT OF SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement the regulations within
zoning districts and subdistricts appearing elsewhere in this title. (Ord.
2045, 7-6-1982)
10-7-2: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage parking or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart
from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided. (Ord.
2045, 7-6-1982)
10-7-3: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT IN CB, C1, OT, M1 AND M2 ZONING DISTRICTS AND
SUBDISTRICTS:
The council may allow greater than standard building heights with or without
extra setback requirements, in the CB, C1, OT, M1 and M2 zoning districts and
subdistricts. A request for additional height shall follow the public hearing
process for zoning map amendments as described in subsection
10-14-5(B) and section
10-14-7 of this title. (Ord. 3077, 8-11-2014)
10-7-4: CANYON RIM SETBACK:
(Rep. by Ord. 2466, 2-6-1995)
10-7-5: DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACKS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
AND SUBDISTRICTS:
Detached accessory buildings may be built on the side or rear property line,
provided all of the following conditions are met:
   (A)   Written permission of adjacent property owner is obtained.
   (B)   Firewalls as required by the building code are constructed.
   (C)   There is no water runoff from building onto adjacent property.
   (D)   The accessory building is not located closer than ten feet (10') to a
main building.
   (E)   There is no architectural projection beyond the property line. (Ord.
2045, 7-6-1982)
10-7-6: FRONT YARD SETBACKS:
Front yard building setbacks shall be as designated in either of the
subsections below, whichever is greater: (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (A)   Arterials And Collectors: Setbacks from street centerline for
arterials and collectors are as follows: (Ord. 2662, 8-7-2000)
Street Limits Front Yard
              Setback
Street               Limits                               Front Yard
                                                          Setback
2700 East            3600 North to 4200 North             80 feet
2750 East            Entire length                        62 feet
2850 East            North College Road to Pole Line Road 62 feet
2875 East            4150 North to 4200 North             52 feet
3200 East            3600 to Falls Avenue                 93 feet
3200 East            Falls Avenue to end                  62 feet
3300 East            Entire length                        80 feet
3400 North           2600 East to Eastland Drive South    80 feet
3600 North           2700 East to 3200 East               93 feet
3600 North           3200 East to 3300 East               80 feet
4150 North           2700 East to Washington North        62 feet
4200 North           2700 East to 2850 East               62 feet
4th Avenue East      Blue Lakes Boulevard to 3200 East    52 feet
4th Avenue           All townsite except CB zone          62 feet
East, North
4th Avenue West      Blake to Washington                  52 feet
6th Avenue           All townsite except CB zone          62 feet
East, North
6th Avenue West      Washington to Shoshone               52 feet
9th Avenue East      Blue Lakes Boulevard to 3200 East    52 feet
9th Avenue East      Townsite                             62 feet
Addison Avenue       Washington to Eastland               80 feet
Addison Avenue East  Eastland to 3300 East                93 feet
Addison Avenue West  2700 East to Washington              93 feet
Blake Street         4th Avenue West to Filer Avenue      62 feet
Blue Lakes Boulevard Kimberly Road to Pole Line Road      80 feet
Blue Lakes Boulevard Pole Line Road to Perrine Bridge     93 feet
North
Blue Lakes Boulevard 3300 North to Kimberly Road          93 feet
South
Bridgeview Boulevard Blue Lakes Boulevard North to Pole   52 feet
                     Line Road East
Bridgeview Boulevard Pole Line Road East to Locust Street 62 feet
                     North
Candleridge Drive    Entire length                        62 feet
Canyon Rim Road      2850 East to 4150 North              52 feet
Carriage Lane        Entire length                        62 feet
Caswell Avenue       Entire length                        52 feet
Cheney Drive         Entire length                        62 feet
Clearwater Way       Entire length                        52 feet
Eastland Drive North 3600 North to Falls Avenue           80 feet
Eastland Drive North Falls Avenue to Pole Line Road       93 feet
El Camino Avenue     Entire length                        52 feet
Eldridge Avenue      Entire length                        62 feet
Elizabeth Boulevard  Locust Street to 3300 East           62 feet
Falls Avenue         Grandview to Eastland                80 feet
Falls Avenue East    3200 East to 3300 East               80 feet
Falls Avenue East    Eastland to 3200 East                93 feet
Falls Avenue West    2700 East to Grandview               62 feet
Federation Road      Entire length                        62 feet
Filer Avenue         Entire length                        62 feet
Fillmore Street      Addison Avenue to Caswell Avenue     52 feet
Fillmore Street      Caswell Avenue to Blue Lakes         62 feet
                     Boulevard North
Grandview            3500 North to 4200 North             80 feet
(2800 East)
Harrison Street      Entire length                        62 feet
Heyburn Avenue       Entire length                        52 feet
Highland Avenue      Entire length                        62 feet
Hillcrest Road/      Entire length                        62 feet
Pheasant Road
Kimberly Road        Blue Lakes Boulevard to Eastland     80 feet
Kimberly Road        Eastland to 3300 East                93 feet
Locust Street        Entire length                        62 feet
Madrona Street       Entire length                        62 feet
Martin Street        Entire length                        62 feet
Maurice Street       Entire length                        52 feet
Meadowview Lane      Entire length                        62 feet
Minidoka Avenue      2nd Avenue South to Blue Lakes       62 feet
                     Boulevard
Minidoka Avenue      Shoshone Street to 2nd Avenue South  52 feet
Monroe Street        Entire length                        52 feet
Mountain View Drive  Entire length                        52 feet
North College Road   Entire length                        62 feet
Orchard Drive        2700 East to 3300 East               80 feet
Osterloh Avenue      Entire length                        52 feet
Park Avenue          Entire length                        80 feet
Pheasant Road        Entire length                        62 feet
Pole Line Road       2700 East to Eastland                93 feet
(4100 North)
Ridgeway Drive       Entire length                        52 feet
Rose Street          North College Road to 4200 North     62 feet
Rose Street          South Park Avenue West to            62 feet
                     Victory Avenue
South Park           2700 East to Washington              80 feet
Avenue West
Southwood Avenue     Entire length                        52 feet
Sparks Street        Entire length                        62 feet
Stadium Boulevard    Entire length                        52 feet
Sunrise Boulevard    Entire length                        52 feet
Victory Avenue       Entire length                        62 feet
Washington Street
and Washington       6th Avenue West to 4150 North        80 feet
Street North
Washington Street    3600 North to South Park             93 feet
South                Avenue West
Washington Street    Airport to 3600 North                80 feet
South
Welch Lane           Entire length                        62 feet
Wendell Street       Entire length                        62 feet
 
(Ord. 2662, 8-7-2000; amd. Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; Ord.
3061, 1-27-2014)
   (B)   Area Of Impact: All front yard setbacks on roads, streets and highways
designated on the current Twin Falls highway district "highway designation map"
shall conform to the setbacks required by that map. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (C)   Access Restricted Developments: Residential developments which have a
front, rear, or side yard adjacent to an arterial or collector street, and
having no access to that street may have the above listed setback reduced from
ninety three feet (93') to eighty three feet (83') or from eighty feet (80') to
sixty five feet (65'), for arterial streets, and from sixty two feet (62') to
fifty two feet (52'), for collector streets. Any residential development with a
reduced setback, as provided herein, shall be prohibited direct access to the
arterial or collector street. (Ord. 2686, 4-2-2001)
10-7-7: SWIMMING POOLS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2288, 10-2-1989)
10-7-8: SEPARATE OWNERSHIP OF UNITS IN DUPLEXES:
Duplexes may have the separate units sold to different owners under the
following procedure: (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
   (A)   An application for duplex split to be made with the administrator on a
form provided by the administrator.
The administrator shall allow a duplex split upon receiving evidence that the
following conditions have been met:
      1.   Each unit shall have a lot area not less than the following:
R1-VAR: The minimum lot area shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
R2: The minimum lot area shall be five thousand five hundred (5,500) square
feet.
R4: The minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet.
R6: The minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet. (Ord.
2550, 6-2-1997)
      2.   Firewalls as required by the building code and the city inspection
department have been provided between the units.
      3.   Separate sewer and water facilities are provided to each unit.
      4.   Two (2) off street parking spaces are provided for each unit. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
10-7-9: FILLING OF CANYONS:
Filling of canyons is prohibited and a special use permit shall be required for
filling within one hundred feet (100') of canyon rims. Minor filling may be
allowed by the administrator for cosmetic purposes. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-7-10: SPECIAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES FRONTING THE COLLEGE
OF SOUTHERN IDAHO (CSI) PROPERTY:
In addition to the other landscaping requirements of this title, the following
landscaping shall be provided on all properties fronting CSI property on
Washington Street North, North College Road, and Falls Avenue except properties
containing single and duplex household dwellings:
A berm of at least three feet (3') in height and twelve feet (12') in width
shall be provided immediately behind the sidewalk or future sidewalk. The berm
shall be planted in grass with a minimum of one conifer tree per three hundred
(300) square feet of berm area and a minimum of one deciduous shrub per three
hundred (300) square feet. Trees and shrubs may be grouped, but there shall be
no open space greater than fifty feet (50') between tree and shrub groupings.
(Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
10-7-11: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES:
   (A)   Intent And Purpose: In the development and adoption of this section,
it is recognized that there are some adult business uses which, due to their
very nature, have serious, objectionable, operational characteristics,
particularly when located in close proximity to residential neighborhoods,
thereby having a deleterious impact upon property values and the quality of
life in such surrounding areas. It has been acknowledged by communities across
the nation that state and local governmental entities have a special concern in
regulating the operation of such businesses under their jurisdiction to ensure
that these adverse secondary effects will not contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of adjacent neighborhoods nor endanger the well being of the youth
in their communities. The special regulations deemed necessary to control the
undesirable externalities arising from these enterprises are set forth below.
The primary purpose of these controls and regulations is to preserve the
integrity and character of residential neighborhoods, to deter the spread of
urban blight and to protect minors from the objectionable, operational
characteristics of these adult uses by restricting their close proximity to
churches, parks, schools, restaurants, movie theaters and residential areas.
This section is not intended and should not be construed to create a
contemporary community standard nor to allow the sale, loan, distribution,
dissemination, presentation or exhibition of material or live conduct which is
obscene or which is in violation of any other law, nor to permit the creation
or maintenance of any moral nuisance. (Ord. 2238, 6-20-1988)
   (B)   Definitions:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a preponderance of its stock in
trade or its dollar volume in trade, books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, theater, restaurant or similar establishment
which frequently features live performances by topless and/or bottomless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers,
where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas and/or
which regularly feature films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER: An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant
facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films,
theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of
consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats in which a
preponderance of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: An adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater,
adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret,
adult drive-in theater, adult live entertainment arcade or adult service
establishment.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ARCADE: Any building or structure which contains or is
used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is
charged a fee to view from an enclosed or screened area or both a series of
live dance routines, strip performances or other gyrational choreography, which
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of more
than five (5) but less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
in which a preponderance of the total presentation time is devoted to the
showing of materials which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or related to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons, upon
request, with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons used for presenting films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions in which a
preponderance of the total presentation time is devoted to showing of materials
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any building, premises, or structure or other
facility, or any part thereof, under common ownership or control which provides
a preponderance of services involving specified sexual activities or display of
specified anatomical areas.
ENLARGEMENT: An increase in the size of the building, structure or premises in
which the adult entertainment business is conducted by either construction or
use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof whether located on the same
or an adjacent lot or parcel of land.
ESTABLISHING AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Shall mean and include any of the
following:
      1.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
      2.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment business, to any of the adult entertainment businesses defined
herein;
      3.   The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined
herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or
      4.   The relocation of any such business.
RECONSTRUCTION: The rebuilding or restoration of any nonconforming adult use
which was damaged or partially destroyed by an exercise of the power of eminent
domain, or by fire, flood, wind, explosion or other calamity or act of God if
the damage or destruction exceeds two-thirds (2/3) of the value of the
structure or the facilities affected.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT: SUI, R1-8,000, R2, R4, R6 and AG zoning districts,
or any subdistricts or overlays thereof.
RESUMPTION: The reuse or reoccupation of a nonconforming adult use which has
been discontinued for a period of six (6) or more consecutive months.
SERVICES INVOLVING SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES OR DISPLAY OF SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in the definition of "adult service establishment"
herein, shall mean and include any combination of two (2) or more of the
following activities:
      1.   The sale or display of books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      2.   The presentation of films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons;
      3.   The operation of coin or slug operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing devices to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      4.   Live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go
dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      5.   The operation of a massage school, massage parlor, massage therapy
clinic, bathhouse, escort service, body painting studio or nude modeling
studio.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Shall mean and include any of the following:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae; or
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Shall mean and include any of the following:
      1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
      3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts;
      4.   Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;
      5.   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain;
      6.   Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a
human being; or
      7.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation
as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1 through 6
of this definition.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change which would prolong the life of the
supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders, except such changes as are ordered. (Ord. 2238, 6-20-1988;
amd. Ord. 2275, 7-17-1989; Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
   (C)   Prohibitions: The establishment, enlargement, reconstruction,
resumption or structural alteration of any adult entertainment business shall
be prohibited if such business is within five hundred feet (500') of any other
such business, within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of any existing
church, school, restaurant or movie theater or within five hundred feet (500')
of any existing open space zoning district or residential zoning district
within the city or the area of city impact. (Ord. 2238, 6-20-1988)
Provided, further, that no adult entertainment business shall be established,
enlarged, reconstructed, resumed or structurally altered unless the site or
proposed site is located in a C1 (commercial highway), M1 (light
manufacturing), or M2 (heavy manufacturing) zoning district. (Ord. 2238, 6-20-
1988; amd. Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (D)   Measurement Of Distances: The distance between one adult entertainment
business and another adult entertainment business shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior structural wall of each such business. The distance between an
adult entertainment business and any church, school, restaurant, movie theater,
open space or residential zoning district shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
structural wall to the adult entertainment business to the nearest property
line of the church, school, restaurant, movie theater, open space or
residential zoning district.
   (E)   Exterior Display:
      1.   Visibility: No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted
in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas by display, decorations, sign, show window or other opening from any
public way.
      2.   Number Of Signs: Not more than one business wall sign shall be
permitted for an adult entertainment business and said sign shall be permitted
only on the front facade. Such requirements shall include direct access to a
public street from that property and a full amount of required parking on the
site with the use. All other sign structures shall be prohibited.
      3.   Sign Surface Area: The sign surface area of a business wall sign for
an adult entertainment business shall not exceed an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of the front building facade of the first floor elevation (first
10 feet) of the premises occupied by the adult entertainment business, or
thirty two (32) square feet, whichever is the lesser.
      4.   Lighting: Signs may be illuminated, provided, however, such
illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon, exterior lighting (e.g., spot
or flood lights), or any flashing or animated lights (either interior to the
sign, on the exterior of the sign, or as a border to the sign).
   (F)   Other Laws: This section shall not be construed:
      1.   To establish a contemporary community standard as a defense to the
violation of any other law;
      2.   To allow the sale, loan, distribution, dissemination, presentation
or exhibition of material or live conduct which is obscene or which is in
violation of any other law; or
      3.   To permit the creation or maintenance of any moral nuisance.
   (G)   Severability: If any provision or clause of this section or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect other ordinance provisions or clauses or
applications thereof which can be implemented without the unconstitutional or
invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end the provisions and
clauses of this section are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2238, 6-20-1988)
10-7-12: SPECIAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR GATEWAY ARTERIALS:
   (A)   Gateway Arterials: Gateway arterials include the following streets:
Addison Avenue, Addison Avenue East, Addison Avenue West, Blue Lakes Boulevard,
Blue Lakes Boulevard North, Blue Lakes Boulevard South, Kimberly Road,
Washington Street from Addison Avenue to Second Avenue West, Washington Street
North, Washington Street South, Pole Line Road from Rock Creek Canyon to
Eastland Drive North, and Eastland Drive from Pole Line Road East to Kimberly
Road. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (B)   Landscaping Requirements: In addition to, and as part of, the
landscaping requirements specified elsewhere in this title, the following
landscaping shall be provided, retained and maintained on all properties in
commercial or industrial zoning districts and fronting gateway arterials: a
landscaped strip at least ten feet (10') in width shall be provided immediately
behind the sidewalk or future sidewalk when existing buildings are being
remodeled, and thirty feet (30') when vacant land or cleared land is being
developed, with the following exception: Washington Street North from Addison
Avenue to Caswell Avenue will be required to provide a landscaped strip at
least ten feet (10') in width immediately behind the sidewalk or future
sidewalk when an existing building is being remodeled or vacant land or cleared
land is being developed. Any continuous landscaped strip exceeding forty feet
(40') in length shall contain a twelve inch (12") minimum height undulating
berm. Each separate section of the landscaping strip shall contain trees or
shrubs. The plant types in each portion of the landscaping strip shall be as
set forth in subsection
10-11-2(A) of this title, except that evergreen trees shall not be required.
Each landscaped strip shall be kept clean and free of noxious and other weeds.
(Ord. 2978, 10-26-2009)
   (C)   Hardship: In the case of the expansion of existing commercial
developments, these requirements may be modified by the commission if it can be
shown by the developer that strict compliance with these requirements will
result in the removal of existing and proposed parking spaces below eighty five
percent (85%) of the number of spaces required to serve the existing and
proposed development. (Ord. 2323, 10-15-1990)
10-7-13: VEHICLE STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-7, 4-18-2016)
10-7-14: OUTSIDE STORAGE AND DISPLAY:
No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed between any street and
the primary business building or outside of screened areas except in the M2
zoning district and except for the display of vehicles, motor homes, travel
trailers, recreational vehicles, pickup shells and large implements where
offered for sale or rent and except for the seasonal display of living plants
and materials such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, bedding plants, etc. The term
"primary business building" shall include any paved pedestrian area adjoining
the building and parallel to any portion of the building facing the street. All
refuse areas shall also be visibly screened from adjacent streets and
properties.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the above outside display restriction, a retail
business may apply for a "parking lot sale" permit for the temporary outside
display of retail merchandise. Parking lot sale permits are subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Up to eight (8) temporary parking lot sale permits shall be allowed
on a lot or parcel in a calendar year, with not more than two (2) per quarter.
      2.   A parking lot sale permit shall be issued for not more than five (5)
consecutive days. Parking lot sale permits issued in different calendar year
quarters shall have a minimum of seven (7) days between permits.
      3.   Retail merchandise may only be temporarily displayed on private real
property and only on the same lot, parcel or shared parking as the primary
business building to which the parking lot sale permit has been issued.
      4.   Retail merchandise shall not be temporarily displayed within
required landscape areas or in any other area that creates a site obstruction
or other traffic obstruction or hazard.
      5.   Retail businesses that share a lot, parcel or parking with other
businesses may apply for a parking lot sale permit if a parking lot sale site
plan has been prepared by the applicant and the site plan has been approved by
an authorized representative of each business sharing the same lot, parcel, or
parking. Approval signatures shall be provided to the planning department with
the permit application along with name and contact information for the
authorized representatives who provided the approval.
   (B)   Parking lot sale permit applications shall be submitted to the
planning department not less than two (2) weeks prior to the planned parking
lot sale. The administrator may approve parking lot sale permit requests that
comply with the standards contained herein. (Ord. 3113, 1-25-2016)
10-7-15: PLACEMENT OF SATELLITE DISHES:
No satellite dish over eighteen inches (18") in diameter shall be placed in the
front yard setback nor in front of any existing building which exceeds the
front yard setback in any zoning district of the city or its area of impact.
(Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
10-7-16: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS:
Motor homes, camp trailers, campers and other similar recreational vehicles may
be stored, maintained, loaded or unloaded (but not occupied otherwise or
connected to sewer, water or cable services, except in approved RV parks) on
residential lots. The zoning administrator may approve a temporary RV park (not
to exceed 6 months) for on site construction on nonresidential lots for a
minimum of three (3) and a maximum of fifteen (15) RVs, provided that all RVs
are connected to centralized sewer and water services. (Ord. 2800, 8-9-2004)
10-7-17: WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
   (A)   Regulations:
      1.   Use: The placement, use or modification of any wireless
communication facility is subject to the provisions of this section.
               a.   Residential zones: New freestanding towers are prohibited.
Wireless communication facilities attached to utility poles, existing towers or
facades attached to nonresidential buildings are permitted subject to the
provisions of this section.
               b.   Nonresidential zones: Lattice towers are prohibited. Other
wireless communication facilities are permitted subject to the provisions of
this section.
      2.   Preferred Locations And Facility Types:
               a.   Site Selection Criteria: A master development plan is to be
created, prior to any wireless communication facility permit request, based
upon engineering constraints and desired areas of service. Wireless
communication facilities shall be located on a master development plan in the
following priority order:
            (1)   Collocation on an existing tower, structure or building. The
applicant shall have the burden of proving that there are no feasible existing
structures upon which to locate as described in this section.
            (2)   Publicly owned property.
            (3)   Other nonresidential buildings or vacant nonresidentially
zoned land.
               b.   Priority Order: Facility types are preferred in the
following priority order:
            (1)   Roof mounted.
            (2)   Facade mounted.
            (3)   Utility pole mounted.
            (4)   Freestanding.
      3.   Collocation: Collocation is considered to be a visually unobtrusive
installation method because the equipment is attached to an existing structure.
Collocation of a wireless communication facility shall require only approval of
the administrator.
      4.   New Freestanding Towers: No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed wireless communication facility. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate the unavailability of other towers or structures shall address all
of the following:
               a.   An RF engineering analysis of all utility poles, regardless
of height, and of all towers or structures thirty five feet (35') in height or
higher, within a one thousand three hundred twenty foot (1,320') radius of the
proposed wireless communication facility site.
               b.   The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for collocation are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
      5.   Prohibitions: The following are prohibited or restricted:
               a.   Lattice towers are prohibited.
               b.   Interference with city and public safety communication
systems and/or area television or radio broadcast is prohibited.
               c.   Freestanding towers within residentially zoned areas are
prohibited.
               d.   Diagonal bracing is permitted only to anchor the antenna to
an existing building to which the antenna is attached.
   (B)   Application Procedure: The administrator shall be the granting
authority for wireless communication facility collocating on existing
structures or utility poles in accordance with the standards set forth below.
All other wireless communications facilities shall require a special use permit
from the planning and zoning commission. An application for a special use
permit for a wireless communication facility shall contain the information set
forth below, in addition to the standard application information required for
all special use permits:
      1.   A site plan including location, type and height of the proposed
wireless communication facility with setbacks, property lines, adjacent land
uses, structures and zoning.
      2.   Elevation drawings or before and after photographs/drawings
simulating and specifying the location and height of the antennas, support
structures, equipment enclosures and other accessory uses.
      3.   The master development plan showing the location of all existing and
proposed wireless communication facility sites of the applicant within the city
and its area of impact, including the service area of each wireless
communication facility.
      4.   Evidence demonstrating the unavailability of collocation, as set
forth above.
      5.   Certification from the applicant's engineer that collocation of
additional antennas for at least one additional provider is possible on the
proposed pole, and a signed and notarized statement by the applicant agreeing
to accommodate collocation of additional antennas on the tower and that the
applicant agrees to enter into leases with other providers allowing use of the
tower at a monthly lease rate not to exceed one-half (1/2) the capital cost of
the tower, excluding the equipment to be used exclusively by the applicant,
paid over fifteen (15) years at (7 percent interest) an interest rate not to
exceed the Dow Jones twenty (20) year bond index, as published by the Wall
Street Journal thirty (30) days prior to the lease date, plus one-half (1/2)
the land lease. The maximum monthly lease rate shall be included in the
application.
      6.   A lease agreement with the landholder that allows other providers to
locate equipment on the subject property, and provides that if the provider
fails to remove the wireless communication facility and equipment within one
hundred eighty (180) days of its discontinued use, the responsibility for
removal shall belong to the landholder.
   (C)   Standards:
      1.   Roof Mounted:
               a.   Height: Roof-mounted wireless communications facilities may
extend above the highest portion of the roof, including parapet walls, by a
distance equal to its distance to the nearest exterior wall. The maximum height
for any roof-mounted facility, including the building, shall be one hundred
feet (100'). (Ord. 2700, 7-16-2001)
               b.   Setback: Roof-mounted wireless communications facilities
shall be set back from the edge of the building the height of the antenna and
support system.
               c.   Lighting: Lighting of antennas or support structures shall
be prohibited except as required by the FAA.
      2.   Facade Mounted:
               a.   Height: Facade-mounted wireless communications facilities
may not exceed five feet (5') above the facade to which it is attached.
               b.   Setback: Maximum projection of eighteen inches (18"), but
may not encroach into the public right of way.
               c.   Attachment: The antenna and supporting electrical and
mechanical equipment must be the same color as the supporting structure so as
to make the antenna and related equipment as unobtrusive as possible.
      3.   Utility Pole Mounted:
               a.   Height: Maximum height of one hundred thirty three percent
(133%) of the height of the original utility pole or an additional fifteen feet
(15'), whichever is greater.
               b.   Lighting: Lighting of antennas or support structures shall
be prohibited except as required by the FAA.
               c.   Attachment: The antenna shall be either fully concealed
within the utility pole or face mounted (not to exceed 18 inches from the face
of the pole). Standoffs and amps platforms are prohibited.
               d.   Pole Replacement: Existing utility poles may be replaced
with a new utility pole of the same height, dimensions and appearance as the
existing utility pole.
               e.   Equipment Enclosures: Aboveground equipment enclosures on
utility poles in the right of way shall not exceed twelve (12) cubic feet in
volume and shall be constructed so as to minimize their visual impact.
Aboveground equipment enclosures off the right of way shall meet building line
setbacks in the underlying district, and shall be finished to blend in with the
surrounding area. If a security fence is installed, landscaping and screening
shall be installed to visually screen the aboveground equipment enclosure.
Landscaping and screening shall consist of a combination of trees, foliage and
shrubs of dense spacing in the form of either: 1) a screening wall or fence
surrounded by a five foot (5') wide landscape planter; or 2) a ten foot (10')
wide landscape planter without a screening wall or fence. All landscaping shall
be watered, fertilized and maintained as necessary. All dead plantings shall be
replaced within thirty (30) days.
               f.   Relocation Of Utilities: In the event the utilities located
on a utility pole are relocated underground, the wireless communication
facility shall be relocated to another location pursuant to the requirements of
this section.
      4.   Freestanding:
               a.   Height: Freestanding towers shall not exceed one hundred
feet (100') in height as measured from the ground.
               b.   Setback: Setbacks shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Towers shall
be set back from all residential and residentially zoned property one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the tower height as measured from ground level.
               c.   Color: Freestanding towers shall be a neutral color,
simulate a standard utility pole, or otherwise be camouflaged or disguised so
as to make the tower as unobtrusive as possible.
               d.   Attachment: The antenna shall be either fully concealed
within the tower or face mounted (not to exceed 18 inches from the face of the
tower). Standoffs and amps platforms are prohibited.
               e.   Landscaping: Landscaping and screening shall be installed
to visually screen the support structure and aboveground equipment enclosures.
Landscaping and screening shall consist of a combination of trees, foliage and
shrubs of dense spacing in the form of either: 1) a screening wall or fence
surrounded by a five foot (5') wide landscape planter; or 2) a ten foot (10')
wide landscape planter without a screening wall or fence. All landscaping shall
be watered, fertilized and maintained as necessary. All dead plantings shall be
replaced within thirty (30) days.
               f.   Lighting: Lighting of antennas or support structures shall
be prohibited except as required by the FAA.
               g.   Maintenance: All facilities and landscaping shall be
properly maintained. (Ord. 2678, 1-16-2001)
   (D)   Modification: Modification to any existing wireless communication
facility, which includes construction involving the replacement of support
structure apparatus, antennas or any exterior alteration, shall comply with all
the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Abandonment: Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier
shall physically remove the wireless communication facility within ninety (90)
days of the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use, and restore the site
to its original condition. The carrier shall provide to the city, prior to
issuance of a permit, a performance bond in the amount of twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00) or a bond equal to a written estimate from a qualified
tower removal contractor to guarantee that the facility will be removed when no
longer in use. The city shall be named as an obligee in the bond and must
approve the bonding company. (Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
10-7-18: COMMERCIAL PAINTING:
Outside commercial painting is prohibited in all zoning districts. Inside
commercial painting is permitted only by special use permit. The painting of
interior and exterior of buildings and fixtures to real estate shall be
excluded from these regulations. (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
10-7-19: CITY SERVICES:
   (A)   Intent And Purpose: It is recognized that property development within
all zoning districts necessarily requires supporting infrastructure for the
provision of city services, including, but not limited to, streets, utility
services, emergency services, recreational facilities, etc. It is also
recognized that many city owned and/or operated facilities existed without
zoning approval, and were considered nonconforming under the zoning ordinance.
The purpose of this section is to declare that municipal services are permitted
uses in all zoning districts, but to require notice, public hearing, and city
council approval before the establishment of new municipal services uses.
   (B)   Permitted Uses: All uses on real property owned and/or operated by the
city of Twin Falls are permitted uses. (Ord. 2985, 5-3-2010)
   (C)   Approval Of New Uses By City Council: Any proposed new use to be
established on real property owned and/or operated by the city of Twin Falls,
not already permitted by other provisions of this zoning ordinance or already
approved as required utility improvements in new developments, must be approved
by the city council after a public hearing at which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice for public hearings shall be provided
as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-7-20: PUBLIC HEARINGS NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Public notice shall be provided for land use actions requiring a public
hearing. Public notice shall comply with the following requirements. Public
hearings for appeals to the administrator's interpretation and administration
of this title, zoning title amendments not relating to a specific property, and
comprehensive plan amendments not relating to a specific property are not
required to provide mail and site posting notice.
   (A)   Mail: Mail notice shall be provided as follows when required:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal shall be provided by
mail to the following:
               a.   Property owners, or purchasers of record, within the land
being considered,
               b.   Property owners, or purchasers of record, within five
hundred feet (500') of the external boundaries of the land being considered,
            (1)   For special use permit, zoning map amendment, and future land
use map amendment requests involving the R6, MHO-1, and nonresidential
districts, except M1, M2, and OS, notices shall be mailed to property owners,
or purchasers of record, within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the external
boundaries of the land being considered.
            (2)   For special use permit, zoning map amendment, and future land
use map amendment requests involving the M1 and M2 districts, notices shall be
mailed to property owners, or purchasers of record, within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the external boundaries of the land being considered.
               c.   Any additional property owners, or purchasers of record,
that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the administrator,
and
               d.   All political subdivisions providing services within the
planning jurisdiction, including the city, school districts, and the Magic
Valley regional airport manager.
      2.   When a public hearing is to be conducted by the city council for a
proposal that the planning and zoning commission has made a recommendation on,
the notice for that hearing shall include the commission's recommendation in
addition to the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal.
      3.   The applicant requesting the proposed change shall mail the notices
to the required property owners. Upon mailing, the applicant shall sign an
affidavit stating that he has notified in writing the required property owners
as to his purpose of application, time and place of hearing, residents served,
and date of service. A copy of the notification shall be attached to the
affidavit and returned to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the
hearing.
   (B)   Site Posting: Notice shall be posted on site as follows when required:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal shall be posted on the
premises.
      2.   The applicant requesting the proposed change shall post the required
notice on the premises as follows:
               a.   Notice shall be provided by not less than one sign located
on the subject property adjacent to each street frontage of the property. In
the event that the subject property is not adjacent to a public street, signs
may be placed within the nearest public street right of way with prior approval
from the administrator and the owner of the right of way.
               b.   Signs shall be placed on the property so as to remain
clearly visible from adjacent streets. In the event that visibility of signs
located on the property is obstructed, signs may be placed within the adjacent
street right of way with prior approval from the administrator and the owner of
the right of way.
               c.   If a property contains three hundred (300) or more feet of
street frontage on a single street, one sign shall be placed on the property
for each three hundred feet (300'), or portion thereof, of the street frontage.
               d.   Additional notice signs may be required as determined by
the administrator.
               e.   Notice signs shall be made from metal, plywood, or an
equivalent hard surface and shall be mounted on two (2) posts in a manner that
is perpendicular to the street along which the sign posted.
               f.   Notice signs shall be a minimum of two feet (2') tall by
three feet (3') wide and mounted so the bottom of the sign is at least two feet
(2') above the ground. Notice signs that are located along a city designated
arterial street or a state highway shall be a minimum of four feet (4') tall
and four feet (4') wide and mounted so the bottom of the sign is at least three
feet (3') above the ground.
               g.   Notice signs shall be white in color. At the top of the
sign, notice signs shall include each of the following with a minimum size of
six inch (6") black letters:
            (1)   The words, "Notice of Public Meeting",
            (2)   The words, "for more information call", and then the phone
number for the city's planning and zoning department, and
            (3)   The official city logo.
               h.   Notice signs shall include a brochure holder mounted to the
sign. The applicant requesting the proposed change shall ensure that, until
such time as the notice sign is removed, the brochure holder contains handouts
providing notice of the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the
proposal. When a public hearing is to be conducted by the city council for a
proposal that the planning and zoning commission has made a recommendation on,
the notice for that hearing shall include the commission's recommendation in
addition to the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal.
               i.   The applicant requesting the proposed change shall remove
the posted notice sign(s) from the property not more than three (3) days after
the conclusion of the final public hearing for the proposed action.
   (C)   Newspaper: Newspaper notice shall be provided as follows when
required:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal shall be published in
the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction
of the city.
      2.   When a public hearing is to be conducted by the city council for a
proposal that the planning and zoning commission has made a recommendation on,
the notice for that hearing shall include the commission's recommendation in
addition to the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal.
      3.   The administrator shall cause the newspaper notice to be prepared
and published.
   (D)   Press Release: A press release shall be provided as follows when
required:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal shall be made available
as a press release to news media outlets serving the jurisdiction, including
newspapers, radio, and television stations.
      2.   When a public hearing is to be conducted by the city council for a
proposal that the planning and zoning commission has made a recommendation on,
the notice for that hearing shall include the commission's recommendation in
addition to the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal.
      3.   The administrator shall cause the press release to be prepared and
made available to news media outlets. The city cannot guarantee that media
outlets will broadcast the press release.
   (E)   City Website: Notice shall be provided on the city website as follows
when required:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal shall be posted on the
city website, www.tfid.org.
      2.   When a public hearing is to be conducted by the city council for a
proposal that the planning and zoning commission has made a recommendation on,
the notice for that hearing shall include the commission's recommendation in
addition to the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposal.
      3.   The administrator shall cause the notice to be posted on the city
website. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-7-21: SPORT SHOOTING RANGE - INDOOR:
The following shall be provided when applying for a special use permit for a
sport shooting range - indoor:
   (A)   Site Location: A sport shooting range shall be located: not less than
five hundred (500') lineal feet from any property in an existing residential
district, with the exception of parks, open space, stormwater management areas,
or similar lands reserved for uses that do not include dwellings.
   (B)   Indoor Range Design: Indoor sport shooting ranges must be designed so
projectiles cannot penetrate walls, floor or ceiling, and ricochets or back
splatter cannot harm range users. Considerations should be made for cleaning of
all surfaces and handling of hazardous wastes.
   (C)   Staffing: Sport shooting range staff must always be present on the
subject property when the shooting range is in use.
   (D)   Shooting Range Operation Plan: Each sport shooting range shall provide
an operation plan. A copy of the operation plan shall be filed with an
application for a special use permit. The operational plan shall include:
      1.   Site plan;
      2.   Building plan and elevations;
      3.   Safety plan;
      4.   Outside security plan;
      5.   Copy of liability insurance;
      6.   Other plans and/or information, as may be reasonably requested by
staff to verify compliance with this section or unique conditions that apply to
the site.
   (E)   The application shall include a sound study prepared by a licensed
sound engineer that demonstrates how the proposed use will address the impact
of noise on adjoining uses. Any adverse effects shall be mitigated through
setbacks, buffers, sound mitigation and/or hours of operation.
   (F)   Alcohol Sales Prohibited: Sport shooting ranges shall not sell or
dispense alcoholic beverages, nor shall they be in a building which contains a
business that sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages are
not allowed on the premises of the sport shooting range at any time.
   (G)   Receive permission from the city for the ability to discharge firearms
within city limits in accordance with city code section
6-2-1-D. (Ord. 2021-010, 5-3-2021)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Integration Of Recitals
10-8-2: Geographic Area Of City Impact
10-8-3: Governing Plan And Ordinance
10-8-4: Administration
10-8-5: Enforcement
10-8-6: Renegotiation
10-8-1: INTEGRATION OF RECITALS:
The recitals set forth in ordinance 2279 on file in the office of the city
clerk are incorporated in this chapter and by this reference made a part
hereof. (Ord. 2793, 7-19-2004)
10-8-2: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
The agreed upon area of city impact is as shown on the city of Twin Falls,
Idaho, area of impact and zoning districts map. (Ord. 2793, 7-19-2004)
10-8-3: GOVERNING PLAN AND ORDINANCE:
   (A)   The city of Twin Falls comprehensive plan and Twin Falls, Idaho,
revised area of impact and comprehensive plan land use map, together with the
city of Twin Falls zoning and subdivision regulations contained in this title,
and the city of Twin Falls, Idaho, area of impact and zoning districts map, are
hereby adopted by reference by the county of Twin Falls to be in full force and
effect in the area of city impact.
   (B)   Within the area of city impact, no provision of this chapter shall
apply to any parcel of land twenty (20) acres or larger used solely for
agricultural purposes. Within the area of city impact this chapter shall apply
to any parcel of land proposed to be used for nonagricultural purposes. (Ord.
2793, 7-19-2004)
10-8-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   The administration of the codes applicable to the City of Twin Falls
Area of Impact shall be as appointed and authorized by the Board of
Commissioners for Twin Falls County.
   (B)   Persons living within the City of Twin Falls Area of Impact shall be
entitled to representation on the City Planning and Zoning Commission. Such
representation shall as nearly as possible reflect the proportion of population
living within the city as opposed to the population living within the City of
Twin Falls Area of Impact.
(Ord. 2020-006, 3-16-2020)
10-8-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Twin Falls County and its employees and agents shall enforce compliance with
the provisions of this chapter within the City of Twin Falls Area of Impact.
(Ord. 2020-006, 3-16-2020)
10-8-6: RENEGOTIATION:
The area of city impact may be reviewed and renegotiated at any time upon the
request of either party hereto. (Ord. 2793, 7-19-2004)
CHAPTER 9
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Applicability
10-9-3: Permit Required To Erect Or Install A Sign
10-9-4: General Sign Provisions
10-9-5: General Sign Specifications And Design
10-9-6: Inspection
10-9-7: Measurement Of Sign Area And Height
10-9-8: Allowable Signs That Require The Issuance Of A Sign Permit
10-9-9: Allowable Signs That Do Not Require The Issuance Of A Sign Permit
10-9-10: Prohibited Signs
10-9-11: Removal/Impoundment Of Prohibited Signs
10-9-12: Recovery Of Impounded Signs
10-9-13: Neglected And Abandoned Signs
10-9-14: Nonconforming Signs
10-9-15: Variances
10-9-16: Sign Coordination Plan
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
Consistent with the standards set forth in section
10-1-5 of this title, the intent of the standards set forth in this chapter are
as follows:
   (A)   To facilitate the design of signs that attract and invite rather than
demand the public's attention, and to curb the proliferation of signs.
   (B)   To facilitate the use of signs that enhance the visual environment of
the city.
   (C)   To promote the enhancement of business and residential properties and
neighborhoods by fostering the erection of signs complementary to the buildings
and uses to which they relate and which are harmonious with their surroundings.
   (D)   To protect the public interest and safety. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
The terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to signs located within
the city of Twin Falls and its area of impact. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED TO ERECT OR INSTALL A SIGN:
   (A)   Permit Required: No sign, other than those exceptions listed in
section
10-9-9 of this chapter, shall be erected, placed, attached, altered, displayed,
or secured to the ground, any building, or any structure, until a permit for
such sign has been issued by the building official. An application for a sign
permit may be obtained from the city's building inspections department. A
permit will be issued if a proposed sign conforms to all city ordinances. Upon
request by the city, a diagram shall be provided showing the location of all
signs on the property and/or adjacent properties. Incorrect information shall
be grounds for revocation of a permit.
      1.   Standard Sign Permit: The building official shall act on an
application for a sign permit within fifteen (15) business days of the city's
receipt of the application. The building official's action may include
approval, approval with conditions, denial, or a request for additional
information.
      2.   Temporary Sign Permit: The building official shall act on an
application for a temporary sign in one day. The building official's action may
include approval, approval with conditions, denial, or a request for additional
information.
   (B)   Permit Expiration: If the work authorized by a permit issued under
this chapter has not been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after
the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
   (C)   Fees: A sign permit fee, as established by resolution of the city
council, shall be paid upon issuance of a sign permit.
   (D)   Investigation: Whenever any work for which a permit is required by
this chapter has been commenced or completed without first obtaining a permit,
a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such
work. An investigation fee, as established by resolution of the city council
and in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit
is then subsequently issued. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-4: GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Interpretation And Administration: The building official shall be
responsible for interpreting and administering this chapter. Allegations of
errors in orders, decisions, or determinations of the building official in the
administration of this chapter shall be in accordance with subsection
10-17-1(G) of this title.
   (B)   License Required: No person shall install, erect or maintain any sign
that requires a building permit for electrical or structure unless such person
is a licensed contractor as required by the state of Idaho. Such person shall
provide a contractor registration number to the building official prior to
issuance of a sign permit.
   (C)   Notice: Notice required by this chapter shall be sufficient if it is
effected by personal delivery, registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, and/or depositing the notice with the United States mail.
   (D)   Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control signs conforming to the "Manual
Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" that are installed or approved by the city
shall not be required to conform to these regulations. No traffic control sign
shall be erected except those approved by the city.
   (E)   Imitation Traffic Control Signs: No sign shall be erected or displayed
in such a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused
with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, including, but not limited
to, signs making use of the words "stop", "go", "look", "slow", "danger", or
any other similar word, phrase, symbol or character or employ any red, yellow,
green, or other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to cause confusion or
otherwise interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (F)   Addresses: Each building shall display an address number which is not
less than four inches (4") in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half
inch (1/2") and plainly visible from the street. Address numbers shall be
allowed in addition to the signs allowed herein. The address number displayed
shall correspond to the number issued by the city. Address numbers shall
contrast with their background and shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters. These standards are intended to be minimum requirements. The fire
chief, or his designee, may require a building to exceed these requirements if
he determines that an address number meeting these minimum standards cannot be
safely identified from the street.
   (G)   No Off Premises Signage: All signs shall pertain only to the use or
products located on the same property as the sign, unless otherwise specified
herein.
   (H)   Signs Inside Buildings: Signs inside buildings which are not visible
from outside the building shall not be regulated by this chapter. Window signs
shall be regulated by this chapter.
   (I)   Mobile Signs: A sign on a vehicle/trailer with wheels, being displayed
with on or off premises messages cannot be used for the sole purpose of
advertising. It is the responsibility of the property owners to provide proof
that the vehicle has a legitimate business purpose other than acting as a sign.
   (J)   Nonconforming Uses: New signs on a nonconforming use may be allowed
providing they meet the signing requirements of the most restrictive zoning
district in which the use would be allowed. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-5: GENERAL SIGN SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN:
   (A)   Compliance With Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, National Electrical
Code, And Other Ordinances: All sign structures shall comply with the city's
zoning ordinance (this title), the building code, the national electrical code,
and other city ordinances, as they currently exist or may be amended. The sign
permit application must include a statement signed by the applicant which
states compliance with these requirements. If the standards as described herein
are more restrictive, then the provisions herein shall apply.
   (B)   Visibility: All signs shall observe all visibility requirements. Signs
shall not be placed within visibility triangles. No sign located within eight
feet (8') of the curb or future curb line shall have a sign face located
between a point three and one-half feet (31/2') and a point eight feet (8')
above the top of existing or future curb as determined by the city engineer.
   (C)   Signs Projecting Into Rights Of Way: No sign shall project beyond the
property line except those allowed herein to project over public ways. No sign
foundations shall encroach into public right of way. No sign shall project
closer than two feet (2') to a vertical line projected from the face of a curb,
or if no curb exists, the face of the future curb as determined by the city
engineer based on the master street plan. The owner of a sign allowed to
project over a public way shall relocate the sign immediately upon written
notification by the city of a modification to the public way.
   (D)   Signs Posted In Specified Areas: Unless otherwise allowed herein, no
person shall post or cause to be posted, attach or maintain any sign upon:
      1.   Any city owned property or right of way without the written
permission of the city manager;
      2.   Any utility easement. Should a property owner be able to demonstrate
to the building official and/or franchise utility company that there is no
other viable location for a sign other than a utility easement, a sign may be
located within the utility easement subject to written approval from the
building official and/or franchise utility company and subject to the providing
of a letter to the city releasing the city of any liability for repair or
replacement of a sign damaged by work occurring within the utility easement;
      3.   Any tree, light pole, or any utility pole or structure;
      4.   Any fence, railing or wall, unless otherwise specified herein; or
      5.   Any sidewalk within the right of way or a sidewalk easement, curb,
gutter, or street, except for house numbers or fire lane designation.
   (E)   Signs Attached To Fire Escapes: No sign shall be attached in any
manner to any fire escape or to the supporting members of any fire escape, nor
shall it be guyed to or supported by any part of the fire escape.
   (F)   Accumulation Of Water: All signs shall be constructed so as to prevent
the accumulation of water from rain or snowmelt within the sign.
   (G)   Location Near Utility Line Or Streetlight: No sign shall be erected
nearer than two feet (2') from any utility line or any streetlight standard.
   (H)   Signs Not To Block Or Interfere With Exits Or Windows And Pedestrian
And Vehicular Traffic: No sign shall be so erected as to block, partially
block, or interfere in any way with a required means or exit from any building
nor with any window. No sign shall block, interfere, or otherwise hinder
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public sidewalk, a public thoroughfare, a
fire lane easement, or a driveway required to access parking.
   (I)   Glass Signs Over Public Property: Signs constructed of glass or other
materials which may shatter upon impact are prohibited over public right of
way, unless adequately protected to prevent injury if broken.
   (J)   Identification Marking Required: All temporary signs shall have
attached, written, or painted in a weatherproof manner and in a conspicuous
place thereon, in letters not less than one inch (1") in height, the date of
expiration and the permit number of the sign.
   (K)   Multiple Signs On A Property Or Building: The permitting of a sign on
a property or building shall not preclude the permitting of other types of
signs on a property or building unless the signs are expressly prohibited
herein.
   (L)   Illuminated Signs: The light from an allowed illuminated sign shall be
arranged, directed and of such intensity that it does not create a hazard on
adjacent property, motor vehicles or approved traffic control devices.
   (M)   Lighting Elements: All lighting elements of exterior signs shall be a
minimum of nine feet (9') above the ground unless adequately protected to
prevent injury if broken.
   (N)   Structural Support: Signs that project from the face of a building and
that require structural support shall be designed such that the structural
support is integral to the overall architecture of the sign and building. (Ord.
2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-6: INSPECTION:
   (A)   The building official reserves the right to perform inspections of all
signs regulated by this chapter. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain
whether the same is unsafe or insecure, is dilapidated or deteriorated, and to
ensure that the sign has been constructed in accordance with the standards
contained herein, any other applicable ordinances, and the applicable permits.
The method and time of such inspections shall be determined by the building
official.
   (B)   If the building official determines that any sign is unsafe or
insecure, or is dilapidated or deteriorated, he shall give written notice to
repair, remove or replace (in accordance with this chapter) said sign to the
person or persons responsible for such sign. If the permit holder, owner of the
sign or owner of the property on which the sign is located fails to repair,
remove or replace the sign within thirty (30) days after such notice or to file
an allegation of error in accordance with this chapter, the building official
is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign. Nothing contained
herein shall prohibit the immediate removal, without notice, of any sign or
portion of a sign which is determined by the building official to be an
immediate threat or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. Any
expense incident to the removal of a sign pursuant to this subsection shall be
paid by the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the
sign is located. The removal of the sign or portion of the sign shall be
limited to the extent necessary to eliminate the threat to the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (C)   The city is authorized to file a lien against any property which is
not otherwise exempt to recover expenses incurred by the city for the removal
of a sign or portion of a sign from the property. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-7: MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT:
   (A)   The area of a sign shall be measured as follows:
      1.   For signs in the shape of a square, rectangle, circle, or similar
standard geometric shape, the area shall be calculated by using the standard
mathematical formula (height multiplied by width, 3.14 multiplied by radius
squared, etc.).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2012.gif]
      2.   For signs with an irregular shape, the area shall be measured by
enclosing the sign elements with intersecting parallel and perpendicular lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2014.gif]
      3.   The area of a spherical, cylindrical or other three-dimensional sign
shall be measured by calculating the area of a two-dimensional drawing of the
largest elevation of the sign. For example, if a sign is cylindrical like the
shape to the left, the area of sign is not the entire surface area (like a
label peeled off a can) but the size of the shape if it was flattened to two
(2) dimensions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2016.gif]
   (B)   Where a sign has two (2) faces, the area of the largest sign face
shall be used to determine the area of the sign provided the two (2) faces are
within sixty degrees (60°) of parallel. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces
that are greater than sixty degrees (60°) from parallel, the sign area shall
either be calculated as the sum of the area of each face, or the sign will
constitute two (2) signs (a V-sign). A V-sign is allowed at the corner of a
property with two (2) street frontages.
   (C)   The area of wall signs containing multiple elements shall be
calculated as follows:
      1.   Regardless of the spacing between letters, letters forming a word or
name shall be considered a single sign.
      2.   When two (2) or more separate items in a sign, such as a word and
logo, are separated horizontally or vertically by less than the width or height
of the largest item, the items shall be considered a single sign and the area
shall be determined by measuring the area enclosing the sign elements with
straight, intersecting lines.
The following sign elements are considered one sign:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2018.gif]
      3.   When two (2) or more separate items in a sign, such as a word and
logo, are separated horizontally or vertically by more than the width or height
of the largest item, the items shall be considered separate signs and the area
of each item shall be determined individually.
The following sign elements are considered two (2) signs:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2020.gif]
   (D)   The vertical support structures of signs shall not be included in
calculating the area of the sign, but shall be included in the measurement of
the height of the sign.
   (E)   The height of all signs shall be measured from the top edge of the
sign and/or support structure to the average finished grade of the ground below
the sign and/or support structure. If a sign is located on a mound, berm, or
other raised area for the sole purpose of increasing the height of the sign,
the height of the mound, berm, or other raised area shall be included in the
height of the sign. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-8: ALLOWABLE SIGNS THAT REQUIRE THE ISSUANCE OF A SIGN PERMIT:
The following signs are allowed, upon issuance of a sign permit, subject to the
following conditions and the specifications listed in section
10-9-5 of this chapter, unless otherwise specified.
   (A)   Awning Signs:
      1.   Definition: An "awning sign" is a sign which is applied to,
attached, or painted on an awning or other roof like cover, intended for
protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, projecting from a
wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door, or the like.
      2.   Awning Signs Permissible: Awning signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A permit shall not be issued to erect or place an
awning sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been approved
by the city for development of the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Awning signs are allowed in conjunction with a nonresidential
use.
            (2)   Awning signs may project into public right of way for up to
four feet (4'), but shall not project closer than two feet (2') to the face of
the curb along an adjacent public street or alley.
               c.   Manner: The maximum percentage of the awning allowed to be
covered with signage is fifty percent (50%) of the visible surface area.
   (B)   Banner Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "banner sign" is a temporary sign having characters,
letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other similar
material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being for background.
      2.   Banner Signs Permissible: Banner signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a banner
sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been approved by the
city for development of the property.
            (2)   Each banner sign must be permitted individually. Individual
banner signs can be placed for up to a maximum of six (6) weeks. Banner signs
will be allowed on a building or property up to three hundred (300) days in a
calendar year. Each suite within a retail development shall be considered a
building and shall therefore be allowed to erect a banner sign accordingly.
            (3)   New businesses shall be allowed to place a banner on their
building prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and up to six (6)
weeks after the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The banner(s)
shall not count against the allowances provided in subsection (B)2a(2) of this
section.
            (4)   Religious organizations that operate in a school or other
temporary facility may erect a banner during times of worship provided the
banner is placed no earlier than two (2) hours prior to worship and is removed
no later than two (2) hours after worship. The banner shall not count against
the allowances provided in subsection (B)2a(2) of this section.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Banners are allowed on a property in any area that does not
violate the site triangle at an intersection or driveway. Banner signs are not
allowed on right of way.
            (2)   Banner signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (3)   With written permission of the city manager, or his designee,
banner signs may also be erected during social or athletic events at a park or
other city owned property. The banners shall be attached to pavilions, fences,
vehicles, stakes, or poles.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The square footage of a banner sign shall not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the linear foot width of the street side of the building,
or the width of the leased storefront space in a larger building, on the lot on
which the banner sign is being located. In no event shall the maximum area of
banner signage exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Multiple signs may be
allowed, but the combined square footage of all banner signs may not exceed the
allowed area described above. The width of a banner sign may not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the width of the building or lease space upon which the
banner sign is located.
            (2)   All four (4) corners of a banner sign shall be securely
attached at all times. Banner signs must be in good repair, taut, and vertical
at all times.
   (C)   Bench Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "bench sign" is an off premises sign incorporated on a
bench designed and intended to be used for seating for the general public.
      2.   Bench Signs Permissible: Bench signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall only be issued to erect or place
a bench sign on a property after that property has been developed.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Allowed by special use permit in CB (except the downtown
business improvement district), C1, M1 and M2 zoning districts and except any
location prohibited by Idaho Code section 40-1910.
            (2)   A bench sign shall not be placed within five hundred feet
(500') in any direction from any other bench sign.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The face of the sign incorporated on the bench seatback shall
not exceed six feet (6') in length and two feet (2') in height.
            (2)   The content or advertising of the bench sign shall be by
special use permit. No permit shall be granted without written consent of all
property owners and tenants within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
proposed location.
   (D)   Canopy Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "canopy sign" is a sign that is applied to, attached,
or painted on a canopy or other roof like cover over gasoline fuel pumps, or
similar use, intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
embellishment.
      2.   Canopy Signs Permissible: Canopy signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
canopy sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been approved
by the city for development of the property and after the issuance of a
building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Canopy signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   One canopy sign may be erected on each side of the canopy
band.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Canopy signs may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
square footage of the band face.
            (2)   Canopy signs must be attached directly to or painted on the
face of the canopy band and shall not project more than twelve inches (12")
from the canopy band.
   (E)   Civic Directional Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "civic directional sign" is an off site sign that
advertises and directs traffic to civic uses, including, but not limited to,
schools, parks, fairgrounds, city facilities, or similar uses operated by
either public or private nonprofit organizations.
      2.   Civic Directional Signs Permissible: Civic directional signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
civic directional sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has
been approved by the city for development of the property and after the
issuance of a building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Civic directional signs are allowed only in conjunction with
a nonresidential use.
            (2)   Civic directional signs are allowed only in road right of way
on collector and arterial streets. Permits to work within the right of way may
be required by the government entity having jurisdiction over the right of way.
               c.   Manner: Signs shall be installed in compliance with the
"Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" as well as all other city, state,
or federal regulations regarding signs located in the right of way.
   (F)   Community Event Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "community event sign" is a temporary sign that
announces or advertises a campaign, drive, activity, or celebration of a civic,
political, public, philanthropic, religious, or educational organization for
noncommercial purposes.
      2.   Community Event Signs Permissible: Community event signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
community event sign on a property more than ten (10) days prior to the event
or thirty (30) days prior to the holiday. A community event sign shall be
removed within three (3) days after the event or holiday.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Community event signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   Community event signs shall not be located in required
parking spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes,
nor shall the sign encroach into a right of way.
            (3)   Community event signs may be allowed to be placed off
premises of the event with permission of the property owner of the property
where the sign is placed.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum area of a community event sign is sixty four (64)
square feet in size.
            (2)   The maximum height of a community event sign is ten feet
(10').
   (G)   Freestanding Sign:
      1.   Definition: A "freestanding sign" is a sign that is erected on its
own vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the
ground and generally used to identify the name of a business or development.
      2.   Freestanding Signs Permissible: Freestanding signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
freestanding sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the city for development of the property and after the issuance of
a building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Freestanding signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   A freestanding sign is allowed on the same lot as a multi-
tenant sign, but the total number of multi-tenant signs and freestanding signs
located within a multi-tenant zone shall generally not exceed the number of
lots located within the multi-tenant zone. The total number of signs shall be
allowed to exceed the number of lots when additional freestanding or multi-
tenant signs are allowed on a property in accordance with subsections (G)2c(6)B
and (M)2c(5) of this section.
            (3)   Minimum setback is ten feet (10') from the street, measured
from the face of the curb or edge of pavement. In no case shall a freestanding
sign encroach into public right of way.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Vertical Support Structure: The vertical support structure of
a freestanding sign shall be a minimum of twenty four inches (24") wide. The
minimum width may be calculated as a total of multiple support structures.
However, no single support structure shall be less than twelve inches (12") in
width.
            (2)   Materials: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of
materials that are similar to or that complement the building materials on the
front building facade of the principal building on the same lot.
            (3)   Consistency Of Building Materials: Freestanding signs
constructed in conjunction with multi-tenant and internal directional signs
shall be consistent with the building elements and materials of the multi-
tenant and internal directional signs on the same lot and/or within the multi-
tenant zone. Architectural embellishments are also encouraged and may be
considered through the review of the sign coordination plan defined in section
10-9-16 of this chapter.
            (4)   Standard Freestanding Sign:
   A. A lot is allowed a maximum of one sign per street frontage.
   B. The maximum area is one hundred (100) square feet per sign.
   C. The maximum height is twenty five feet (25').
            (5)   Nonresidential Freestanding Signs: Freestanding sign for
nonresidential uses in residential, open space and professional office overlay
districts:
   A. A lot is allowed a maximum of one sign per street frontage.
   B. The maximum area is sixty (60) square feet per sign.
   C. The maximum height is eight feet (8').
            (6)   Freestanding Signs In Identified Commercial Corridors:
   A. The following standards shall apply to freestanding signs located in a
commercial district adjacent to: 1) Blue Lakes Boulevard North, 2) Kimberly
Road East, 3) Addison Avenue, entire length, and 4) Pole Line Road from Canyon
Crest Drive to Bridgeview Boulevard. A business that fronts directly onto one
of these roads or that is located within a larger common development that
fronts directly onto one of these roads is considered to be located within the
commercial corridor.
   B. A lot is allowed a maximum of one sign for the first two hundred feet
(200') of each street frontage. For lots that exceed two hundred feet (200') of
street frontage, one additional sign is allowed for each additional two hundred
feet (200') of street frontage, or portion thereof, up to a maximum of three
(3) signs per street frontage. Multiple signs on a lot shall be spaced a
minimum of one hundred feet (100') apart from one another.
   C. The maximum area is one hundred (100) square feet per sign. Where a lot
is allowed to have multiple signs as described in subsection (G)2c(6)B of this
section, the allowed area of the multiple signs may be combined into one sign.
However, no single sign in any event shall exceed two hundred (200) square
feet.
   D. The maximum height is thirty five feet (35').
   (H)   Inflatable Signs:
      1.   Definition: An "inflatable sign" is a temporary ground mounted sign
that is manufactured of plastic, cloth, canvas, or other light fabric, inflated
with air and held upright, typically by mechanical means.
      2.   Inflatable Signs Permissible: Inflatable signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A sign permit for an inflatable sign shall not be issued
until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for a building on the
property.
            (2)   An inflatable sign may be erected on a lot for no more than
six (6) 15-day periods per calendar year. In the case of multiple businesses or
tenants located on a single lot, each business is allowed to erect an
inflatable sign on the lot for six (6) 15-day periods provided that no more
than one inflatable sign is located on the lot at any one time and provided a
minimum of fifteen (15) days transpires between the removal of an inflatable
sign permitted by one business and the placement of another inflatable sign
permitted by another business.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Inflatable signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   Inflatable signs shall not be located in required parking
spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes, nor
shall the sign encroach into a right of way.
            (3)   The minimum setback from the road right of way shall be one
and one-half (11/2) times the height of the sign.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Inflatable signs shall be secured directly to, and not
suspended from, the ground or a building. A cloud buster sign as discussed in
subsection
10-9-9(B) of this chapter is not an inflatable sign.
            (2)   The maximum height of an inflatable sign, measured from the
ground, is the same as the maximum height allowed in the zoning district.
            (3)   A banner sign may be applied to an inflatable sign without
the banner counting towards the allotted number of banner signs per calendar
year (subsection (B) of this section). The maximum area of a sign placed or
applied to an inflatable sign shall be forty eight (48) square feet.
   (I)   Internal Directional Signs:
      1.   Definition: An "internal directional sign" is a sign that is to be
read by a person already on the premises and used to identify or locate a
drive-through lane, entrance, exit, route, parking, building, office, tenant,
or similar place, service, or route within commercial, multi-family, or office
developments.
      2.   Internal Directional Signs Permissible: Internal directional signs
are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place
an internal directional sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat
has been approved by the city for development of the property and after
issuance of a building permit on a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Internal directional signs are allowed only in conjunction
with a nonresidential or apartment complex use.
            (2)   Minimum setbacks are thirty feet (30') from the front
property line.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Internal directional signs constructed in conjunction with
multi-tenant and/or freestanding signs shall be consistent with the building
elements and materials of the multi-tenant and/or freestanding signs on the
same lot and/or within the same development.
            (2)   The maximum area of an internal directional sign is twelve
(12) square feet.
   (J)   Marquee Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "marquee sign" is a sign mounted on a vertical surface
of a roof like structure projecting over a building entrance, typically a
theater entrance.
      2.   Marquee Signs Permissible: Marquee signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
marquee sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the city for development of the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Marquee signs are allowed in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   Marquee signs may project into public right of way for up to
four feet (4'), but shall not project closer than two feet (2') to the face of
the curb along an adjacent public street or alley.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum area of marquee signage shall be fifteen percent
(15%) of the area of the largest face of the wall on which the sign is located.
            (2)   Marquee signs may implement electronically changeable text.
Only the text of a marquee sign may be electronically changeable. Lighting
intensity of electronically changeable text shall comply with the same
intensity standards as set forth for message center signs found in subsection
(L) of this section. Electronically changeable text may not flash, blink,
scroll, or move in any way, and must remain static for a minimum of sixty (60)
seconds.
   (K)   Menu Board Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "menu board sign" is a sign erected in conjunction
with a use that incorporates a drive-through or drive-in and generally used to
provide service and/or product options and pricing for customers who remain in
their vehicles.
      2.   Menu Board Signs Permissible: Menu board signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
menu board sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the city for development of the property and after issuance of a
building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Menu board signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use that includes a drive-through or drive-in.
            (2)   Minimum front yard setback shall be twenty five feet (25').
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Drive-through preorder sign:
   A. Internal lighting may be utilized for the sign panels.
   B. One drive-through preorder sign is allowed at the entrance of a drive-
through lane and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the drive-
through menu board in the same drive-through lane.
   C. The maximum area of a drive-through preorder sign is forty eight (48)
square feet with a maximum height of eight feet (8').
   D. Drive-through preorder signs shall be located at the side or rear of the
principal building(s) on the lot.
            (2)   Drive-through menu board:
   A. Internal lighting may be utilized for the sign panels.
   B. One drive-through menu board sign is allowed per drive-through lane use
on a lot.
   C. The maximum area of a drive-through menu board is forty eight (48) square
feet with a maximum height of eight feet (8').
   D. Drive-through menu boards shall be located at the side or rear of the
principal building(s) on the lot.
            (3)   Drive-in menu board:
   A. If the drive-in stalls are covered by a canopy, the drive-in menu board
signs may be attached directly to the canopy support columns.
   B. Internal lighting may be utilized for the sign panels.
   C. One drive-in menu board sign is allowed per ordering station.
   D. The maximum area of a drive-in menu board sign is nine (9) square feet
with a maximum height of six feet (6').
   (L)   Message Center Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "message center sign" is a sign containing a display
that can be changed by electrical, electronic and/or a computerized process
that provides general public service information such as time, date,
temperature, weather, or messages of interest to the traveling public. A
message center sign may also provide commercial messages relating to the use of
the property on which the sign is located.
      2.   Message Center Signs Permissible: Message center signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
message center sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the city for development of the property and after issuance of a
building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Message centers may be included as part of other allowed
flush wall mounted, roof mounted or freestanding signs.
            (2)   Message center signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (3)   Message center signs shall not project into the right of way.
            (4)   The building official must make all of the following findings
in permitting such a sign:
   A. The location and placement of the sign will not endanger motorists or
pedestrians and does not cause undue distraction to traffic on the adjacent
street or impede views at street or railroad intersections.
   B. The sign will not cover or blanket any prominent view of a structure or
facade of historical or architectural significance.
   C. The sign will not obstruct views of users of adjacent buildings to side
yards, front yards or to open space.
   D. The sign will not distract, intrude upon or negatively impact the visual
quality of a public open space such as a public recreation facility, square,
plaza, courtyard and the like.
   E. The sign is compatible with building heights of the existing neighborhood
and does not impose a foreign or inharmonious element to an existing skyline.
   F. The sign's lighting will not cause hazardous or unsafe driving conditions
for motorists and will not glare, reflect or spill onto adjacent business or
residential areas.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum area of a message center sign is fifty (50)
square feet of the total square footage of the sign in which it is located;
provided, however, where the property upon which the message center is to be
executed possesses a single, contiguous street frontage equal to or greater
than four hundred (400) linear feet, total square footage shall not exceed
eighty (80) square feet.
            (2)   The lighting on message centers shall not exceed the
following light measurements, as made using a one degree (1°) photographic
exposure meter (spot meter) and measured one hundred feet (100') from the sign
at a position five feet (5') to six feet (6') above ground level perpendicular
from the face of the sign:
   A. Daylight: The average exposure value (EV) shall not exceed fourteen (14)
EV during the sign's normal running cycle, and shall never peak higher than
fifteen (15) EV.
   B. Night: The average exposure value (EV) shall not exceed twelve (12) EV
during the sign's normal running cycle, and shall never peak higher than
thirteen and one-half (13.5) EV.
            (3)   Flashing (the same copy flashing on and off repeatedly) is
prohibited.
            (4)   Word messages shall not have a change frequency less than one
second per frame.
            (5)   Animated graphics and enhancements are allowed so long as
they are not used in conjunction with on/off flashing and as long as the sign
does not include any full motion video, live or delayed.
   (M)   Multi-Tenant Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "multi-tenant sign" is a sign that is erected on its
own vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the
ground and generally used to identify several commercial, service, and/or
office uses within a single common subdivision or development.
      2.   Multi-Tenant Signs Permissible: Multi-tenant signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
multi-tenant sign on a property until a sign coordination plan as defined in
section
10-9-16 of this chapter has been approved with a plat and/or site plan for the
property by the city and after issuance of a building permit for a building
within the multi-tenant zone.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Multi-tenant signs are allowed only in conjunction with
nonresidential uses.
            (2)   A multi-tenant sign shall be located within a multi-tenant
zone. A multi-tenant zone shall:
   A. Consist of multiple businesses/tenants with the same subdivision name or
multiple lots which were depicted on the same preliminary plat or site plat;
   B. Be united through common building architecture, color, and materials,
landscaping and parking.
            (3)   A multi-tenant sign is allowed on the same lot as a
freestanding sign, but the total number of multi-tenant signs and freestanding
signs located within a multi-tenant zone shall generally not exceed the number
of lots located within the multi-tenant zone. The total number of signs shall
be allowed to exceed the number of lots when additional freestanding or multi-
tenant signs are allowed on a property in accordance with subsections (G)2c(6)B
and (M)2c(5) of this section.
            (4)   Minimum setback is ten feet (10') from the street, measured
from the face of the curb or edge of pavement. In no case shall a multi-tenant
sign encroach into public right of way.
            (5)   A multi-tenant sign shall not be located closer than fifty
feet (50') to another multi-tenant sign or a freestanding sign.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Prior to city consideration of a multi-tenant zone, all
property owners located within a proposed multi-tenant zone must submit
notarized letters to the city authorizing the creation of the multi-tenant
zone. A lot shall only be included in one multi-tenant zone.
            (2)   The vertical support structure of a multi-tenant sign shall
be a minimum of twenty four inches (24") wide. The minimum width may be
calculated as a total of multiple support structures. However, no single
support structure shall be less than twelve inches (12") in width.
            (3)   Multi-tenant signs shall be constructed of materials that are
similar to or that complement the building materials on the front building
facade of the principal building on the same lot.
            (4)   Multi-tenant signs constructed in conjunction with
freestanding and internal directional signs shall be consistent with the
building elements and materials of the freestanding and internal directional
signs on the same lot and/or within the multi-tenant zone. Architectural
embellishments are also encouraged and may be considered through the review of
the sign coordination plan defined in section
10-9-16 of this chapter.
            (5)   One multi-tenant sign is allowed for the first six hundred
feet (600') of street frontage of the multi-tenant zone. For multi-tenant zones
that exceed six hundred feet (600') of street frontage, one additional multi-
tenant sign is allowed for each additional six hundred (600) linear feet of
street frontage, or portion thereof, up to a maximum of three (3) multi-tenant
signs per street frontage.
            (6)   The maximum area of a multi-tenant sign shall be one hundred
fifty (150) square feet. For multi-tenant zones that exceed two hundred feet
(200') of street frontage, the maximum area of a multi-tenant sign shall be
three hundred (300) square feet.
            (7)   The maximum height of a multi-tenant sign is thirty five feet
(35').
   (N)   Projecting Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "projecting sign" is a sign attached to and projecting
out from a building face or wall more than twelve inches (12"), generally at a
right angle to the building.
      2.   Projecting Signs Permissible: Projecting signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
projecting sign on a property until a building permit has been issued for the
building on which the sign is to be attached.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Projecting signs are permitted in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   If a projecting sign is constructed over a sidewalk, a
minimum of nine feet (9') shall be provided between the grade of the sidewalk
and the lowest portion of the projecting sign.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Each building or tenant is allowed a maximum of one
projecting sign per wall that faces a street, public way, or parking area.
            (2)   The maximum area of a projecting sign is twelve (12) square
feet.
   (O)   Roof Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "roof sign" is a sign that is painted directly upon or
mounted on the roof of any building.
      2.   Roof Signs Permissible: Roof signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
roof sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been approved
by the city for development of the property and after the issuance of a
building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Roof signs are permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential
use.
            (2)   Roof signs shall not be allowed to face property zoned, or
designated on the future land use plan, for single-family uses if the sign is
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the property line of said residential
property.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Each nonresidential use may have one roof sign in lieu of
wall signage. The square footage of a roof sign erected on a building will be
deducted from the allowable wall sign area for the same building.
            (2)   The maximum size of the roof sign is three (3) square feet
per linear foot of building width, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet.
            (3)   Roof signs shall be designed to look like part of the
building or roof structure with the supports, anchors, or braces for the roof
sign being enclosed or designed so that they are not readily visible from the
street or other public way.
            (4)   In no case shall a roof sign project beyond the wall line of
any outer building wall.
   (P)   Sandwich Board Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "sandwich board sign" is a temporary sign that is
generally constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or a tent like shape
that is placed on, but not permanently attached to the ground. This definition
also includes signs of a similar temporary nature that are constructed with a
base and single upward sign face, forming an upside down "T".
      2.   Sandwich Board Signs Permissible: Sandwich board signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
sandwich board sign on a property until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued for a building on the property.
            (2)   Sandwich board signs may be placed on properties during
business hours only.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Sandwich board signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential structure or use and only in either of the following two (2)
circumstances:
   A. Sandwich board signs are allowed within multi-tenant developments.
Sandwich board signs within multi-tenant developments shall be located on the
interior of the property and shall not be located within any public right of
way.
   B. Sandwich board signs are allowed within the boundaries (as they exist or
may be amended) of the downtown business improvement district 1. Sandwich board
signs within the downtown business improvement district 1 may be located within
public right of way.
            (2)   Sandwich board signs shall not be located within a landscaped
area, parking space, or vehicular travelway.
            (3)   Sandwich board signs shall be located not more than ten feet
(10') from the door of the business or use utilizing the sign.
            (4)   Sandwich board signs shall not be located closer than three
feet (3') to the curb of any adjacent street.
            (5)   Should a sandwich board sign be placed on or adjacent to a
sidewalk, an unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least five feet (5') in
width must be provided adjacent to the sign.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum size of a sandwich board sign is eight (8) square
feet with a maximum height of four feet (4') and a maximum width of two feet
(2').
            (2)   A maximum of one sandwich board sign may be placed per
business or tenant on the property where the sandwich board sign(s) is located.
            (3)   Sandwich board signs shall be placed no closer than twenty
feet (20') from other sandwich board signs.
   (Q)   Skylights And Searchlights:
      1.   Definition: A "skylight or searchlight" is a temporary sign that
uses a large high power light pointed into the sky to attract attention to a
particular location or event.
      2.   Skylights And Searchlights Permissible: Skylights and searchlights
are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A sign permit for a skylight or searchlight shall not be
issued until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for a building on
the property.
            (2)   A skylight or searchlight may be utilized on a lot for no
more than six (6) 15-day periods per calendar year. In the case of multiple
businesses or tenants located on a single lot, each business is allowed to
utilize a skylight or searchlight on the lot for six (6) 15-day periods
provided that no more than one skylight or searchlight is located on the lot at
any one time and provided a minimum of fifteen (15) days transpires between the
removal of a skylight or searchlight permitted by one business and the
placement of another skylight or searchlight permitted by another business.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Skylights or searchlights are allowed only in conjunction
with a nonresidential use.
            (2)   Skylights or searchlights shall not be located in required
parking spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes,
nor shall they encroach into a right of way.
            (3)   The minimum setback from the road right of way is thirty feet
(30').
               c.   Manner: Skylights or searchlights shall generally be
pointed upward and not aimed at any building or traffic.
   (R)   Subdivision Entry Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "subdivision entry sign" is a sign that generally
identifies a development and that generally refers to the platted name of the
subdivision.
      2.   Subdivision Entry Signs Permissible: Subdivision entry signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
subdivision entry sign on a property until a final plat or site plan has been
approved by the city for development of the property.
               b.   Place: All subdivision entry signs shall be located within
the platted limits of a subdivision.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Subdivision entry signs may be in the form of a sign mounted
to a subdivision monument, screening wall, retaining wall, or similar
structure, so long as the sign does not project above the top of the structure.
            (2)   Subdivision entry signs shall have a maximum area of one
hundred (100) square feet and a maximum height of eight feet (8').
            (3)   The maximum number of subdivision entry signs shall equal one
freestanding sign or two (2) signs attached to screening walls or similar
structures (not a combination of both) per street entrance.
            (4)   Alternative types of subdivision entry signs, including, but
not limited to, neighborhood entry signs within an overall subdivision, may be
approved as part of a sign coordination plan as outlined in section
10-9-16 of this chapter. The sign coordination plan shall be submitted for
review with the final plat, landscaping, and screening wall plans.
   (S)   Subdivision Monuments:
      1.   Definition: "Subdivision monuments" are physical improvements such
as signs, walls, or structures, constructed to draw attention to or enhance a
subdivision entrance or its surrounding area. A subdivision monument may
require issuance of a building permit depending upon the design of the proposed
monument. The current building code should be consulted to determine whether a
building permit will be required or not.
      2.   Subdivision Monuments Permissible: Subdivision monuments are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign and/or building permit shall not be issued to
erect or place subdivision monuments on a property until a final plat or site
plan has been approved by the city for development of the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Subdivision monuments placed on private property shall
observe all building line and setback requirements. However, a nonhabitable
monument may encroach into a required setback provided all visibility clips and
easements are observed and the monument is deemed by city staff not to
negatively impact fire protection of existing or future development.
            (2)   Subdivision monuments may not be erected within an area
designated as future right of way on the city's master transportation plan.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The developer of the subdivision monument must provide a plan
for future maintenance of the monument to the city for review.
            (2)   The maximum height of subdivision monuments shall be twenty
five feet (25').
   (T)   Wall Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "wall sign" is a sign painted on or erected parallel
to and generally extending not more than twelve inches (12") from the facade of
any building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by
the building face.
      2.   Wall Signs Permissible: Wall signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
wall sign on a property until a site plan and/or final plat has been approved
by the city for development of the property and after the issuance of a
building permit for a building on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Wall signs are permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential
use.
            (2)   Wall signs shall not be allowed on any facade (other than the
main front of the building) that faces property zoned, or designated on the
future land use plan, for single-family uses if the sign is within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the property line of said residential property.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Each nonresidential use may have up to three (3) square feet
of wall signage per linear foot of building width. The total square footage of
allowed wall signage may be split into multiple signs.
            (2)   In no case shall a wall sign project above the roof line or
parapet wall of any building.
            (3)   The maximum size of a wall sign located within a professional
office overlay district shall be twenty five (25) square feet. (Ord. 2957, 12-
8-2008)
10-9-9: ALLOWABLE SIGNS THAT DO NOT REQUIRE THE ISSUANCE OF A SIGN PERMIT:
The following signs are allowed and do not require the issuance of a sign
permit, provided the signs comply with the following conditions and the
specifications listed in section
10-9-5 of this chapter, unless otherwise specified.
   (A)   Civic Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "civic sign" is a temporary stake sign that publicizes
times or locations of meetings or special events of homeowners' associations,
religious organizations or groups, or civic groups. This definition excludes
directional signs for regularly scheduled religious events. A civic sign may
also publicize times or locations of special events for schools and athletic
team registrations.
      2.   Civic Signs Permissible: Civic signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: Civic signs shall be erected no more than seven (7)
days prior to the meeting or event and removed no more than forty eight (48)
hours after the meeting or event.
               b.   Place: See section
10-9-5, "General Sign Specifications And Design", of this chapter.
               c.   Manner: Civic signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
   (B)   Cloud Buster Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "cloud buster sign" is a temporary sign inflated so
that it rises into the air and is anchored to the ground, vehicle, structure,
or any other fixed object used for the purpose of advertising or drawing
attention to a business, activity, commodity, service, sale, or product.
      2.   Cloud Buster Signs Permissible: Cloud buster signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A cloud buster sign shall not be erected on a property until
the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for a building on the property.
            (2)   A cloud buster sign may be erected on a lot for no more than
six (6) 15-day periods per calendar year. In the case of multiple businesses or
tenants located on a single lot, each business is allowed to erect a cloud
buster sign on the lot for six (6) 15-day periods, provided that no more than
one cloud buster sign is located on the lot at any one time and provided a
minimum of fifteen (15) days transpires between the removal of a cloud buster
sign erected by one business and the placement of another cloud buster sign
erected by another business.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Cloud buster signs shall not be located in required parking
spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes, nor
shall the sign encroach into a right of way.
            (2)   The minimum setback from the road right of way is ten feet
(10').
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Cloud buster signs shall be securely attached at all times to
the ground, parked vehicle, structure, or any other fixed object.
            (2)   Should a cloud buster sign lose its buoyancy and fall to the
ground, it shall not be so high, or located in such a position, so that the
device or its tether line falls across a power line or public right of way.
   (C)   Construction Identification Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "construction identification sign" is a temporary sign
that is generally used to advertise a new building, opening dates, leasing
opportunities, and/or to identify the property owner, architect, contractor,
engineer, landscape architect, or financier engaged in the design, construction
or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. Construction
identification signs are also used to advertise sales and zoning information of
properties.
      2.   Construction Identification Signs Permissible: Construction
identification signs are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   A construction identification sign shall not be erected on a
property until a building permit has been issued to build a structure on the
property or until the city authorizes the construction of utilities or other
amenities on the property.
            (2)   For properties with single- or two-family zoning or future
land use plan designation, the sign shall be removed upon the issuance of
certificates of occupancy for ninety five percent (95%) of the homes within a
single-family or two-family subdivision.
            (3)   For properties with agricultural, multi-family, or
nonresidential zoning or future land use plan designation, the sign shall be
removed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for any building
on the property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   A construction identification sign shall be located no closer
than fifteen feet (15') to any property line.
            (2)   The minimum distance between construction identification
signs is two hundred feet (200').
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum area of a construction identification sign is
ninety six (96) square feet.
            (2)   The maximum height of a construction identification sign is
twelve feet (12').
            (3)   A maximum of one construction identification sign shall be
placed on a property per street frontage. If multiple construction
identification signs are permitted on a tract of land, only one sign shall be
placed along each street frontage. A platted single-family or two-family
subdivision shall be considered a single property for the purpose of this
provision.
   (D)   Flags:
      1.   Definition: A "flag" is a piece of fabric attached to a staff or
cord on one end and generally used as a symbol of a nation, state, political
subdivision, or organization.
      2.   Flags Permissible: The United States flag is exempt from the
following conditions. All other flags are permissible subject to the following
conditions:
               a.   Time: A flag shall not be placed on a property until a site
plan and/or final plat has been approved by the city for development of the
property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   A flag and its supporting structure shall be located on
private property behind the property line.
            (2)   Flags may be placed at parks during social and athletic
events.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum height of a flagpole or other supporting
structure shall be thirty five feet (35').
            (2)   The maximum area of a flag is sixty (60) square feet.
            (3)   A maximum of three (3) flags shall be located on a property.
   (E)   Garage Sale Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "garage sale sign" is a temporary sign used to
advertise a garage sale, yard sale, or similar event on a residential property.
This definition includes off premises signs for this purpose.
      2.   Garage Sale Signs Permissible: Garage sale signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A garage sale sign shall not be erected earlier than
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the day before a garage sale or similar event
and must be removed by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the day following the
garage sale or similar event.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   A garage sale sign shall be erected only on private real
property, with the consent of the property owner. In general, a garage sale
sign shall be erected no closer than ten feet (10') from the street pavement.
            (2)   Garage sale signs shall not be placed closer than sixty feet
(60') from another garage sale sign.
               c.   Manner: Garage sale signs shall not exceed six (6) square
feet in area.
   (F)   Government Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "government sign" is a temporary stake sign used to
convey information to the public regarding city, state, or federal government
activities and events.
      2.   Government Signs Permissible: Government signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: See section
10-9-5, "General Sign Specifications And Design", of this chapter.
               c.   Manner: No restrictions.
   (G)   Home Improvement Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "home improvement sign" is a temporary stake sign that
displays the name of a roofing, fence, pool, paint, landscape or other home
improvement contractor currently performing home improvement work at a
residential location.
      2.   Home Improvement Signs Permissible: Home improvement signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A home improvement sign may be erected upon
commencement of home improvement work and shall be removed when the home
improvement work is completed.
               b.   Place: A home improvement sign shall be erected on the lot
on which the home improvement is occurring. In general, a home improvement sign
shall not be erected closer than ten feet (10') from the edge of the street
pavement.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Home improvement signs shall not exceed nine (9) square feet
in area.
            (2)   A maximum of one home improvement sign per contractor may be
erected on a lot. In the event of multiple contractors working on a lot at the
same time, up to three (3) home improvement signs may be located on a single
lot at any given time.
   (H)   Human Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "human sign" is a temporary sign held by or attached
to a human for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an
individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product. A person
dressed in costume for the purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing
attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product
shall also be construed as a human sign.
      2.   Human Signs Permissible: Human signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: All human signs shall be located on private
property. In general, a human sign shall not be located closer than ten feet
(10') from the edge of the street pavement.
               c.   Manner: No restrictions.
   (I)   Instructional Signs:
      1.   Definition: An "instructional sign" is a sign that provides
instruction, information, or direction to the general public. The sole purpose
of an instructional sign is to provide such information to the general public
that is essential to the health, safety, and public welfare of the community.
Instructional signs shall include, but are not limited to, signs identifying
restrooms, public telephones, handicap parking spaces, reserved parking spaces,
freeze warning, no trespassing, no dumping, no loitering, and construction
entrance signs. Signs erected by the city, state or federal government for the
purpose of public instruction, warning, street or highway designation, control
of traffic and similar uses incidental to the public interests shall be
considered instructional signs. An instructional sign also includes signs of a
warning, directive or instructional nature erected by a public utility company
that operates under a franchise agreement with the city.
      2.   Instructional Signs Permissible: Instructional signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: No restrictions.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum area of an instructional sign is sixteen (16)
square feet.
            (2)   An instructional sign shall contain no other message, copy,
announcement, or decoration other than the essential instruction, information,
or direction and shall not advertise or otherwise draw attention to an
individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product.
   (J)   Political Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "political sign" is a temporary sign relating to the
election of a person to a public office, relating to a political party,
relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body or
containing primarily a political message.
      2.   Political Signs Permissible: Political signs are permissible subject
to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A political sign relating to the election of a person
running for public office or relating to a matter to be voted upon at an
election called by a public body cannot be erected for more than sixty (60)
days prior to the election date for which the candidate or matter is scheduled
to be held. Signs must be removed within two (2) days after the election.
               b.   Place: Political signs shall be located only on private
real property with the consent of the property owner. In general, a political
sign shall not be erected closer than ten feet (10') from the edge of the
street pavement.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Political signs shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet
in area.
            (2)   Political signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height
measured from the ground to the highest point of the sign.
            (3)   Political signs shall not be illuminated.
   (K)   Real Estate Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "real estate sign" is a temporary stake sign that
advertises a home, building, or property for sale or lease. This definition
includes off premises real estate signs for directional purposes.
      2.   Real Estate Signs Permissible: Real estate signs, both on premises
and off premises, are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Real estate signs shall not be located within any public
right of way. In general, a real estate sign shall be erected no closer than
ten feet (10') from the street pavement.
            (2)   An on premises real estate sign shall be erected on the lot
on which the home or property is for sale or lease.
            (3)   An off premises real estate sign shall be erected only on
private real property, and only with the consent of the property owner. No more
than three (3) off premises real estate signs may be located on any single lot
or property.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   A maximum of one real estate sign per street frontage may be
erected on a lot.
            (2)   Residential real estate signs shall not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area.
            (3)   Real estate signs on property zoned for nonresidential uses
shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area.
            (4)   Real estate signs on agricultural properties shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area. Only properties that are larger than forty
(40) acres and that currently produce agricultural products shall be considered
to be agricultural properties.
            (5)   All real estate signs shall be located in conformance with
the provisions of section
10-9-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
      3.   Open House Real Estate Signs: Open house real estate signs, both on
premises and off premises, are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time:
            (1)   Open house signs may only be permitted on the public right of
way one hour before and one hour after a scheduled open house. The total time
an open house sign will be permitted on the public right of way shall not
exceed five (5) hours in one day.
            (2)   No open house sign shall block the access of any public right
of way so as to prevent passage by the general public including wheelchair
access.
            (3)   All open house signs are to be removed from the public right
of way within one hour after the completion of the open house.
            (4)   Open house signs are permitted only during the hours between
sunrise and sunset.
               b.   Manner:
            (1)   Real estate open house signs placed on a sidewalk shall have
a pedestrian or wheelchair passageway of a minimum of thirty six inches (36").
            (2)   Real estate open house signs shall not exceed nine (9) square
feet in area.
            (3)   Real estate open house signs shall not be placed in a manner
that would obstruct an ADA sidewalk ramp.
            (4)   Real estate open house signs placed in the right of way will
not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height.
            (5)   Real estate open house signs may not be illuminated, either
internally or externally. (Ord. 3066, 3-10-2014)
   (L)   Residential Nameplate Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "residential nameplate sign" is a sign that states the
name of the occupant of a residential unit.
      2.   Residential Nameplate Signs Permissible: Residential nameplate signs
are permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A residential nameplate sign shall not be erected on
a property until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for a
residential unit on the property.
               b.   Place: A residential nameplate sign shall be located on
private real property. In general, a residential nameplate sign shall be
erected no closer than ten feet (10') from the street pavement.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   The maximum size of a residential nameplate sign shall be two
(2) square feet.
            (2)   The maximum height of a residential nameplate sign shall be
seven feet (7').
            (3)   Each household unit may have a maximum of one residential
nameplate sign.
   (M)   Scoreboards:
      1.   Definition: "Scoreboards" are signs erected at an athletic field,
stadium or court and that are generally used to maintain the score or time
expired in an event at the field or stadium.
      2.   Scoreboards Permissible: Scoreboards are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Scoreboards shall be erected within the limits of
and face into the athletic field, stadium or court.
               c.   Manner: No restrictions.
   (N)   Sponsor Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "sponsor sign" is a sign that is mounted or applied to
the inside of a fence or wall surrounding an athletic field, stadium or court,
such as an outfield wall of a baseball field, and intended to be viewed by
spectators of an athletic event at the field or court.
      2.   Sponsor Signs Permissible: Sponsor signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Sponsor signs shall be erected within the limits of
and face into the athletic field, stadium or court.
               c.   Manner: No restrictions.
   (O)   Vehicle Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "vehicle sign" is a sign that is attached to or placed
in or on a truck, bus, car, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, or any other
vehicle. Vehicle signs shall exclude bumper stickers, license plates, and
inspection and registration stickers.
      2.   Vehicle Signs Permissible: Vehicle signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Vehicle signs are permitted provided that during
periods of inactivity such vehicle is not parked in the right of way or placed
in a manner that the sign is readily visible and intended to be read from
adjacent public right of way.
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   A vehicle on which a sign is attached cannot be used for the
sole purpose of advertising. It is the responsibility of the property owners to
provide proof that the vehicle has a legitimate business purpose other than
display of the sign.
            (2)   The signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral
part of the vehicle.
            (3)   The vehicle is in operating condition, currently registered
and licensed to operate on public streets, and actively used in the daily
function of the business to which such sign relates.
            (4)   The vehicle is not used primarily as a static display,
advertising a product or service, not utilized as storage, shelter or a
distribution point for commercial products or services for the general public.
   (P)   Vending Machine Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "vending machine sign" is a sign that is attached to a
vending machine, including a gasoline pump, and that generally advertises the
products dispensed from the vending machine.
      2.   Vending Machine Signs Permissible: Vending machine signs are
permissible subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Vending machine signs are allowed only in
conjunction with a nonresidential use.
               c.   Manner: Vending machine signs shall be directly attached to
a vending machine. The signs shall be flat and shall not project from the
vending machine.
   (Q)   Wind Device Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "wind device sign" is a sign that is made of cloth,
canvas, plastic, or any flexible material that moves or is designed to move
freely in the wind, with or without a frame or other supporting structure, used
for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity,
service, sale, or product. This definition includes balloons, pennants,
streamers, spinners, or similar devices, but excludes inflatable signs, cloud
buster signs and flags as specifically defined in this chapter.
      2.   Wind Device Signs Permissible: Wind device signs are permissible
subject to the following conditions:
               a.   Time: A wind device sign shall not be erected on a property
until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for a building on the
property.
               b.   Place:
            (1)   Wind device signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
            (2)   Wind device signs shall not be located in required parking
spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes, nor
shall the sign encroach into a right of way.
            (3)   The minimum setback from the road right of way is ten feet
(10').
               c.   Manner:
            (1)   Wind device signs shall be securely attached at all times to
the ground, building, or other structure.
            (2)   The maximum height of a wind device sign, measured from the
ground, is the same as the maximum height allowed in the zoning district.
   (R)   Window Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "window sign" is a sign that is visible from a public
street or sidewalk and that is posted, attached, painted, placed, or affixed in
or on a window or a sign that is located within three feet (3') of the inside
of a window.
      2.   Window Signs Permissible: Window signs are permissible subject to
the following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Window signs are allowed only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use.
               c.   Manner: The square footage of a window sign shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage of the window in which
the sign is located.
   (S)   Yard Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "yard sign" is a temporary stake sign that publicizes
the arrival of a newborn, the participation of a family member in a school
activity or sport, or similar residentially themed event. Yard signs shall also
include signs that advertise the presence of a home security system and
seasonal or holiday decorations.
      2.   Yard Signs Permissible: Yard signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
               a.   Time: No restrictions.
               b.   Place: Yard signs shall be located only on lots containing
an occupied residential dwelling. In general, a yard sign shall be erected no
closer than ten feet (10') from the street pavement.
               c.   Manner: Signs advertising the presence of a home security
system shall not exceed one square foot in area.
   (T)   Zoning Signs:
      1.   Definition: A "zoning sign" is a temporary sign erected to publicize
the request for zoning or rezoning of a property. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
      2.   Zoning Signs Permissible: Zoning signs are permissible subject to
the conditions set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-9-10: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   (A)   Commercial Billboard Signs: A commercial billboard sign is a large
sign, generally supported by a metal or wood frame and consisting of two (2)
parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions, used for the display of
posters, printed, painted, or electronic advertisements that generally direct
attention to goods, merchandise, entertainment, or services conducted, sold, or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
   (B)   Obscene Signs: An obscene sign is a sign that contains offensive
language, is hate based, is discriminatory or on which the dominant theme of
material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex, or is patently
offensive because it affronts community standards relating to the description
or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social
value.
   (C)   Portable Signs: Signs designed or intended to be relocated from time
to time, whether or not it is permanently attached to a building or structure,
or is located on the ground, are prohibited. Portable signs include signs on
wheels or on portable or mobile structures, such as, among other things,
trailers, skids, tent signs, and airborne signs. This prohibition does not
include vehicle, sandwich board, and other similar sign types specifically
regulated herein.
   (D)   Merchandise Displays: No person shall suspend from any building, or
pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, parking area, or fuel pump island
any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising object or structure for the
purpose of advertising such items, other than a sign as defined, regulated and
prescribed by this chapter. This prohibition does not apply to the outside
display or storage of merchandise as allowed in this title.
   (E)   Other Signs:
      1.   Signs which move and/or are animated by means of flashing, traveling
or blinking lights, or other means not providing constant illumination, unless
specifically allowed within this chapter;
      2.   Appendages to primary signs which have flashing, blinking, or
traveling lights;
      3.   Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, or visible matter;
      4.   Any sign located on a property where the contents of that sign do
not pertain to a person, activity, idea, business, or product being sold,
promoted, or expressed on the premises where the sign is located, unless
specifically allowed within this chapter;
      5.   Any sign not referenced within, or governed by this chapter;
      6.   Any sign erected without a permit, either prior to or after the
adoption of this chapter, if a permit was required;
      7.   Any sign erected in or over public right of way or other public
property, unless the same is erected by the city, county, state or other
authorized governmental agency, or with the permission of the city, for public
purposes, unless allowed within this chapter; and
      8.   Any lighted sign erected or displayed within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a residentially zoned property, or designated as residential on the
future land use plan, unless the lighting is shielded from view of the
residential property and indirect light does not exceed one-half (1/2) lumen
measured from any property line of the residential property, unless allowed
within this chapter. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-11: REMOVAL/IMPOUNDMENT OF PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   (A)   All signs listed in section
10-9-10 of this chapter and other prohibited or noncompliant signs shall be
considered a public nuisance and are prohibited by this chapter. Upon
identification of any prohibited sign, the building official shall provide
written notification of the violation to the owner of the property on which the
prohibited sign is located and/or the permittee of the sign. The notification
shall state that the offending sign shall be removed by the property owner,
agent or person having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon
which such sign is located within the time period prescribed by the building
official after written notification to do so. The notification shall further
state that if the prohibited sign is not removed within a specific time frame
(not to exceed 10 days) a citation may be issued and the city may resort to any
civil remedy available up to and including impoundment. If any sign is
determined to present an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare,
the city may remove it immediately. Within ten (10) days of the removal of the
sign, the city shall notify the owner of the property on which the sign was
located of the reasons for removal of the sign.
Signs authorized by a sign permit with an expiration date shall be removed
promptly upon the date of expiration. Signs remaining after the date of
expiration shall be deemed prohibited. The sign permit listing the expiration
date shall be considered adequate notice of violation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation receiving
such written notice or having an expired permit to fail to comply with the
direction of the notice. In the event failure to comply with such notice
provided under subsection (A) of this section, the building official is hereby
authorized to cause the removal and impoundment of such sign. Any expenses
incident thereto shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent or person
having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon which such sign
was located.
   (C)   If a sign is placed within the public right of way or on a city owned
property in violation of this chapter, the sign may be immediately removed and
impounded. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-12: RECOVERY OF IMPOUNDED SIGNS:
   (A)   Impounded signs may be recovered by the owner within fifteen (15) days
from the date of the written notification of impoundment by paying a pick up
fee, as established by resolution of the city council.
   (B)   Signs not recovered within fifteen (15) days of impoundment may be
disposed of by the city in any manner it shall elect. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-13: NEGLECTED AND ABANDONED SIGNS:
   (A)   A neglected sign is a sign which contains missing panels, burned out
lights, missing letters, rust, loose parts, is faded from its natural color, or
is in a similar state of disrepair.
   (B)   An abandoned sign is a sign which, for at least six (6) months does
not identify or advertise a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner,
product, or activity; or pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer
applies.
   (C)   Abandoned signs and neglected signs shall be considered a public
nuisance and are prohibited by this chapter. Upon written notification to the
permit holder by the building official, such abandoned signs shall be removed
from the premises and neglected signs shall be repaired or removed from the
premises by the property owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the
land, building, or structure upon which such sign is located. The notification
shall state that the offending sign shall be repaired or removed by the owner,
agent or person having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon
which such sign is located within ten (10) days after written notification to
do so by the building official. The notification shall further state that if
the sign is not removed or repaired, a citation may be issued and the city may
resort to any civil remedy available to remove or repair the sign, up to and
including impoundment. If any sign is determined to present an immediate danger
to public health, safety, or welfare, the city may remove it immediately.
Within ten (10) days of the removal of the sign, the city shall notify the
owner of the property on which the sign was located of the reasons for removal
of the sign.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation receiving
such written notice to fail to comply with the direction of the notice. In the
event failure to comply with such notice provided under subsection (C) of this
section, the building official is hereby authorized to cause the removal and
impoundment of such sign. Any expenses incident thereto shall be the
responsibility of the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the land,
building or structure upon which such sign was located. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-14: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   (A)   Definition: A "nonconforming sign" is a sign and its supporting
structure which does not conform to all or part of the provisions of this
chapter, and:
      1.   Was in existence and lawfully erected prior to the effective date of
this chapter;
      2.   Was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with
the provisions of the prior ordinance applicable thereto, or which was
considered legally nonconforming thereunder, and has since been in continuous
or regular use; or
      3.   Was in existence, located, and used on the premises at the time it
was annexed into the city limits or included in the city's area of impact and
has since been in regular and continuous use.
   (B)   Repair Or Replacement: Any nonconforming sign and its supporting
structure, which is destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated, may be
replaced or repaired providing:
      1.   The new sign does not have a nonconforming feature that the original
sign did not have,
      2.   The new sign does not exceed the size of the original sign,
      3.   A nonconforming sign is not expanded or changed, and
      4.   A sign permit for the replacement or repair is issued within six (6)
months of the date of the damage. The planning and zoning commission may
approve requests for extensions within the original six (6) months.
   (C)   No Increase In Dimension: No sign or supporting structure which is
lawfully reproduced, repaired, or renovated as a nonconforming sign shall be
increased in area or height.
   (D)   Change Of Interior Panel Allowed: Changing an interior panel of a
nonconforming sign is allowed in all cases.
   (E)   Relocation: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any
sign which is a legally existing nonconforming sign hereunder may be relocated
on the same lot or tract of land, if the sign is required to be removed from
its present location because the property upon which the sign is located is
acquired by any governmental agency or other entity which has or could have
acquired the property through the exercise of its power of eminent domain. Such
relocated sign shall be placed, insofar as possible, as to comply with all the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-15: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Requests for variances to sign regulations shall be made in writing by
the applicant and heard by the planning and zoning commission at a public
hearing. A variance application may be obtained from the city. Applications for
a variance will be administered per the variance process contained in section
10-13-2-1 of this title. The planning and zoning commission's decision on a
variance application will be based on the approval criteria in section
10-13-2-1 of this title.
   (B)   A variance shall not be approved for a sign that is prohibited by
section
10-9-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
10-9-16: SIGN COORDINATION PLAN:
   (A)   A sign coordination plan is required prior to the permitting of
specified signs to determine overall sign locations on a property, the
relationship of the signs to surrounding existing, proposed, and future
improvements, and to determine consistency and uniformity among buildings and
signs within a multi-tenant zone or residential development. The sign
coordination plan shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department.
   (B)   A sign coordination plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   Elevations of the signs illustrating the materials of construction,
colors, lighting, font of letters, and dimensions of the signs. If the sign is
to be attached to a building, the elevation shall be a composite of the sign
and the building.
      2.   Elevations depicting the size of the signs in relation to the size
of the buildings within the development.
      3.   A plan drawn to preliminary plat or site plan specifications of the
site illustrating the location of existing and proposed signs on the property
and, if required by city staff, on adjacent properties.
      4.   Other information to illustrate the consistency and uniformity of
the signs.
      5.   For multi-tenant signs, the sign coordination plan shall identify a
multi-tenant zone. Only those properties and businesses included within the
multi-tenant zone shall be included on the multi-tenant signs erected within
the multi-tenant zone.
   (C)   For nonresidential and multi-family developments, the sign
coordination plan shall be submitted to the city for review with a site plan of
the property. For single-family and two-family developments, the sign
coordination plan shall be submitted to the city for review with a preliminary
or final plat of the property.
   (D)   The plan will be reviewed and considered for approval by city staff.
Staff may approve or deny a sign coordination plan. Should staff deny a sign
coordination plan, the plan may be forwarded to the planning and zoning
commission for their review and consideration upon receipt of a written appeal
request. The planning and zoning commission may approve or deny the plan. A
plan that is denied by the planning and zoning commission may be forwarded to
the city council for their review and consideration upon receipt of a written
appeal request. The city council may approve or deny the plan. The city
council's decision is final. (Ord. 2957, 12-8-2008)
CHAPTER 10
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Residential Parking Provisions
10-10-3: Nonresidential And Multi-Family Parking Provisions
10-10-4: Mixed Use Or Joint Use Parking Provisions
10-10-5: Parking Access And Layout Drawing - All Districts And Subdistricts
10-10-6: Parking Requirements Based On Use
10-10-7: Bicycle Parking Exchange
10-10-8: Rules For Computing Number Of Parking Spaces
10-10-9: Location Of Parking Spaces
10-10-10: Loading Space And Stacking Requirements
10-10-11: Minimum Standards For Parking Lot Design
10-10-12: Regulations For Parking Overlay Districts
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on
public streets; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation; to
conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of
land. Minimum off street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in
the following schedules and provisions. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-2: RESIDENTIAL PARKING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Required parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use it is to
serve.
   (B)   All required parking spaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or other
material approved by the city engineer prior to construction.
   (C)   No required parking space shall be used for the storage of any vehicle
of one and one half (1.5) ton capacity or more, nor a vehicle which has an
overall length of more than twenty two feet (22'), nor a trailer of more than
one and one-half (1.5) ton capacity, except while engaging in the actual
loading or unloading of passengers or property.
   (D)   Direct private residential driveway access to arterial streets creates
a traffic hazard. No development plan or plat creating lots which require
direct residential driveway access to an arterial street (as shown in current
master transportation plan) shall be approved.
   (E)   When a property abuts a residential and collector/arterial, the
driveway shall be located on the residential street. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-3: NONRESIDENTIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY PARKING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be
designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties.
   (B)   All required parking spaces shall be constructed from asphalt, paved
concrete, or another similar surface approved by the city engineer, or
designated official, prior to construction. Parking spaces shall be permanently
and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other
approved methods. Nonpermanent markings, such as paint, shall be regularly
maintained to ensure continuous identification.
   (C)   All parking and loading spaces and vehicle sales areas on private
property shall have a curb or vehicle stopping device for spaces adjacent to
required landscaped areas, public right of way line, public sidewalk, or other
accessible path, to prevent any parked vehicle from overhanging into these
areas. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right of way
in any case. All vehicle maneuvering shall take place on site. No public right
of way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or out of a parking space,
except as provided in the downtown parking overlay districts.
   (D)   Required parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these
respective purposes and not for the storage or permanent display of boats,
trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, or products for
sale.
   (E)   Refuse storage facilities placed in a parking lot shall not be located
in a designated parking or loading space. Each refuse facility shall be located
so as to facilitate pick up by refuse collection agencies and shall be screened
according to provisions in this title.
   (F)   Handicap parking space(s) shall conform to the current ADA standards
for accessible design as amended. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-4: MIXED USE OR JOINT USE PARKING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Mixed Uses: Total requirements for off street parking spaces shall be
the sum of the requirements for various uses.
   (B)   Joint Uses: The joint use of off street parking facilities is allowed
provided:
      1.   The applicant shows that there is no substantial conflict in the
principal operating hours of the building, structure or use for which the joint
use of parking facilities is proposed;
      2.   The parking facility for such proposed joint use is not farther than
three hundred fifty feet (350') for customers and five hundred feet (500') for
employees from the building, structure or use which is being required to
provide off street parking; and
      3.   The parties concerned in the joint use of off street parking
facilities shall submit a written agreement in a form to be recorded for such
joint use, approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and such
agreement, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be filed with the
application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy (COO); whichever
occurs first.
   (C)   Evening Parking Spaces: Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking
spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:
00 P.M.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices,
and similar uses not normally occupied during evening hours if specifically
approved by the zoning administrator. Approval may be reviewed upon the
determination that a change of use has occurred. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-5: PARKING ACCESS AND LAYOUT DRAWING - ALL DISTRICTS AND SUBDISTRICTS:
   (A)   In all districts building plans shall provide for entrance/exit drive
(s) appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or
conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets as approved by the
city engineer or designated representative.
      1.   Where projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving the
developments are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow
volumes on adjoining streets, additional right of way and paving in the form of
a deceleration lane or turn lane may be required to be furnished by the
landowner in order to reduce such interference. Projections of traffic shall be
based on analysis performed by the city engineer or designated official.
      2.   Additional right of way or paving requirements may be reviewed and
determined during the platting and/or development process.
   (B)   Backing a vehicle from an off street parking space directly into a
public trafficway creates a traffic hazard. Parking layouts requiring this
maneuver shall not be approved by the city engineer except for residential uses
exiting onto a local trafficway of low traffic volume.
   (C)   Whenever off street parking is required by this code a parking layout
drawing shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer. The layout
shall show a sketch of all parking spaces, access aisles, entrances to the site
and exits from the site drawn to scale and the dimensions of each item shown
and shall indicate all information necessary to determine the employee and
customer parking requirements. The entrances to and/or exits from the parking
site shall conform to the requirements of this code for driveway approaches.
Parking spaces shall have a minimum size of nine feet by twenty feet (9' x
20'), or if parallel to the access aisle, nine feet by twenty three feet (9' x
23'). (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE:
In all zoning districts and subdistricts, at the time any building or structure
is constructed, structurally altered, enlarged or increased in capacity, or
when the use of a building or structure is changed, parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements:
Assembly and education:  
Assembly and education:                   
 Assembly, convention, exhibition or    1 parking space for each 200 square
  reception hall without fixed seats     feet of floor area
                                         1 parking space for each 3 fixed
                                         seats, or 6 feet of bench, in all
                                         areas that may be simultaneously used
 Church, rectory, or other place of     for assembly. Where there is no fixed
  worship                                seating or a combination of assembly
                                         areas with and without fixed seating,
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each 35 square feet of assembly space
 College or university                  1 space per 4 students at maximum
                                         capacity
                                         10 parking spaces plus 1 additional
                                         space for each 300 square feet of
                                         floor area in excess of 2,000 square
  Community center, library, museum, or  feet. If an auditorium is included as
 art gallery                            a part of the building, its floor area
                                         shall be deducted from the floor area
                                         and additional parking provided on the
                                         basis of 1 space for each 4 seats
                                         contained therein
  Kindergartens, day schools, and        1.5 spaces per employee anticipated at
 similar child training and care        full capacity plus 1 paved off street
  establishments                         loading and unloading space
 Recreation center                      1 space per 100 square feet of floor
                                         area
 School; elementary, secondary, or      2 parking spaces per classroom
  middle
 School; high school                    1 space per 4 people calculated at
                                         maximum capacity
  Theater, sports arena, stadium,        1 parking space for each 3 seats or 6
 gymnasium or auditorium (except        feet of bench seating
  school)
Health services:                          
 Assisted living, nursing home and      1 space per 2 certified beds or 2
  retirement facilities                  units, whichever is greater
                                         1 space per employee on the largest
 Hospital                               shift, plus 1.5 spaces per each bed or
                                         examination room, whichever is
                                         applicable
                                         1 space per 250 square feet of floor
 Medical or dental office               area. Facilities over 20,000 square
                                         feet shall use the parking standards
                                         set forth for hospitals
Residential:                              
                                         2 spaces for units containing 1 and 2
 Dwellings, multi-family                bedrooms, each additional bedroom
                                         requires 0.5 additional space
 Dwellings, single-family and duplex    2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Retail, commercial, industrial:           
 Bank, savings and loan, or similar     1 space per 350 square feet of gross
  institution                            floor area
 Bar or club                            1 parking space for each 75 square
                                         feet of gross floor area
 Beauty salon                           See Personal service establishment
                                         1 space per guestroom in addition to
 Bed and breakfast facility             the requirements for a normal
                                         residential use
 Bowling alley                          3 parking spaces for each alley or
                                         lane
  Business or professional office        1 space per 250 square feet of gross
 (general)                              floor area except as otherwise
                                         specified herein
 Commercial amusement                   1 space per 3 guests at maximum
                                         designed capacity
                                         1 parking space for each 150 square
 Country club or private golf club      feet of floor area or for every 5
                                         members, whichever is greater
 Flea market                            1 space for each 500 square feet of
                                         site area
                                         1 parking space for each 2 beds on
 Fraternity, sorority, or dormitory     campus; 1.5 spaces for each 2 beds in
                                         off campus projects
  Furniture or appliance store, hardware
  store, wholesale establishments,       2 parking spaces, plus 1 additional
 machinery or equipment sales and       parking space for each 300 square feet
  service, clothing or shoe repair or    of floor area over 1,000
  service
 Gas station                            See Refueling station
 Golf course                            5 parking spaces per hole
 Health club or exercise gym            1 parking space per 250 square feet of
                                         exercise area
                                         1 parking space for each sleeping room
 Hotel                                  or suite plus 1 space for each 200
                                         square feet of commercial floor area
                                         contained therein
 Lodge or fraternal organization        1 space per 200 square feet of floor
                                         area
  Manufacturing or industrial            1 parking space for each employee on
  establishment, research or testing     the maximum working shift plus space
 laboratory, creamery, bottling plant,  to accommodate all trucks and other
  warehouse, printing or plumbing shop,  vehicles used in connection therewith,
  or similar establishment               but not less than 1 parking space for
                                         each 1,250 square feet of floor area
                                         4 spaces per complex plus 1 additional
 Miniwarehouse                          space per 300 square feet of rental
                                         office
                                         2 spaces for each mobile home plus
 Mobile home park                       additional spaces as required herein
                                         for accessory uses
                                         1 parking space for each 50 square
 Mortuary or funeral home               feet of floor space in parlors or
                                         individual funeral service rooms
                                         1 parking space for each sleeping room
 Motel                                  or suite plus 1 additional space for
                                         each 200 square feet of commercial
                                         floor area contained therein
                                         1 parking space for each 500 square
 Motor vehicle salesroom and used car   feet of the structure. These required
  lots                                   spaces may not be used to store or
                                         display automobiles for sale
                                         3 parking spaces plus 1.5 parking
                                         spaces per service bay. Adequate
 Motor vehicle service and repair       storage space for overnight stay of
                                         vehicles also required where
                                         applicable. Adequate stacking lanes
                                         also required where applicable
 Motor vehicle wash station (car wash   1 parking space per 500 square feet of
  self-serve)                            gross floor area
 Office                                 See Business or professional office
                                         (general)
 Personal service establishment, except 1 space per 250 square feet of gross
  as otherwise specified herein          floor area
                                         1 space per 250 square feet of gross
 Refueling station                      floor area. Adequate space shall be
                                         provided for waiting, stacking, and
                                         maneuvering automobiles for refueling
                                         1 parking space for each 75 square
                                         feet of gross floor area for stand
                                         alone buildings without a drive-
                                         through, and 1 parking space for each
  Restaurant, cafe or similar dining     100 square feet of gross floor area
 establishment                          for restaurants located within a
                                         multi-tenant building and for stand
                                         alone buildings with a drive-through.
                                         Outdoor seating/dining areas will be
                                         included in gross floor area
                                         calculations
 Retail store                           1 space per 250 square feet of gross
                                         floor area
 Rooming or boarding house              1 parking space for each sleeping room
                                         1 truck parking space for each 10,000
 Truck stops                            square feet of site area, plus 1
                                         vehicle parking space per 200 square
                                         feet of building area
  Warehouse, wholesale,                  1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross
 minimanufacturing and other industrial floor area, or 1 space per maximum
  type uses                              number of employees on a shift,
                                         whichever is less
 
(Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-7: BICYCLE PARKING EXCHANGE:
At the owner's discretion, a maximum of one required parking space may be
exchanged for ten (10) bicycle spaces. Bicycle spaces shall be located on a
bike rack furnished by the owner. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-8: RULES FOR COMPUTING NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses,
the following rules shall govern:
   (A)   "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
   (B)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
constructed to be the next whole number.
   (C)   The parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned
herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature, as determined
by the zoning administrator.
   (D)   When an existing residential structure is converted to a
nonresidential use, the parking requirements may be modified by the
administrator if it can be shown that strict compliance to these development
standards is not possible. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-9: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or
use requiring said spaces when at all possible. Exceptions to this requirement
are as follows:
   (A)   The required off street parking location shall not be located more
than the following distances, measured along the sidewalk or a walkway
available for public use, from the primary entrance of the premises to the
nearest entrance of the parking lot:
      1.   Customer parking for retail or commercial businesses, as well as
medical-dental clinics, churches, restaurants, bars, entertainment facilities
and residential uses: Three hundred fifty feet (350').
      2.   Employee parking: Five hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-10: LOADING SPACE AND STACKING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   All nonresidential uses having ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more of gross floor area shall provide and maintain an area for the loading and
unloading of merchandise and goods, in accordance with this code and the
following requirements:
      1.   Retail, commercial and industrial uses with building sizes of ten
thousand (10,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area will
provide one loading space minimum. Uses with building sizes fifty thousand
(50,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area will
provide two (2) loading spaces minimum. Buildings over one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of floor area will provide two (2) loading spaces
minimum, plus one additional space for each one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of floor area.
      2.   All hotels, office buildings, restaurants and similar establishments
shall have at least one space per one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square
feet of gross floor area up to three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
      3.   A loading space shall consist of an unobstructed minimum area of
twelve feet wide, forty feet long and fourteen feet tall (12' x 40' x 14').
      4.   All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and
clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks. Each site shall provide a
designated maneuvering area for trucks.
   (B)   Stacking spaces provide the ability for vehicles to queue on site
prior to receiving a service. A stacking space shall be a minimum of nine feet
wide and twenty feet long (9' x 20') and shall not be located within or
interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering
aisle. Unless otherwise specified, stacking spaces shall be provided behind the
vehicle bay door, middle of the service window, or middle of the service
island, whichever is applicable. In all zoning districts, at the time any
building or structure is erected or altered, stacking spaces shall be provided
in the number and manner set forth in the following list of property uses:
Automated teller machine (ATM)          3 stacking spaces
Automobile oil change and similar       3 stacking spaces per bay
establishments
Car wash (full service)                 5 stacking spaces per bay
Car wash (self-service - automated)     3 stacking spaces per bay
Car wash (self-service - open bay)      2 stacking spaces per bay
Dry cleaning, pharmacy, or other retail 3 stacking spaces from first service
establishments with a drive- through    window
Financial institution                   3 stacking spaces per window or service
                                        lane
Restaurant with drive-through           5 stacking spaces from first window,
                                        order board, or other stopping point
 
A single stacking space shall be provided after the final window, order board,
or stopping points, to allow vehicles to pull clear of the transaction area
prior to entering an intersecting on site driveway or maneuvering aisle.
Buildings and other structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the back of the curb of the intersecting driveway or maneuvering aisle to
provide adequate visibility and to allow vehicles to safely exit drive-through
lanes and escape lanes prior to merging into intersecting driveways or
maneuvering aisles.
An escape lane shall be provided for any use containing a drive-through
facility. An escape lane shall be nine feet (9') wide and shall provide access
around the drive- through facility. An escape lane may be part of a circulation
aisle. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-11: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOT DESIGN:
         (A)   Design Standards Table And Exhibit:
A       B     C      D     E Driveway Width  F      G      H      I
Parking Stall Curb   Stall One- Way Two- Way Curb   Curb   Curb   Curb Length
Angle   Width Length Depth                   Length Length Length
A       B     C      D      E Driveway Width  F      G      H      I
Parking Stall Curb   Stall  One- Way Two- Way Curb   Curb   Curb   Curb Length
Angle   Width Length Depth                    Length Length Length
0°     9'0"  23'0"  9'0"   12'0"    24'0"    0'0"   20'0"  9'0"   20'0"
20°    9'0"  26'4"  15'3"  11'0"    24'0"    3'1"   15'8"  8'5"   18'10"
30°    9'0"  18'0"  17'9"  11'0"    24'0"    4'6"   12'10" 7'10"  17'4"
40°    9'0"  14'0"  19'9"  12'0"    24'0"    5'9"   9'6"   6'11"  15'4"
45°    9'0"  12'9"  20'6"  13'0"    24'0"    6'4"   7'9"   6'4"   14'2"
50°    9'0"  11'9"  21'1"  14'0"    24'0"    6'11"  6'0"   5'9"   12'10"
60°    9'0"  10'5"  21'10" 16'0"    24'0"    7'10"  2'2"   4'6"   10'0"
70°    9'0"  9'8"   21'10" 18'0"    24'0"    8'5"   1'7"   3'1"   6'10"
80°    9'0"  9'2"   21'4"  20'0"    24'0"    8'10"  5'5"   1'7"   3'6"
90°    9'0"  9'0"   20'0"  24'0"    24'0"    9'0"   9'0"   0'0"   0'0"
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c7d9933e539822766bd1a6628bd2e23284e30d1a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2022.gif]
   (B)   Interior Landscaping Requirements: Any nonresidential parking area
that contains twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall provide interior parking
lot landscaping, in addition to other required landscaping, as follows:
      1.   Where an existing parking lot area is altered or expanded to
increase the number of spaces to twenty (20) or more, interior landscaping
shall be provided on the new portion of the lot in accordance with this
section.
      2.   Landscaped islands shall be located at the terminus of all parking
rows. Also, no more than fifteen (15) parking spaces are permitted in a
continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island.
      3.   Required landscaped islands shall be a minimum eight feet wide and
fifteen feet long (8' x 15') and shall contain at least one tree. Trees shall
have a height of at least four feet (4') when planted.
      4.   Required landscape islands may be grouped, subject to approval by
the planning and zoning commission.
      5.   All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised six inch (6")
concrete curb. Pavement shall not be placed closer than four feet (4') from the
trunk of a tree unless a root barrier is provided. (Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
10-10-12: REGULATIONS FOR PARKING OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
The purpose of the parking overlay districts is established to accommodate the
need for off street parking ratio alternatives in accordance with traffic
patterns, ultimate densities and coordinated use of lands within the city. It
is intended that the respective districts with which the parking district is
combined shall have requirements particular to the land and uses which warrant
off street parking variables to be applied.
The following regulations of this section shall apply to all land classified as
a "parking district" (P). All uses are permitted in the respective district
with which the P district is combined, subject to the provisions of those
districts. If any of the regulations specified in this section differ from
corresponding regulations specified for a district with which the P district is
combined, then the regulations of this district shall govern.
   (A)   Parking district 1:
      1.   The boundary of the P1 district is defined as illustrated on the
current zoning district map.
      2.   No off street parking is required within the P1 district as
designated for outright permitted uses, but may be required through the special
use permit required by the commission or council. This provision does not
exempt any use from the requirements for off street loading.
   (B)   Parking district 2:
      1.   The boundary of the P2 district is defined as illustrated on the
current zoning district map.
      2.   The off street parking requirement in the P2 district is thirty
percent (30%) less than that required outside of the P districts except that
household dwellings of less than five (5) units shall provide two (2) spaces
per unit. This provision does not exempt any use from the full requirements for
off street loading.
   (C)   Parking district 3:
      1.   The boundary of the P3 district is defined as illustrated on the
current zoning district map.
      2.   Due to the desire of the city to retain the character of the P3
district special consideration may be given on a case by case basis to the
parking requirements, if the standard requirements cannot be applied. Examples
of special consideration may be a variance, leased parking, and remote parking.
(Ord. 3076, 8-11-2014)
CHAPTER 11
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Improvements Required
10-11-2: Exceptions
10-11-3: Landscaping
10-11-4: Screening Of Properties
10-11-5: Parking Areas
10-11-6: Right Of Way Improvements
10-11-7: Solid Waste Management
10-11-8: Water And Sewer
10-11-9: Drainage And Stormwater Management
10-11-10: Floodplain Regulations
10-11-11:Reference Codes
10-11-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The improvements required herein shall be provided whenever a building or
structure is constructed, placed, erected or enlarged or when there is a change
of use of a building, structure or parcel of land. Unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, all required improvements shall be a condition of any building
permit and they shall be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy of the building.(Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Cost Of Improvements: If cost of improvements required by sections
10-11-3 through
10-11-6 of this chapter exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the cost of the
proposed private improvements, an agreement may be negotiated to allow the
required improvements to be staged over a period of time not to exceed three
(3) years.
   (B)   Size Of Building Addition Or Modification: Any improvements required
by sections
10-11-3 through
10-11-6 of this chapter are not required for minor modifications or additions
to existing buildings or structures when the modifications and improvements do
not constitute more than a twenty five percent (25%) increase over the square
footage of the existing buildings or a total increase in square footage over
ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is less, within any three (3) year
period from date of completion of other expansion.
   (C)   Sites With Multiple Buildings: If a single building of a premises
containing multiple buildings is expanded over twenty five percent (25%) of
that building’s square footage but less than a total of twenty five percent
(25%) of the combined square footage of all buildings, the improvements
required by sections
10-11-3 through
10-11-6 of this chapter shall be provided for the building being expanded only.
If the expansion is greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater
than twenty five percent (25%) of the combined footage of all buildings, the
improvements required by sections
10-11-3 through
10-11-6 of this chapter shall be provided for the entire premises. (Ord. 2024-
012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-3: LANDSCAPING:
   (A)   Minimum Standards: The required minimum size landscaped area shall, as
a minimum, have the following plant life:
      1.   One tree per five hundred (500) square feet of landscaped area. At
least fifty percent (50%) of the required trees shall be evergreens. All trees
shall have a height of at least four feet (4') when planted.
      2.   One bush per one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area. At
least fifty percent (50%) of the required bushes shall be evergreens.
      3.   Within required landscaped areas, display of vehicles, trailers,
pickup shells, tires, or any other items for sale is prohibited.
         a.   Except upon city approved display pads provided through zoning
development agreements (ZDA), or as approved through the special use permit
process.
         b.   No such display pads shall be approved within fifteen feet (15')
of the sidewalk or future sidewalk.
      4.   The commission may approve alternative plans or designs to allow
innovative landscaping.(Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (B)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A landscaping plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this
section shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a
building permit to construct any building. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
      2.   A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued when the
landscaping vegetation items are not completed.
      3.   All landscaping shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the
minimum requirements of this section. (Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; amd. Ord. 2024-
012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-4: SCREENING OF PROPERTIES:
   (A)   Screening Required:
      1.   Screening shall be required between any residential use and any
trade or manufacturing use in abutting zoning districts or any zoning district
where both such uses are permitted outright and may be required around any
special use. The trade, manufacturing or special use shall provide any required
screening. Screening shall not be required if a public trafficway other than a
service road separates the two (2) uses. This screening requirement may be
waived upon written approval of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-
1997)
      2.   Screening shall be required between an MHP zoning subdistrict and
any other zoning district or subdistrict except another MHP or MHS subdistrict
and screening may be required between a ZDA or MHS zoning subdistrict and any
other zoning district or subdistrict. The zoning subdistrict shall provide any
required screening. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
      3.   No wrecking yard or wrecking house or junkyard or junk house shall
be established unless the same shall be completely surrounded by a fence of
wood, concrete or slatted chainlink not less than eight feet (8') in height
from the level of the ground and completely obscuring the wreckage and parts
therein from outside view. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (B)   Minimum Standards:
      1.   Screening shall be a minimum six foot (6') fence or wall or a
landscaped area or any combination thereof. If it be a fence or wall it shall
be constructed of wood, solid vinyl, metal, concrete or concrete block. If it
be a landscaped area, it shall be evergreen bushes or trees and may include an
earthen berm. (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
      2.   Whenever bushes or trees are used as screening, the screening height
may not be less than three feet (3') at the time of planting, providing a
minimum height of six feet (6') is achieved within six (6) years after
planting.
      3.   Screening shall completely obscure objects inside the screened area
when viewed from any angle outside the screened area and shall be constructed
so as to reduce noise, lights and blowing trash.
   (C)   Exceptions: Screening shall not be constructed so as to create a
traffic hazard 1  and it shall conform to the height restrictions in the
chapters establishing dimensional standards in zoning districts and
subdistricts.
   (D)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minium requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   All requirements found within the Screening section shall be
completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-
1984; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-9-16 of this code.
10-11-5: PARKING AREAS:
   (A)   Pedestrian Access: Access to each building shall be provided by
connecting the principal entrance into each building to the parking areas
intended for the use of the occupants with a sidewalk which is not more than
three hundred feet (300') in length. (Ord. 2468, 12-19-1994)
   (B)   Surfacing: All parking and maneuvering areas shall be hard surfaced
with portland concrete or asphaltic concrete surface material. In the M1 and M2
zoning districts, the requirements in section
7-1-20 of this code will apply. (Ord. 2550, 6-2-1997)
   (C)   Striping: Parking areas that are intended to provide more than ten
(10) spaces on a single site shall be marked off with a four inch by fifteen
foot (4" x 15') long painted stripe along the sides of each parking space.
   (D)   Lighting: Parking areas that are intended to provide more than
eighteen (18) spaces on a single site shall have lighting that will provide at
least one foot- candle of light at the ground surface on the entire parking
site. Lighting shall be screened so that it does not directly illuminate any
adjacent residential uses with more than one-fourth (1/4) of a foot-candle and
so that it does not create a traffic hazard.
   (E)   Vehicle Access:
      1.   Any motor vehicle entrance to a public trafficway from private
property shall be considered a driveway approach and shall conform to the
standards established herein.
      2.   The city engineer shall establish construction standards for all
driveway approaches. The standard depressed curb type approach shall be
constructed unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. An arterial street
driveway approach, with rounded curbing, may be required by the city engineer
when traffic conditions on arterial streets warrant a more rapid entrance and
exit through the driveway approach. This decision of the city engineer
requiring an arterial street driveway approach may be appealed to the city
council. Nothing in this subsection should be construed to prevent the
construction of an arterial street driveway approach, if desired by the
property owner. (Ord. 2468, 12-19-1994)
      3.   The city engineer may allow driveway approaches conforming to the
following standards, providing they do not pose any unusual traffic hazards:
         a.   Residential Use Driveway Approaches: Shall not exceed thirty six
feet (36'). Joint use drives between two (2) separate properties to serve
multi-family residences will be allowed; however, the total width of the curb
cut shall not exceed forty feet (40'). There shall be at least thirty two feet
(32') between driveways entering a single property ownership and at least
eighteen feet (18') of straight curb between the end of a driveway and the end
of a corner radius and at least two feet (2') between the end of a driveway and
a side property line.
         b.   Commercial And Manufacturing Use Driveway Approaches: Shall not
exceed forty feet (40') nor be less than thirty feet (30') except one-way
approaches which shall not be less than twelve feet (12'). There shall be at
least thirty two feet (32') of curb between driveways and at least eighteen
feet (18') of straight curb between the end of a driveway and the end of a
corner radius and at least two feet (2') between the end of a driveway and a
side property line. (Ord. 2773, 12-15-2003)
         c.   Large Trucks And Trailer Accommodation: The city engineer may
allow curb cuts up to sixty five feet (65') for commercial or industrial drives
where it appears that it is necessary to accommodate large trucks and trailers
and to reduce the distance between a commercial or industrial driveway and the
side property line to two feet (2') when on street parking is not allowed or
not practical due to some existing condition. The public welfare, safety and
convenience shall be considered in granting such applications.
         d.   Additional Driveway Width Allowed: The city engineer may allow
additional driveway width under the following conditions: the street is not an
arterial or collector street; the traffic generated by the land use is minimal
(no high traffic generating retail trade uses, services, residential uses or
public assembly as defined in section
10-10-3 of this title); a parking plan is submitted and adhered to that
conforms to subsection
10-10-5(B) of this title; and driveways conform to standard slope and height
dimensions to control drainage.
   (F)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued when the
following Parking Area items have not been completed:
         a.   Parking stall striping.
         b.   Hard surfacing: only in areas that are not part of other
requirements of this code.
         (1)   Any area or items needed to meet the minimum code requirements
for ADA Accessibility, parking lot layouts (delivery areas, parking spaces,
maneuvering areas), and/or stormwater systems shall be installed prior to any
Certificate of Occupancy being issued.(Ord. 2468, 12-19-1994; amd. Ord. 2024-
012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-6: RIGHT-OF-WAY IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Adequate Access: No building shall be constructed or erected on a lot
in a zoning district unless adequate access to a fifty foot (50') wide minimum
standard all weather public trafficway is provided. Said access may be a
private drive providing such drive conforms with the following chart:
         PRIVATE DRIVEWAY LENGTH
 
 Width 100      150      200      250      300
        Feet     Feet      Feet   Feet     Feet
                                        
20 feet 8 units  7 units  6 units  n/a      n/a
25 feet 10 units 10 units 8 units  8 units  n/a
30 feet 12 units 12 units 12 units 12 units 12 units
 
      This requirement may be limited to a minimum length of fifty feet (50')
for driveways serving not more than three (3) single-family residences within
the AG and SUI zoning districts.
      In commercial and manufacturing zoning districts, a private drive may not
exceed three hundred feet (300') in length, must have a developed width of
twenty feet (20') for one-way traffic and twenty five feet (25') for two-way
traffic and may not serve a total building area of over fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet.
      The city council may approve additional driveway length in excess of
three hundred feet (300') in cases where isolated parcels of land cannot be
developed with a minimum fifty foot (50') dedicated right of way.
      Such a private drive shall be surfaced with Portland concrete or
asphaltic concrete. No zoning subdistrict will be allowed that does not have
direct access to a fifty foot (50') wide minimum standard all weather paved
public trafficway. (Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (B)   Curb, Gutter And Sidewalk:
      1.   New curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be constructed at the expense of
the property owner with and at the same time as all new construction or
modification of existing buildings in accordance with city standards on all
streets, within and adjacent to the development, and in all zoning districts
except the AG district, for all land uses except under any one or more of the
following conditions:
         a.   Sidewalks are not required in the SUI, M1 or M2 zoning districts
except on arterial streets or areas of high pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 2347, 9-
3-1991; amd. Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004)
      2.   The city engineer may defer the construction of required curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk until other curb, gutter and/or sidewalk is constructed
adjacent to other lands in the neighborhood under any one or more of the
following conditions:
         a.   If the total length of existing curb-gutter on both sides of the
street in an existing development plus the length of the property in question
is less than forty percent (40%) of the total property length adjacent to a
standard block unless the curb-gutter will connect to an existing curb-gutter
section. The standard block shall be the distance between two (2) intersecting
streets or four hundred feet (400') whichever is less. The same criteria shall
apply separately to sidewalks. All curb-gutters to be considered as existing
shall be to acceptable line and grade.
         b.   If another governmental agency having jurisdiction over a
particular street requests that curb-gutter be deferred.
         c.   If existing curb, gutter and/or sidewalk is in good repair and to
an acceptable line and grade which conforms to the line and grade of other
curb, gutter and/or sidewalk in the standard block, it may be retained.
      3.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall not be required or allowed to be
constructed or may be deferred if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the
improvement would create a traffic hazard or an unusual drainage problem.
   (C)   Construction Standards For Vertical And Rolled Curb: Both vertical and
rolled curb shall be allowed in the city, in accordance with the provisions of
this code and in conformance with the standard construction design and
specifications for the same, as are on file in the city engineer's office. The
most recent construction design and specifications shall prevail.
      Standard detail C-2 (4 inch rolled curb) shall be used only when the
following applicable conditions have been met:
      1.   On local residential streets in new developments, when the top of
curb to top of curb street drainage capacity is not exceeded by the peak flow
generated during a 50-year 24-hour storm. It shall be the developer's
engineering consultant's responsibility to compile and submit drainage
calculations to the city for review and approval.
      2.   On residential cul-de-sac streets in new developments which meet the
drainage requirements set forth in subsection (C)1 of this section.
      3.   On local residential streets in existing developments where no curb
or gutter exists in the block under consideration and a study by the city
engineering department indicates that the proposed installation will meet the
drainage requirements set forth in subsection (C)1 of this section.
      4.   In all cases four inches (4") rolled curb shall be transitioned into
six inch (6") vertical curb around all curb returns.
   (D)   Restrictive Requirements: In areas where two (2) or more zoning
districts or subdistricts abut, and said zoning districts or subdistricts have
different public improvement requirements, the council may impose the least
restrictive requirements if the council finds that imposition of the least
restrictive requirements will further the policies and purposes described in
chapter 1 of this title.
   (E)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   All requirements found within this section shall be completed, or
other financial surety accepted by the City of Twin Falls, prior to issuance of
any Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-
2024)
10-11-7: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   Trash Bins: A trash bin of sufficient size to accommodate all trash or
solid waste stored on the premises shall be provided in any zoning district
except buildings containing two (2) or less household units.
   (B)   Enclosure: All trash bins shall be completely surrounded with a well
maintained fence or wall that will completely obscure all trash and waste
stored in the enclosure. All trash bins shall be visibly screened from adjacent
streets and properties. (Ord. 2741, 11-4-2002)
   (C)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued when the
following Solid Waste Management items have not been completed:
         a.   Enclosure of the trash bins. (Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-8: WATER AND SEWER:
All buildings intended for human occupancy shall have adequate sanitary
facilities. Such facilities shall be connected to an approved domestic water
source conforming to the water regulations of the city 1  and to an approved
wastewater system conforming to the wastewater regulations of the city 2 .
   (A)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   All requirements found within the Water and Sewer section shall be
completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-
1981; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  title 7, chapter 8 of this code.
2 2. See
  title 7, chapter 7 of this code.
10-11-9: DRAINAGE AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   Best Management Practices: Building sites shall use best management
practices (BMPs) to retain as much storm water as possible on the property.
   (B)   Highway Drainage: Drainage to a state highway shall be subject to the
regulations of the Idaho transportation department. Necessary permits shall be
acquired by the developer.
   (C)   Road Drainage: Drainage to a road under the care, custody and control
of the Twin Falls highway district shall be subject to their regulations.
Necessary permits shall be acquired by the developer.
   (D)   Drainage To U.S. Waters Or Canals: No drainage shall be allowed from a
building site directly to any waters of the United States or to any privately
owned canal system.
   (E)   Residential Subdivisions:
      1.   All residential subdivisions shall design and construct storm water
retention facility or facilities to retain the 50-year 24-hour rainstorm event.
Refer to subsection
10-11-9(C)5c(4) of this chapter to determine the volume requirements.
      2.   The storm water shall be detained and released over a forty eight
(48) hour period or at a rate that is approved by the Twin Falls canal company
or by any other entity that may govern the waterway downstream.
      3.   The storm water dischargers releasing water from their retention
area shall use best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the amount of
pollutants from the water. Discharge water quality shall comply with the most
current regulations or standards that may apply.
      4.   The retention facilities shall also have an overflow device that can
convey the 100-year 24-hour rainstorm event, without damage to the retention
facility. This structure should be designed to minimize any downstream safety
problems.
      5.   Storm sewers shall be placed in a public right of way or minimum
fifteen foot (15') wide easement. Easements shall also be required for the
retention areas. The city reserves the right to modify the retention facilities
to stay in compliance with any state or federal regulation.
   (F)   Commercial And Industrial Developments: All commercial and industrial
developments shall design and construct storm water retention facilities to
retain the 50-year 24-hour rainstorm event. Refer to subsection
10-11-9(C)5c(4) of this chapter to determine the volume requirements. No
discharge of storm water will be allowed from these areas.
   (G)   Procedure For Review And Approval Of The Storm Water Management Plan:
      Note: Review and approval by the city does not constitute an engineering
review of project plans and calculations. The review is for the purpose of
ensuring general conformance to city policies and requirements. The submitting
engineer is solely responsible for the design. All submissions to the city
shall be stamped by a professional engineer registered in the state.
      The following shall be submitted to the city:
      1.   Topographic survey of the development showing all drainage and
irrigation water conveyance systems within the area encompassed by a line two
hundred feet (200') outside the property line.
      2.   Peak flow calculations, with peak flows delineated on the drawings.
      3.   Runoff volume calculations.
      4.   Plans and profiles of new or modified drainage and irrigation water
conveyance systems.
      5.   Plans, profiles and calculations for storm water retention or
detention facilities.
      6.   Flood routing computations for the 100-year flood through any
existing drainage conveyance systems.
      7.   Maintenance and operation manuals for storm water facilities.
      8.   Infiltration rates where applicable.
      9.   Seasonal high ground water table elevations where applicable. This
applies when the absorption of stormwater is used as a best management
practice.
      Note: Facilities using absorption designs shall not intercept the
postdevelopment ground water table. The bottom of the facility shall have a
minimum four feet (4') vertical separation from the seasonal high ground water
elevation and bedrock. The four foot (4') separation between the bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high ground water table shall contain a sandy loam
material to treat the water prior to entering the ground water. If the best
management practices are utilized to pretreat the water prior to discharge into
the absorption facility, the requirement for four foot (4') of sandy loam will
be waived.
      The seasonal high ground water table elevation shall be established and
used for the facility design. The elevation of the seasonal high ground water
table shall be determined by a monitoring well established at the facility site
and monitored during the high ground water season. If available, Twin Falls
health department ground water records may be used to establish the probable
highest ground water elevation. The high ground water elevation shall be shown
on the plans and be referenced to a nearby bench mark, the latitude and
longitude of the well shall be shown on the plans. If ground water is
encountered during construction of the facility at an elevation higher than
that shown on the plans, the facility shall be redesigned to account for the
higher elevation.
      10.   Soil classifications where applicable.
      11.   Flood routing of the 100-year storm to the ultimate drainage
system.
      12.   Copies of associated permits and discharge agreements.
      13.   Copy of the pollution prevention plan that is on file with EPA for
the development.
      Note: Prior to beginning of construction on any development site larger
than five (5) acres, the developer or their representative must have a
pollution prevention plan in place and must file a notice of intent (NOI) with
the EPA, in accordance with NPDES (national pollutant discharge elimination
system) requirements. The pollution prevention plan will include provisions for
reducing sediment discharges from the construction site and tracking of mud
onto roadways. A copy of this plan and the NOI shall be provided to the city
prior to any site grading. Refer to 40 CFR chapter 1 section 122.26 stormwater
discharges for NPDES requirements.
   (H)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   All requirements found within the Drainage and Storm Water
Management section shall be completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of
Occupancy. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-1995; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-10: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Statutory Authority :
      1.   The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 46-
1020, 46-1023, and 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain
management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain
development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health,
and property. Therefore, the Council of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho does
hereby ordain as follows:
      2.   Findings Of Fact:
         a.   The flood hazard areas of City of Twin Falls are subject to
periodic inundation that results in: loss of life and property; health and
safety hazards; disruption of commerce and governmental services; extraordinary
public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
         b.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard
areas, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected
from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
         c.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for
planning, adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
      3.   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
         a.   Protect human life, health, and property;
         b.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
         c.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas;
         d.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
         e.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated
with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
         f.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
         g.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified the property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
         h.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
      4.   Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to
accomplish its purpose, this section includes methods and provisions to:
         a.   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
         b.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
         c.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage or erosion;
         d.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
         e.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store flood waters.
   (B)   Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this section shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in
common usage and which give this section its most reasonable application.
   (C)   General Provisions:
      1.   Lands To Which This Section Applies: This section shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of City of Twin Falls.
Nothing in this section is intended to allow uses or structures that are
otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
      2.   Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas: The special flood hazard areas
(SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its
flood insurance study (FIS) for City of Twin Falls, dated May 1, 1984, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate
maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared
a part of this section. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at City of Twin Falls,
203 Main Avenue, East Room 218.
      3.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A Floodplain
Development Permit (FDP) shall be required in conformance with the provisions
of this section prior to the commencement of any development activities within
special flood hazard areas (SFHA) determined in accordance with the provisions
of Part (D), Section 2.
      4.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance
with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations.
      5.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This section shall not in any
way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions, etcetera. However, where this section and another ordinance
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions
shall control.
      6.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this
section all provisions shall be:
         a.   Considered as minimum requirements;
         b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
         c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
      7.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
section does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas (SFHA)
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of City of Twin
Falls, or by any officer or employee thereof, for flood damages that result
from reliance on this section or an administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
      8.   Penalties For Violation: No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the
terms of this section and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this section or failure to comply with any of its requirements,
including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred and eighty (180)
days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Twin Falls from
taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
   (D)   Administration :
      1.   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator:
         a.   The Assistant City Engineer, hereinafter referred to as the
"Floodplain Administrator," is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this section.
      2.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: The
Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following
duties:
         a.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits
for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas (SFHA) to assure
that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.
         b.   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas
(SFHA) to assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been
received, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
         c.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water
Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
         d.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained.
         e.   Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection
(E) 5. are met.
         f.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (D)3.c.
         g.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (D) 3.c.
         h.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of subsection (D) 3.c.
         i.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (D) 3.c and (E) 2.b.
         j.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (SFHA), floodways, or flood fringe
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section.
         k.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (C) 2., obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or flood fringe area
data available from a federal, state, local, or other source, including data
developed pursuant to subsection (E) 3.b.(2), in order to administer the
provisions of this section.
         l.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
or flood fringe area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions
of division (C) 2., obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
flood fringe area data available from a federal, state, local, or other source
in order to administer the provisions of this section.
         m.   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard
area (SFHA) is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner
of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain
a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
         n.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this section and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act
of 1974, as amended.
         o.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to
ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local
ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain
Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
         p.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this section, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
         q.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
         r.   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator
and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
         s.   Follow through with corrective procedures of subsection (D) 4.
         t.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
         u.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (C) 2. of this section, including
any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify
the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of the community's mapping needs.
         v.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters
of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
      3.   Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification
Requirements:
         a.   Application Requirements: Application for a floodplain
development permit (FDP) shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to
any development activities located within special flood hazard areas (SFHA).
The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:
            (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
               A.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility
systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage
facilities, and other development;
               B.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection (C) 2.,
or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;
               C.   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development
area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in in
subsection (C) 2.;
               D.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as
determined in Part (C) Section 2;
               E.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth
in subsections (C) 2., (C) 3., or (E) 3.;
               F.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
            (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development
within a special flood hazard area (SFHA), including but not limited to:
               A.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
               B.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
               C.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
            (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-
0-33) with supporting data; an operational plan; and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise,
and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
            (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
section are met. These details include but are not limited to:
               A.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e.,
fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open
foundation, or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
               B.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection (E) 2.d. (1) -
(4) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and
A1-30.
            (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
            (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located
and constructed to minimize flood damage.
            (7)   Certification that all other local, state, and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received.
            (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
subsection (E) 2.f. and g. of this section are met.
            (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
            (10)   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of
the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
         b.   Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit (FDP)
shall include, but not be limited to:
            (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted
under the floodplain development permit (i.e. house, garage, pool, septic,
bulkhead, cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging,
filling, rip-rap, docks, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
            (2)   The special flood hazard area (SFHA) determination for the
proposed development in accordance with available data specified in subsection
(C) 2.
            (3)   The flood protection elevation (FPE) required for the lowest
floor and all attendant utilities.
            (4)   The flood protection elevation (FPE) required for the
protection of all public utilities.
            (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
            (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as
applicable.
            (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO,
or A1-30.
            (8)   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the start of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A
floodplain development permit (FDP) shall expire one hundred and eighty (180)
days after issuance, unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the
start of construction definition.
            (9)   A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses,
if applicable. (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
            (10)   A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood
resistant materials.
         c.   Certification Requirements:
            (1)   Elevation Certificates:
               A.   A Construction drawings elevation certificate (FEMA Form
86-0-33) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation
to mean sea level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit.
               B.   A building under construction elevation certificate (FEMA
Form 86-0-33) is required after the lowest floor is established. Within seven
(7) calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor elevation, it shall be
the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea
level. Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to issue a stop-work order for the project.
               C.   A final as-built finished construction elevation
certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and
prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
            (2)   Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing
is used to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan,
and an inspection and maintenance plan, are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean
sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
            (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AE, AH, AO,
or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty-six (36) inches
in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required, in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (E) 2.c.(2).
            (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following
shall all be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator by the permit applicant
prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit (FDP):
               A.   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
               B.   A professional engineer's certified report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
               C.   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation; and
               D.   An Idaho stream channel alteration permit.
            (5)   Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/
floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections (D)3. a. and
b. of this section:
               A.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection
(E) 2.e.(1);
               B.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection (E)
2.f.; and
               C.   Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square
feet meeting requirements of subsection (E) 2.g.
         d.   Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures
(including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements,
repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such
buildings and structures), the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with
the Building Official, shall:
            (1)   Estimate the market value or require the applicant to obtain
an appraisal of the market value, prepared by a qualified independent
appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the
proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or
structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any
repairs are made;
            (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to
repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, and the combined costs
of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building
or structure;
            (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
            (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted
Idaho Building Code and this ordinance is required.
      4.   Corrective Procedures:
         a.   Violations To Be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator
finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited
in such notification.
         b.   Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the
owner of a building or property fails to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
            (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations (FMR);
            (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days
after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining
to the matter; and
            (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building, or to remove fill,
as applicable.
         c.   Order To Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant
to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that
the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention
ordinance (FDPO), he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not
less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred-eighty (180)
calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be
taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
         d.   Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective
action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving
notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk
within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of
an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local
governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
         e.   Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.
      5.   Variance Procedures:
         a.   The City Council of Twin Falls, hereinafter referred to as the
"appeal board," shall hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this section.
         b.   Variances may be issued for:
            (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
            (2)   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition as stated in subsection (B) of this section, provided provisions of
subsection (D) 5. i.ii, iii, and v, have been satisfied, and such facilities
are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; or (note these refs are
incomplete )
            (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.
         c.   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
subsections of this section, and:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as
defined under subsection (B) of this section as a functionally dependent
facility, where applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
         d.   The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of
the above factors in subsection (D), 5. c. (1) - (9) with their application for
a variance.
         e.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes
of this section, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
section.
         f.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE)
and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such
construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance.
         g.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the State of Idaho, upon request.
         h.   Conditions For Variances:
            (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
            (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
or flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
            (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
            (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
            (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
               A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
               B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and
               C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         i.   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or
sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas (SFHA),
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
            (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special
flood hazard area (SFHA).
            (3)   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated or floodproofed
to at least the flood protection elevation (FPE).
            (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and
local laws.
         j.   The City of Twin Falls will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of
the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
         k.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535.
   (E)   Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction:
      1.   General Standards: In all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), the
following provisions are required:
         a.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage in accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant
Materials Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
         c.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
         d.   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection
elevation (FPE). These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water
softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/
boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
         e.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
         f.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
         g.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
         h.   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially
improved structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
            (1)   Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE); and
            (2)   Include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
               A.   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of
each enclosed area subject to flooding;
               B.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least
one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
               C.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each
enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically
enter and exit;
               D.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no
higher than one (1) foot above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
               E.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions; and
               F.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
         i.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this section.
         j.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of
this section and located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
flood protection elevation (FPE) in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream
setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets
all of the other requirements of this section.
         k.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection (D) 5.i. A
structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or
to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility
may be located in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) only if the structure or
tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection
elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of subsection (D)
3.c.
         l.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
         m.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
         n.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
         o.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
         p.   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area (SFHA), the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.
         q.   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in
a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions
for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
      2.   Specific Standards: In all special flood hazard areas (SFHA) where
base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsections
(C) 2., or (E) 4., the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
subsection (E) 1., are required:
         a.   Residential Construction: New construction, substantial
improvements, and development of any residential structure (including
manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
no lower than the flood protection elevation (FPE), as defined in subsection
(B) of this section.
         b.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction, substantial
improvements, and development of any commercial, industrial, or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation (FPE), as defined in
subsection (B) of this section. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and
A1-30 may be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation (FPE) in lieu of
elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, below the flood protection elevation (FPE) are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the
floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with subsection (E) 6.b. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in subsection
(D) 3.c, along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
         c.   Manufactured Homes:
            (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than the flood
protection elevation (FPE), as defined in subsection (B) of this section.
            (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance
with the most current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho
Manufactured Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code § 44-
2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the
chassis thirty-six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When
the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six inches (36") in height, an
engineering certification is required.
            (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet
the requirements of subsection (E) 2.d.
            (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
         d.   Additions/Improvements:
            (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
               A.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more non-conforming than the existing structure; or
               B.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
            (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a
standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with
the standards for new construction.
            (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when
the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications
to the existing structure are:
               A.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
               B.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
            (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a ten
(10) year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building
or structure, the ten (10) year period begins on the date of the first
improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective
date of this section. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
               A.   Any project for improvement of a building required to
correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the
building official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living
conditions; or
               B.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
         e.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be either:
            (1)   Temporary Placement: Be on site for fewer than one hundred
and eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway
use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
            (2)   Permanent Placement: Recreational vehicles that do not meet
the limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction, as set forth in subsection (E) 1.
         f.   Temporary Nonresidential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
            (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one
(1) year;
            (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
            (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will
be removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
            (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
            (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be
moved.
         g.   Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area (SFHA),
elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory
structures in accordance with subsection (D) 3.c, and the following criteria
shall be met:
            (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
            (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
            (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;
            (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
            (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (E) 1.a.
            (6)   All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (E) 1.d; and
            (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of subsection (E) 2.d.(4).
            An accessory structure with a footprint less than two hundred (200)
square feet and is a minimal investment of seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500.00) or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in 2. a. through g.
above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of
subsection (E) 2.b.
         h.   Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within
a special flood hazard area (SFHA), the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the
effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
            (2)   Elevated above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
attached to an elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
            (3)   Not elevated above-ground tanks that do not meet the
elevation requirements of subsection (E) 2.b of this section shall be permitted
in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and
constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of
flood-borne debris.
            (4)   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets, and vents shall be:
                  A.   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
                  B.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
         i.   Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
            (1)   The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE
and must not be more than two (2) feet below the exterior lowest adjacent grade
(LAG).
            (2)   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall,
must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
            (3)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
            (4)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed
five (5) feet per second for any crawlspace.
            See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information.
            Caution:
            Buildings that have below-grade crawlspaces may have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace
construction, with the interior elevation of the crawlspace soil at or above
the base flood elevation (BFE).
         j.   Other Development In Regulated Floodways And Flood Fringe:
            (1)   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated
floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection (E) 2.b. of
this section.
            (2)   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that
involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall
meet the limitations of subsection (E) 5. of this section.
            (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into
regulated floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of subsection
(E) 5. of this section.
            (4)   Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage
tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated
floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection (E) 5. of
this section.
            (5)   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations
of subsection (E) 5. of this section.
         k.   Subdivision Plats in Flood Zones:
            (1)   A note must be provided on the final plat documenting the
current flood zone in which the property or properties are located. The
boundary line must be drawn on the plat in situations where two (2) or more
flood zones intersect over the property or properties being surveyed.
            (2)   FEMA FIRM panel(s): #160xxxxxxC, & 160xxxxxxE, etc.
               FIRM effective date(s): mm/dd/year
               Flood Zone(s): Zone X, Zone A, Zone AE, A Zone AO, Zone, AH,
Zone D, etc.
               Base Flood Elevation(s): Example: (AE ____.0 ft., etc.)
               Flood Zones are subject to change by FEMA and all land within a
floodway or floodplain is regulated by _____________ chapter/section of the
City Code
10-11-9(C)1.
         l.   Critical Facilities: As a best practice, FEMA recommends
protection that exceeds code minimums. For example, FEMA 543, Design Guide for
Improving Critical Facility Safety from Flooding and High Winds (2007)
recommends protecting critical facilities to withstand at least a 0.2-percent-
annual-chance flood event (often called the "500-year flood event"). Flood
elevations for the 0.2-percent-annual-chance flood may be greater than the
elevation specified by ASCE 24. If federal funding or other Federal action is
involved, the requirements of Executive Order 11988 – Floodplain Management may
necessitate protection of critical actions to the 500-year flood elevation
(critical actions may include the construction and repair of critical
facilities).
      3.   Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations:
Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A (also known as
Unnumbered A Zones) and established in subsection (C) 2., where no base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in
addition to the provisions of subsection (E) 1., shall apply:
      The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be
determined based on the following criteria:
         a.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this section and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in subsections (E) 1. and
2.
         b.   When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a federal,
state, local or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements
of subsections (E) 2. and 5.
         c.   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home
sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in
accordance with subsection (C) 2. and utilized in implementing this section.
         d.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, local, or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor
shall be elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection
elevation (FPE), whichever is higher, as defined in subsection (B). All other
applicable provisions of subsection (E) 2. shall also apply.
      4.   Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But
Without Established Floodways Or Flood Fringe Areas:
      Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is
provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor
flood fringe areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM
or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development
within such areas:
         a.   Standards of subsections (E) 1. and 2.; and
         b.   Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated,
no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
      5.   Standards For Floodways And Flood Fringe Areas: Areas designated as
floodways or flood fringe areas are located within the special flood hazard
areas established in subsection (C) 2. The floodways and flood fringe areas are
extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion
potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions,
in addition to standards outlined in subsections (E) 1. and 2., shall apply to
all development within such areas:
         a.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
            (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
            (2)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been
approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within
six (6) months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
         b.   If subsection (E) 5.a. is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
         c.   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following
provisions are met:
            (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection (E)
2.c.; and
            (2)   The encroachment standards of subsection (E) 5.a.
      6.   Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/
AH): Located within the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) established in
subsection (C) 2., are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to
three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to subsection
(E) 1. and 2., all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
         a.   The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two (2) feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two
(2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
         b.   Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in subsection (E) 6.a. so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that
level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is
required in accordance with subsections (D) 3.c, and (E) 2.b.
         c.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   (F)   Stormwater Management:
      1.   Any applicant for a building permit shall furnish satisfactory
engineering data to allow the city engineer to ascertain that any proposed
construction will comply with the following drainage criteria:
         a.   A conceptual drainage plan shall be presented and approved with
the preliminary plat or site plan. A drainage study shall be submitted and
approved before any improvement plans are reviewed.
         b.   The drainage study shall be prepared by a civil engineer
registered in the state. Refer to section
10-11-8 of this chapter for additional drainage requirements.
         c.   The drainage study and conceptual plan shall be submitted under
the following concepts:
            (1)   Drainage Patterns: Drainage flows of all frequencies should
enter and depart from the property to be developed in substantially the same
manner as predevelopment conditions.
            (2)   Street Relationships/Emergency Access: All lots, structures,
etc., within a development shall be accessible by at least one route during a
100-year storm with a maximum street water depth of one foot (1'). In all
cases, the flow of water shall be contained within rights of way.
      2.   In order to reduce the storm runoff as much as feasible, retention
facilities shall be sized for local (on site) stormwater using the following
procedures:
         a.   The design frequency shall be the fifty (50)-year storm, using
the twenty four (24)-hour rainfall depth "D" as determined from the National
Weather Service's isopluvials for Idaho. For the Twin Falls area the twenty
four (24)-hour rainfall on a fifty (50)-year storm frequency is 1.9 inches.
         b.   Volume requirements for the retention facility are calculated by
the following method:
Vt  = 1.9 A  
    12
     
Vt  = Volume required (acre-feet)
     
1.9 = 24 hour rainfall depth (inch) on a 50-year storm frequency
     
A   = Tributary area
 
         c.   Where possible, the retention facility shall have four to one (4:
1) side slopes.
   (G)   Legal Status Provisions:
      1.   Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance: This section, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted July 6,
1981 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact
and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so
that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and
may be enforced. The enactment of this section shall not affect any action,
suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance of City of Twin Falls enacted on July 6, 1981, as amended,
which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
      2.   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain
development permit (FDP) has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or
his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this section.
Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days subsequent to the
date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this section.
   (H)   Approval And Completion:
      1.   A site plan conforming to the minimum requirements of this section
shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for a building
permit to construct any building.
      2.   All requirements found within the Flood Plain regulations section
shall be completed prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord.
2019-002, 10-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-11-11: REFERENCE CODES:
   (A)   Resolutions: Resolutions of the council that pertain to required
improvements are 1167, 1168 and 1182 and their current amendments. The
provisions of said resolutions shall supersede any conflict with conditions set
forth in this title.
   (B)   Ordinances: Ordinances of the city that pertain to required
improvements are 1758 (title 8, chapter 5 of this code), 1783 (title 7, chapter
6 of this code) and 1784 (title 7, chapter 6 of this code) and their current
amendments. The provisions of said ordinances shall supersede any conflict with
conditions set forth in this title. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982; amd. Ord. 2024-012,
9-9-2024)
CHAPTER 12
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: General Subdivision Provisions
10-12-1-1: Authority
10-12-1-2: Purpose
10-12-1-3: Jurisdiction
10-12-1-4: Interpretation
10-12-1-5: Administration
10-12-2: Procedure For Subdivision Approval
10-12-2-1: Subdivision Approval Required
10-12-2-2: Preapplication
10-12-2-3: Preliminary Plat
10-12-2-4: Final Plat
10-12-2-5: Conveyance Plats
10-12-3: Design Standards
10-12-3-1: Minimum Design Standards Required
10-12-3-2: Dedication Of Streets
10-12-3-3: Street Location
10-12-3-4: Street Specifications
10-12-3-5: Street Names
10-12-3-6: Intersections
10-12-3-7: Pedestrian Walkways
10-12-3-8: Utility And Drainageway Easements
10-12-3-9: Lots
10-12-3-10: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
10-12-3-11: Stormwater Retention/Detention
10-12-3-12: Restrictive Covenants
10-12-3-13: Right Of Way Requirements
10-12-4: Improvement Standards
10-12-4-1: Responsibility For Plans
10-12-4-2: Required Improvements
10-12-4-3: Guarantee Of Completion Of Improvements
10-12-5: Special Development Subdivisions
10-12-5-1: Purpose
10-12-5-2: Hillside Or Canyon Rim Subdivision (Rep. by Ord. 2466, 2-6-1995)
10-12-5-3: Condominium Subdivisions
10-12-5-4: Mobile Home Subdivision (Rep. by Ord. 2140, 3-18-1985)
10-12-5-5: Large Scale Development Subdivision
10-12-5-6: Planned Zero Lot Line Subdivision
10-12-5-7: Cemetery Subdivision
10-12-5-8: Subdivision Within A Floodplain
10-12-5-9: Subdivision Within An Area Of Critical Concern
10-12-1: GENERAL SUBDIVISIONS PROVISIONS:
10-12-1-1: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are authorized by Title 50, Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code;
Title 67, Chapter 65 of the Idaho Code; and Article 12, Section 2 of the Idaho
Constitution, as amended or subsequently codified.
10-12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to provide for:
   (A)   The harmonious development of the area;
   (B)   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with
other existing or planned streets and roads;
   (C)   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   (D)   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
   (E)   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; and
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   (F)   The requirement as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or other
facilities shall be installed.
   (G)   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat; and
   (H)   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approval authorities.
10-12-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdividing of land within the corporate
limits of the City including the property within one mile outside the corporate
limits thereof. They shall also apply to the "area of impact" as established by
agreement between the City and County in conformance with State law 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. 67-6526.
10-12-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by the
Council and shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. These
regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with
other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
10-12-1-5: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this Title shall be conducted by the Administrator 1 .
The Administrator shall be appointed by the City Manager and the appointment
shall be ratified by the Council.
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-17-1 of this Code.
10-12-2: PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
10-12-2-1: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to create a subdivision as herein defined shall submit all
necessary applications to the Administrator on forms as provided by the City.
No final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder or improvements made on
the property until the plat has been acted upon by the Planning and Zoning
Commission 1  as approved by the Council. No lots shall be sold until the plat
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  10-17-2 of this Code.
10-12-2-2: PRE-APPLICATION:
   (A)   Application: The subdivider shall submit a pre-application to enable
the Administrator to review and comment on the proposed subdivision. The pre-
application shall include at least one copy of a sketch plan. The sketch plan
shall include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision, in
schematic form and include the following:
      1.   The general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, blocks and
lots in sketch form;
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
      3.   The areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
   (B)   Fee: None required.
   (C)   Administrator Action: The Administrator shall notify the subdivider
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receiving an acceptable pre-
application as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal
with this Title, and shall provide the necessary forms and check lists, as well
as the additional following consideration:
      1.   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or state
policies, goals and objectives or comprehensive plans;
      2.   Determination if additional special permits or ordinance conflicts,
such as rezone, special development permit or variance are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits;
      3.   Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated as areas of critical
environmental concern, unique plant or animal life and floodplains; and
      4.   Consideration of other local and state agencies that the subdivider
should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (A)   Application: The subdivider shall file with the administrator a
complete subdivision application form and preliminary plat date as required in
this title.
   (B)   Combining Preliminary And Final Plats: The applicant may request that
the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and final plat
if all the following exist:
      1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
      2.   No new street dedication or street widenings are involved;
      3.   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain or a hillside development; and
      4.   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form.
A request to combine both preliminary plat and final plat into one application
shall be acted upon by the commission after receiving a recommendation by the
administrator. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (C)   Content Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of the preliminary plat and
related information shall be in such form as stipulated by the commission;
however, additional maps or data as deemed necessary by the administrator may
also be required.
The subdivider shall submit to the administrator at least the following:
      1.   Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated; each copy of the
preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall be drawn to a scale of
not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), shall show the
drafting date and a north arrow.
      2.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat.
(Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
      3.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, zoning
development agreement, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large scale
development, hazardous and unique areas of development. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
      4.   To ensure adequate water supply to each new subdivision/development,
all subdivision/development preliminary plat applications to the city will
include water modeling results which indicates the new subdivision/development
can be developed in a manner that will provide adequate water supply for
domestic water and fire protection and the new subdivision/development will not
adversely affect the city's ability to continue to provide adequate domestic
water and fire protection to the existing water system users.
      5.   To ensure adequate sewer treatment service by the city, each
subdivision/development preliminary plat application to the city will include
sewer service treatment modeling results which indicates the new subdivision/
development can be developed in a manner that will provide adequate sewer
service and sewer treatment capacity by the city and the new subdivision/
development will not adversely affect the city's ability to continue to provide
adequate sewer treatment capacity to the existing sewer system users.
      6.   The cost of the water and sewer modeling will be the responsibility
of the developer. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (D)   Requirement Of Preliminary Plats: The following shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or shall be submitted separately together with any other
pertinent information requested by the administrator:
      1.   The name of the proposed subdivision, which does not duplicate the
name of any other subdivision in Twin Falls County.
      2.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdividers, the
engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat, and any other professional persons
involved in the subdivision.
      3.   The names and addresses of all surrounding property owners both
adjacent to and beyond any public thoroughfares from the subject property on
record in the County Assessor's office.
      4.   The legal description of the subdivision by section, township and
range.
      5.   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such
as: residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural and a showing of any sites proposed
for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses.
      6.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
      7.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area (covering at least a 4 square mile area).
      8.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the
adjacent land.
      9.   Existing streets, street names, rights of way and roadway widths,
including adjoining streets or roadways, along with type of surface and the
existence of any curb-gutter and/or sidewalks.
      10.   Approximate location and length of the boundary lines of each lot,
parcel or site and the proposed lot and block numbers. Approximate acreage
enclosed by subdivision.
      11.   Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope
is greater than twenty percent (20%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land
slope is twenty percent (20%) or less, referenced to an established bench mark
of the City vertical control system, including its location and elevation.
      12.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
individual wells or septic tanks are proposed.
      13.   Location, size and direction of flow of all existing utilities,
including, but not limited to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals,
ditches, drainages, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, gas lines,
power, telephone and streetlights. If utilities are not on or adjacent to the
property, indicate direction and distance to nearest ones that can serve the
subdivision.
      14.   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed
restrictions.
      15.   Any dedications to the public and/or easements both public and
private, together with a statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such
on both, the subject property and surrounding properties.
      16.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in this Title 1 .
      17.   A statement as to whether or not any variance will be requested
with respect to any provision of this Title describing the particular
provision, the variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
      18.   Location, right-of-way width and name of all public or private
traffic ways, the location, right-of-way width and use of any proposed public
or private pedestrianways or special ways, and a statement of intended
improvements to be made thereto.
      19.   A statement as to what improvements will be made to existing
utilities and what other on-site improvements will be made.
      20.   Approximate lot corner and easement locations of all adjacent
subdivisions. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
      21.   Location, size and direction of flow of all drainage, irrigation,
sewer and water line improvements which will be part of the subdivision
development. (Ord. 2570, 11-17-1997)
      22.   For additional drainage requirements see Section
10-11-8 of this Title. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-1995)
   (E)   Fees: A fee for processing and checking a preliminary plat shall be
due at the time upon submittal of the preliminary plat to the Administrator.
The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the Council. (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
   (F)   Administrator Review:
      1.   Certification: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, and all other
required data as provided for herein, the Administrator, after review by the
City Engineering Department, shall certify the application as complete and
shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon. He shall, thereafter,
place the preliminary plat on the agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the Commission. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be delivered
by the subdivider to each member of the Commission at least five (5) days prior
to the meeting for plat consideration.
      2.   Review By Other Agencies: The Administrator shall refer the
preliminary plat and application to as many agencies as deemed necessary. Such
agencies may include the following:
               a.   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
               b.   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or
districts and drainage districts;
               c.   The superintendent of the school district; and
               d.   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed
subdivision.
      3.   Recommendation: Upon expiration of the time allowance for department
and agency review, the Administrator shall prepare a recommendation to the
Commission. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (G)   Notification To Property Owners: The subdivider shall certify to the
Administrator that he has notified all adjoining property owners of the
proposed subdivision. Such written notification shall be mailed at least ten
(10) days prior to the Commission meeting.
   (H)   Commission Action:
      1.   Hearing By Commission: The Commission shall review the preliminary
plat, comments from the concerned persons and agencies and the report from the
Administrator to arrive at a decision on the preliminary plat.
      2.   Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a proposed
subdivision the Commission shall consider the objectives of this Title and at
least the following:
               a.   The conformance of the subdivision with a Comprehensive
Plan;
               b.   The availability of public services to accommodate the
proposed development;
               c.   The continuity of the proposed development with the capital
improvement program;
               d.   The public financial capability of supporting services for
the proposed development; and
               e.   The other health, safety or environmental problems that may
be brought to the Commission's attention.
      3.   Action On Preliminary Plat: The Commission may approve,
conditionally approve, disapprove or table for additional information when
acting on the preliminary plat. If tabled, approval or disapproval shall occur
at the regular meeting following the meeting at which the plat is first
considered by the Commission. The action, and the reasons for such action shall
be stated in writing by the Administrator and forwarded to the applicant. The
Administrator shall also forward a statement of the action taken and the
reasons for such action together with a copy of the preliminary plat to the
Council for its information and record. Upon granting or denying a preliminary
plat the Commission shall specify:
               a.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the
application;
               b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
               c.   The actions, if any that the applicant could take to obtain
plat approval.
      4.   Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the Commission's
conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's request for the subdivision to be
considered as both a preliminary plat and final subdivision, then a
recommendation shall be forwarded to the Council in the same manner as herein
specified for a final plat. The commission may recommend that the combined
application be approved, approved conditionally or disapproved. (Ord. 2012, 7-
6-1981)
   (I)   Approval Period:
      1.   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of
the final plat application by the administrator within two (2) years after
action by the commission shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to
be null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for by the subdivider
and granted by the commission. Only one extension may be granted by the
commission for a term of two (2) years.
      2.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of two (2) years may be considered for
final approval without resubmission for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 3006,
7-25-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-12-5 of this Chapter.
10-12-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
   (A)   Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed, and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator
three (3) copies of the final plat. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (B)   Content Of The Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho Code
and shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to
enable the same to be placed on one sheet of eighteen inch by twenty seven inch
(18" x 27") stable base drafting film with a minimum base thickness of three
thousandths inches (0.003"). The plat shall have a three inch (3") margin at
the left for binding and a one-half inch (1/2") margin on all other sides. No
part of the drawing shall be nearer than one-half inch (1/2") to the margins.
The reverse of said sheet shall not be used. If, because of the size or
complexity, required information cannot be shown, additional sheets may be
used, provided they conform to this chapter. The final plat shall include at
least the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the commission.
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat.
      3.   Such other information as the administrator or commission may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat.
      4.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof.
      5.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this title.
      6.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards established by
the administrator. (Ord. 2391, 8-17-1992)
   (C)   Fees: At the time of submission of an application for a final plat, a
fee as established by resolution of the council shall be paid. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-
1981)
   (D)   Administrator Review:
      1.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the final plat and compliance with all
other requirements as provided for herein, the administrator, after review by
the city engineering department, shall certify the application as complete and
shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
      2.   Resubmittal Of Final Plat: The administrator shall review the final
plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved preliminary
plat. If the administrator determines that there is substantial difference in
the final plat than that which was approved as a preliminary plat or conditions
which have not been met, the administrator may require that the final plat be
submitted to the commission in the same manner as required in the preliminary
plat process.
      3.   Submission To The Council: Upon the determination that the final
plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the administrator shall place the final plat on the
council agenda at the next regular meeting. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (E)   Agency Review: The administrator may transmit one copy of the final
plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the
departments and the agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with
the preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and
the legal review of the performance bond.
   (F)   Council Action: The council, at its next meeting following receipt of
the administrator's report, shall consider the commission's findings and
comments from concerned persons and agencies to arrive at a decision on the
final plat. The council shall approve, approve conditionally, disapprove or
table the final plat for additional information. A copy of the approved plat
shall be filed with the administrator. Upon granting or denying the final plat
the council shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (G)   Plans And Specifications: Prior to recording the final subdivision
plat, the subdivider shall submit to the administrator:
      1.   Approved copies of the final plans and specifications for streets,
water, sewer, stormwater, parks, gravity irrigation and pressure irrigation
systems. All plans and specifications shall have sufficient detail, written
information, vertical and horizontal dimensions to accurately locate the
proposed improvements in the field and determine their relationship to other
improvements. The city engineer shall establish standards.
      2.   Financial guarantee of improvements pursuant to section
10-12-4-3 of this chapter.
      3.   An approved weed management plan.
      4.   Certification of water and sewer plan approval from the Idaho
department of environmental quality.
      5.   Street and utility plan approval from the Idaho department of
transportation, as required.
      6.   Street and utility plan approval from the Twin Falls highway
district, as required.
      7.   Gravity irrigation system plan approval from the Twin Falls canal
company, as required.
      8.   An executed improvement agreement for developers.
      9.   Certification of the notice of intent and stormwater pollution
prevention plan filed with the United States EPA.
      10.   A recorded warranty deed to the city of Twin Falls for water shares
equal to one share per acre for new residential developments (2 acres or
larger), and such other number of shares as agreed to between the city and the
developer. (Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006)
   (H)   Fees: At the time of submittal of plans and specifications a fee to
defray costs and expenses of plan checking as provided for by resolution of the
city council shall be paid. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (I)   Approval Period: Final plat shall be filed with the county recorder
within two (2) years after written approval by the council; otherwise such
approval shall become null and void unless prior to said expiration date an
extension of time is applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council.
Only one extension may be granted by the council for a term of two (2) years.
(Ord. 3006, 7-25-2011)
   (J)   Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the council,
the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of surety bond or other
acceptable guarantee and the inclusion of the following signatures on the final
plat, the administrator shall submit the final plat to the county recorder for
recording:
      1.   Certification and signature of the city council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      2.   Certification and signature of the city clerk, if required, and the
city engineer verifying that the subdivision meets the city requirements and
has been approved by the council; and
      3.   Certification of the sanitation restrictions on the face of the plat
per section 50-1326, Idaho Code. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-2-5: CONVEYANCE PLATS:
   (A)   Purpose; Intent: A conveyance plat may be used for the purpose of
subdividing land and the recording of same, or recording a single existing lot
or parcel created by other means. A conveyance plat may be used to convey the
property or interests therein; however, a conveyance plat does not constitute
approval for development of the property and is not intended for immediate
development. A conveyance plat is an interim step in the subdivision and
development of land. (Ord. 2901, 4-16-2007)
   (B)   Conveyance Plats: The applicant may request that the subdivision
application be processed as conveyance plat if the following exist:
      1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed two (2) lots.
      2.   To record the remainder of a tract created by the final platting of
a portion of the property provided that the remainder is not intended for
immediate development.
      3.   To record the subdivision of property into parcels that is not
intended for immediate development. All public rights of way and easements
shall be dedicated. The council may require all abutting streets and utilities
to be installed and accepted by the city at the time of the building permitting
and/or development stage, whichever comes first.
      4.   If either parcel develops or is built on, the city council may
require construction of street and utility improvements on both parcels. (Ord.
3098, 6-22-2015)
   (C)   Application: The subdivider shall submit to the administrator three
(3) copies of the conveyance plat for review. After the approval by the
administrator, the subdivider may cause the total parcel to be surveyed, and a
plat to be prepared. The subdivider shall submit the plat.
The conveyance plat shall include at least the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such conveyance plat as
stipulated by the administrator.
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed plat.
      3.   Such other information as the administrator or city council may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said plat.
      4.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this title.
      5.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards established by
the administrator.
      6.   All conveyance plats shall include the following note:
A conveyance plat is a record of property approved by the City of Twin Falls,
Idaho, for the purpose of sale or conveyance in its entirety or interests
thereon defined. No building permit shall be issued until a final plat is
approved, filed of record and public improvements accepted in accordance with
the provisions of Title 10 of the City of Twin Falls City Code. Selling a
portion of this property by metes and bounds, except as shown on an approved,
filed and accepted conveyance plat is a violation of City Code.
   (D)   Fees: At the time of submission of an application for a final plat, a
fee as established by resolution of the council shall be paid.
   (E)   Administrator Review:
      1.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the conveyance plat and compliance with
all other requirements as provided for herein, the administrator, after review
by the city engineering department, shall certify the application as complete
and shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
      2.   Submission To The Council: Upon the determination that the
conveyance plat is in compliance and all conditional requirements have been
met, the administrator shall place the conveyance plat on the council agenda at
the next regular meeting.
   (F)   Agency Review: The administrator may transmit one copy of the
conveyance plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to
the departments and the agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance.
   (G)   Council Action: The council shall approve, approve conditionally,
disapprove or table the conveyance plat for additional information. A copy of
the approved plat shall be filed with the administrator. Upon granting or
denying the plat, the council shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
   (H)   Approval Period: The plat shall be filed with the county recorder
within one year after written approval by the council; otherwise such approval
shall become null and void unless prior to said expiration date an extension of
time is applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council.
   (I)   Platting Rules: The subdivider shall follow all the state and local
platting rules when recording the plat. Refer to section
10-12-2-4 of this chapter for additional information and requirements. (Ord.
2901, 4-16-2007)
10-12-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
10-12-3-1: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this chapter; provided, however, that any higher
standards adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health
agency shall prevail over those set forth herein. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-2: DEDICATION OF STREETS:
Within a proposed subdivision arterial and collector streets as shown on a
comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the public in all cases; in general,
all other streets shall also be dedicated to public use. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-3: STREET LOCATION:
Street and road location shall conform to the following:
   (A)   Street Location And Arrangements: All street locations shall conform
to the Twin Falls master street plan where applicable. Collector type streets
may, for aesthetic reasons, curve and wind in accordance with these standards,
but such trafficways shall maintain a grid type pattern approximately one-
fourth (1/4) of a mile square.
   (B)   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets
extend to the boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future
extension of said streets into adjacent areas. A vehicular nonaccess reserve
strip may be required and held in public ownership. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall
be required.
   (C)   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation
to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   (D)   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off street
loading and parking. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases. (Ord.
2139, 3-4-1985)
   (E)   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than one
thousand feet (1,000') in length and shall terminate with an adequate
turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') for right of way. (Ord.
2489, 6-5-1995)
   (F)   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract,
special justification shall be presented for variance request to the
commission. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or
partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within such
tract. A vehicular nonaccess reserve street may be required and held in public
ownership.
   (G)   Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited within
a subdivision, except as provided by subsection
10-11-5(A) of this title, but may be allowed in subdistricts providing the
private streets conform to city standard drawing S-5. Access from interior
subdivision lots to public streets may be allowed by private drives conforming
to subsection
10-11-5(A) of this title. (Ord. 2139, 3-4-1985)
10-12-3-4: STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Street Right Of Way Widths: Street and road right of way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive plan and the rules of
the state department of highways and the highway district having jurisdiction;
minimum right of way standards shall be in accordance with section
10-12-3-13 of this chapter.
   (B)   Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%) on
either local or collector streets and six percent (6%) for arterial streets.
Minimum street grades shall be four-tenths percent (0.4%).
   (C)   Street Alignment: Street alignment shall be as follows:
      1.   Horizontal alignment: Shall be in accordance with section
10-12-3-13 of this chapter.
      2.   Vertical alignment: Minimum stopping sight distances shall be two
hundred feet (200') for minor streets and designed in accordance with design
speed for collector and arterial streets. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-5: STREET NAMES 1 :
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
   (A)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the limits
of this title except where a new street is a continuation of an existing
street. Street names if spelled differently but sound the same as existing
streets shall not be used.
   (B)   All new streets shall be named as follows: Streets having
predominantly north-south direction shall be named "street" or "way"; streets
having a predominantly east-west direction shall be named "avenue" or "road";
meandering streets shall be named "drive", "lane", "path" or "trail" and cul-
de-sacs shall be named "circle", "court" and "place".
   (C)   When any new subdivision contains any street which is a continuation
of any street, such new street shall take the name of such existing street. No
new street not a continuation of an existing street shall be given the same or
similar name of any existing street. The city engineer shall have the power to
change the name of any street on any map or plat submitted to make such map or
plat conform to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2132, 12-17-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 8-1-3 of this code.
10-12-3-6: INTERSECTIONS:
   (A)   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90o)
or as closely thereto as possible, and in no case shall streets intersect at
less than seventy degrees (70o).
   (B)   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection. (See section
9-9-16 of this code.)
   (C)   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   (D)   T Intersections: T intersections may be used wherever such design will
not restrict the free movement of traffic.
   (E)   Centerline Off Sets: Street centerlines shall be off set by a distance
of at least one hundred twenty five feet (125').
   (F)   Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall be extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') each way from
the intersection. An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade
in rolling terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain will be permitted.
(Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-7: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long blocks may be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
schools, parks or shopping areas; the pedestrian easement shall be in
accordance with section
10-12-3-13 of this chapter. Cul-de-sacs will be connected to other adjacent
streets with cul-de-sacs within the proposed subdivision or existing
subdivisions and to adjacent arterial or collector streets with paved
pedestrian walkways at least ten feet (10') wide within fifteen foot (15')
easements. (Ord. 2798, 8-2-2004)
10-12-3-8: UTILITY AND DRAINAGE WAY EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot
lines, rear lot lines and side lot lines when deemed necessary; total easement
width shall be in accordance with section
10-12-3-13 of this chapter.
   (B)   Unobstructed drainageway easements shall be provided as required by
the council.
   (C)   A lot drainage plan shall be submitted for approval as part of the
plans and specifications required by subsection
10-12-2-4(G) of this chapter. All lots required by the plan to drain along rear
and side lot lines shall have drainage easement widths determined by an Idaho
licensed engineer and shall not be less than five feet (5') in width. The final
plat and the recorded covenants shall specify that the rear and side yard
drainageways shown in the approved drainage plan shall be neither obstructed
nor substantially regraded by the property owners. (Ord. 2472, 12-19-1994)
10-12-3-9: LOTS:
Lots shall conform to the following:
   (A)   Zoning: The lot width, depth and total area shall not be less than the
requirements of any applicable zoning district.
   (B)   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tanks),
the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future
resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated the plan
thereof shall be approved by the commission prior to the taking of such action.
   (C)   Sufficient Area For Septic Tank: Where individual septic tanks have
been authorized, sufficient area shall be provided for a replacement sewage
disposal system. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-10: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following:
   (A)   Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next
to incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial
uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screening shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal street
right of way or utility easement.
   (B)   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private Reserve Strips: Privately held reserve strips controlling
access to streets shall be prohibited.
      2.   Public Reserve Strips: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be
placed along half streets which are within the subdivision boundaries and shall
be deeded in fee simple to the city for future street widening. (Ord. 2012, 7-
6-1981)
10-12-3-11: STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION:
No Residential Plat shall be approved unless it includes provision for
stormwater retention/detention.
   (A)   Construction Standards: Stormwater Retention/Detention areas shall
meet the standards found in City of Twin Falls revisions to ISPWC (Idaho
Standard for Public Works Construction) and/or The City of Twin Falls Parks
Department Design Manual, whichever is applicable.
   (B)   Dedication and Maintenance: Stormwater retention/detention facilities
may be dedicated to the City upon completion, and acceptance, of all required
improvements. Irrevocable Restrictive Covenants for each development shall be
required in order to provide the City with the right to add a fee to the water
bill of each account within the development, for the purpose of maintaining
stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2822, 4-11-2005; amd. Ord. 2954, 11-3-2008; Ord.
3034, 7-16-2012; Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
10-12-3-12: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS:
Restrictive covenants may be prepared and recorded as part of a subdivision.
This is done to provide protection to future property owners by establishing
higher standards than required under other regulations. The provisions within
protective covenants are enforceable through civil action and local governments
shall not be required to enforce these provisions. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-3-13: RIGHT OF WAY REQUIREMENTS:
Type Of Public Way Residential Commercial Manufacturing
                   (In Feet)   (In Feet)  (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way Residential Commercial Manufacturing
                   (In Feet)   (In Feet)  (In Feet)
Minimum right of way width:
Trafficways:                             
Alley                                   20
Service road       25          25         Not allowed
One-way road       25          30         30
Local street       50          60         60
Collector street   64          64         64
Arterial street    80          80         80
Special ways:                            
Pedestrian         10          10         10
Bicycle            15          15         15
Equestrian         20          20         20
Easements:                               
Utility            15          15         15
Access             10          10         15
Minimum centerline radius:
Trafficways:                             
Alley                                   60
Service road       50          50         Not allowed
One-way road       50          50         60
Local street       100         150        200
Collector street   200         250        300
Arterial street    500         500        500
Special ways:                            
All                25          25         25
Easements:                               
All                0           0          0
Minimum tangent length:
Trafficways:                             
Alley                                   0
Service road       0           0          Not allowed
One-way road       100         150        200
Local street       100         150        200
Collector street   200         250        300
Arterial street    400         400        400
Special ways       0           0          0
Easements          0           0          0
Minimum cul-de-sac:
Trafficways:                             
All                100         100        100
 
(Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-4: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
10-12-4-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by a registered engineer, a complete set of construction
plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications and other supporting
data, for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved
with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final
plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public
agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
public agencies' standards or specifications. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-4-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following improvements in
accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
   (A)   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with section 50-1303,
Idaho Code.
   (B)   Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the council 1 .
   (C)   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all
streets and service roads.
      All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the council 2 .
   (D)   Bicycle Pathways: A bicycle pathway shall be provided within all
subdivisions, as part of the public right of way or separate easement, as may
be specified in an overall bicycle plan as adopted by the council.
   (E)   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities shall be
required in all new subdivisions.
      Existing utilities or new large transmission lines shall not be required
to be buried.
   (F)   Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the
administration, highway district or state highway department.
   (G)   Storm Drainage: Refer to section
10-11-8 of this title for additional drainage requirements.
   (H)   Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: All new public water supply or
sewer systems shall be an extension of an existing public system 1 .
   (I)   Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Adequate fire protection shall be
required in accordance with standards established by the city engineer.
   (J)   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the
appropriate locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local
standards set forth by the City Engineer.
   (K)   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both
sides of the street, except that where the average width of lots, as measured
at the street frontage line or at the building setback line, is over two
hundred ten feet (210') sidewalks on only one side of the street may be
allowed. Pedestrian walkways, when required shall have easements at least ten
feet (10') in width and include a paved walk at least five feet (5') in width.
      Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications as adopted by the council 2 .
   (L)   Mailboxes: Mailbox locations shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   In the SUI zone with public streets where no sidewalks are required,
boxes shall be placed with their bottoms three and one-half feet (31/2') above
the edge of the public roadway and their fronts one-half foot (1/2') behind the
face of the curb.
      2.   In the R1-VAR, R2, R4 and R6 zones for single-family and duplexes on
public streets, the boxes shall be placed in groups of two (2) or more with
their bottoms between three and one-half feet (31/2') and four feet (4') above
the back of the sidewalk and their fronts between one-half foot (1/2') and one
foot (1') behind the back of the sidewalk.
      3.   In the R4 and R6 zones for triplexes and larger multiplexes on
public streets, mailboxes shall not encroach over public sidewalks. Mailbox
locations shall be reviewed and approved by the U.S. postal service.
      4.   In ZDA and MHP overlays with private streets and in commercial and
industrial zones, mailbox locations shall be reviewed and approved by the U.S.
postal service.
      5.   No appurtenances to the mailbox or its support shall extend forward
of the box.
   (M)   Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for the
protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial streets,
waterways, railroad rights of way or other features. Subdivision plats shall
show the location of any greenbelt areas.
   (N)   Street Luminaires: Luminaires shall be required to be installed at
intersections throughout the subdivision, in accordance with the local
standards set forth by the City Engineer.
   (O)   Landscape And Sidewalk Placement: Landscaping and sidewalk placement
required adjacent to arterial and collector streets. A tract of land eleven
feet (11') in depth behind the curb line will be dedicated as part of any
residential development adjacent to arterial and collector streets. Within that
tract the developer shall install landscaping six feet (6') in depth with a
sprinkler system and with grass and trees behind the curb line and shall also
install a five foot (5') sidewalk. The landscaping will be maintained by the
city and funded through a fee added to the water bill of each account within
the development. Irrevocable restrictive covenants for this development and
maintenance shall provide for this funding. Alternative landscaping other than
trees and grass may be approved by the city.
   (P)   Pressure Irrigation System:
      1.   Pursuant to section
7-8-3 of this code, the use of the city's potable water supply as the primary
source of irrigation water in all new developments shall be prohibited. For
purposes of this subsection, the term "new development" means any new
subdivision or ZDA, or any development of any parcel of land of three-fourths
(3/4) of an acre or larger that is not part of a subdivision or ZDA.
      2.   All new developments shall include an operating pressure irrigation
system constructed to city standards and approved by the city engineer and the
Twin Falls Canal Company. The city engineer shall encourage developers to
participate in a regional system as long as the pump station is operational
before the first building permit is issued for that station's service area.
      3.   The city engineer may authorize in specific cases a variance from
the requirement of a pressure irrigation system, if not contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this subsection would result in unnecessary hardship.
               a.   Special conditions may include, but are not limited to,
small developments in terms of acreage, developments without viable access to
irrigation water delivery, or developments without Twin Falls Canal Company
water shares.
               b.   Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of
convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of
this title would result in unnecessary hardship.
      4.   The city engineer shall not authorize a variance from the
requirement of an operating pressure irrigation system unless an alternate
provision has been approved by the city engineer. Alternates may include, but
shall not be limited to, required xeriscaping (i.e., landscaping in ways that
do not require supplemental irrigation), payment of an in lieu fee equal to the
estimated cost of construction of an operating pressure irrigation system
(including land acquisition), or some combination of these or other acceptable
options.
      5.   One share of Twin Falls Canal Company water for each acre of
property within the subdivision shall be deeded to the city before the filing
of the final plat for use in the pressurized irrigation system.
   (Q)   Special Features: All other special features or items as represented
during the approval process. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981; amd. Ord. 2472, 12-19-1994;
Ord. 2481, 5-1-1995; Ord. 2796, 6-14-2004; Ord. 2850, 2-21-2006; Ord. 2925, 11-
19-2007; Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014; Ord. 2024-003, 1-8-2024)
 
Notes
  1. See section
1 8-1-2 of this code and section
  10-11-5 of this title.
  2. See section
2 8-2-12 of this code and section
  10-11-5 of this title.
1 1. See subsection
  7-8-3(D) of this code.
2 2. See section
  8-2-12 of this code.
10-12-4-3: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Financial Guarantee Arrangements: In lieu of the actual installation
of required public improvements before recording of the final plat, the council
may permit the subdivider to execute a trust and escrow agreement and record a
notice prohibiting the sale of an undeveloped lot without a recorded
developer's agreement between the subdivider and the city relating to that lot,
or to provide a financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of
the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond the
requirements of any other agency responsible for the administration, operation
and maintenance of the applicable public improvement: (Ord. 2488, 6-5-1995)
      1.   Surety Bond:
               a.   Accrual: The bond shall accrue to the city covering
construction, operation and maintenance of the specific public improvement.
               b.   Amount: The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred
percent (100%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the
specific public improvements, as estimated by the developer's consulting
engineer and approved by the city engineer.
               c.   Term Length: The term length in which the bond is in force,
for the duration of that phase of the project, shall be for a period to be
specified by the council for the specific public improvement.
               d.   Bonding For Surety Company: The bond shall be with a surety
company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho, acceptable to the
council.
      2.   Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Negotiable Bond Or Irrevocable Bank
Letter Of Credit:
               a.   Treasurer, Escrow Agent Or Trust Company: A cash deposit,
certified check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, such
surety acceptable by the council, shall be deposited with an escrow agent or
trust company.
               b.   Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit,
certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of construction for
the specific public improvement, as estimated by the developer's consulting
engineer approved by the city engineer.
               c.   Escrow Time: The escrow time for the cash deposit,
certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be
until completed and accepted by the city engineer.
               d.   Progressive Payment: In the case of cash deposits or
certified checks, an agreement between the council and the subdivider may
provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the
certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the
extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in
accordance with a previously entered into agreement.
   (B)   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial
guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be conditioned on
the accomplishment of one of the following:
      1.   The construction of improvements required by this title shall have
been completed by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer.
      2.   Surety acceptable to the council shall have been filed in the form
of a cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond, irrevocable bank letter of
credit or surety bond.
   (C)   Inspection Of Public Improvements Under Construction: Before approving
a final plat and construction plans and specifications for public improvements,
an agreement between the subdivider and the council shall be made to provide
for checking or inspecting the construction and its conformity to the submitted
plans.
   (D)   Penalty In Case Of Failure To Complete The Construction Of A Public
Improvement: In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete
such work within the period of time as required by the conditions of the
guarantee for the completion of public improvements it shall be the
responsibility of the council to proceed to have such work completed. In order
to accomplish this, the council shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense
thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank
letter of credit, or negotiable bond which the subdivider may have deposited in
lieu of a surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require
performance by the bonding or surety company, and as included in a written
agreement between the council and the subdivider. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-5: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
10-12-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to identify various types of developments that
normally pose special concerns to the commission and elected officials when
reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. This section outlines the plan
submittal requirements and design standards that shall be taken into
consideration when acting on special developments. The provisions of this
section are in addition to the plan requirements, design standards and
improvement standards that are required by sections
10-12-2,
10-12-3 and
10-12-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-12-5-2: HILLSIDE OR CANYON RIM SUBDIVISION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2466, 2-6-1995)
10-12-5-3: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Condominium developments shall be subject to requirements set forth in this
title and also subject to all provisions herein contained. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-
2014)
   (A)   Allowances: See chapter 6 of this title for subdistrict provisions.
   (B)   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the commission with
a colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that
will include at least the following where applicable:
      1.   Architectural style and building design.
      2.   Building materials and color.
      3.   Landscaping.
      4.   Screening.
      5.   Solid waste areas.
      6.   Parking.
      7.   Open space. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
A concept site development plan may be approved by the commission but shall be
conditioned upon approval of a final site development plan before final
approval of the condominium subdivision. (Ord. 3082, 12-8-2014)
   (C)   Homeowners' Association: The homeowners' association bylaws and other
similar deed restrictions, which provide for the control and maintenance of all
common areas, recreation facilities or open space shall meet with the approval
of the council. Any and all powers as specified in such agreements may also be
assigned to the council and the city may elect to accept said powers for the
purpose of assessing property for delinquencies and enforcement of motor
vehicle regulations to protect the best interests of the owners involved and of
the general public.
   (D)   Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and trailers. For typical residential development, two
hundred (200) square feet shall be provided every two (2) living units. This
may be reduced by the Council if there is a showing that the needs of a
particular development are less.
   (E)   Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by Chapter 10 of this Title may be required for every three (3)
dwelling units to accommodate visitor parking.
   (F)   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size
and location to be suitable for the service needs that are necessary for the
repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   (G)   Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development.
   (H)   Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the
development is built and constructed as planned. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-81)
   (I)   Storm Drainage: Refer to Section
10-11-8 for additional drainage requirements. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-95)
10-12-5-4: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: (Rep. by Ord. 2140, 3-18-85)
10-12-5-5: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION:
Due to the impact that a large scale development would have on public utilities
and services, the developer shall submit the following information along with
the preliminary plat:
   (A)   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development such as fire protection, police protection, central water, central
sewer, road construction, parks and open space, recreation, maintenance,
schools and solid waste collection.
   (B)   Estimate of the public service costs to provide adequate service to
the development.
   (C)   Estimate of the tax revenue that will be generated from the
development.
   (D)   Suggest public means of financing the services for the development if
the cost for the public services would not be off-set by tax revenue received
from the development. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-81)
   (E)   Storm Drainage: Refer to Section
10-11-8 for additional drainage requirements. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-95)
10-12-5-6: PLANNED ZERO LOT LINE SUBDIVISION:
Planned zero lot line developments shall be subject to requirements set forth
in this Title and also subject to all provisions contained herein.
   (A)   Allowances: See Chapter 4 of this Title. Except for side yard and lot
area requirements which are as specified below.
   (B)   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Commission with
the following:
      1.   Plat Map with building envelopes to show location of each unit in
the development project.
      2.   Common wall agreement if applicable that is acceptable to the
Commission.
      3.   Maintenance Easement, if applicable, must be shown on the plat. This
applies to one dwelling zero lot line units without a common wall.
   (C)   Requirements:
      1.   Lot Area:
               a.   R1-8,000 - the minimum lot area shall be six thousand
(6,000) square feet for a one dwelling unit.
               b.   R2 - the minimum lot area shall be five thousand five
hundred (5,500) square feet for one dwelling unit.
               c.   R4 - the minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000)
square feet for one dwelling unit.
               d.   R6 - the minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000)
square feet for one dwelling unit.
      2.   Side Yard: No building is allowed within ten feet (10') of the side
opposite the zero lot line.
      3.   Front Yard: Same as in chapter 4 of this title as specified in each
zone.
      4.   Rear Yard: Same as in chapter 4 of this title as specified in each
zone.
      5.   Zero Side Yard: The zero side yard cannot be adjacent to a public or
private right of way.
      6.   Windows: No window shall be placed on the zero lot line.
      7.   Setback: No accessory building shall be placed in the ten foot (10')
side yard setback area as required above.
      8.   Lot Coverage: No dwelling including its accessory buildings shall
occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot.
      9.   Projections: In a one-dwelling unit no portion of the dwelling or
architectural projections other than rain gutters may project over any property
lines. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (D)   Storm Drainage: Refer to section
10-11-8 of this title for additional drainage requirements. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-
1995)
10-12-5-7: CEMETERY SUBDIVISION:
   (A)   Function: The developer shall provide the commission with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain the functions of the proposed
cemetery for either human or animal remains.
   (B)   Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural management requirements
that are outlined in title 27, Idaho Code. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (C)   Storm Drainage: Refer to section
10-11-8 of this title for additional drainage requirements. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-
1995)
10-12-5-8: SUBDIVISION WITHIN A FLOODPLAIN:
   (A)   Flood Areas: For any proposed subdivision that is located within a
floodplain, the developer shall provide the commission with a development plan
of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will show and explain at
least the following:
      1.   Location of all planned improvements.
      2.   Location of the floodway and the floodway fringe as shown on the
FEMA flood insurance rate map and flood insurance study referenced in
subsection
10-11-9(C) of this title or as established by engineering studies and approved
by the city engineer.
      3.   Location of the present water channel.
      4.   Any planned rerouting of waterways.
      5.   All major drainageways.
      6.   Areas of frequent flooding.
      7.   Means of floodproofing buildings.
      8.   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
      9.   For subdivisions of fifty (50) or more lots or of five (5) acres of
area or more, base flood elevations where flood elevation data has not been
established.
      10.   Storm drainage: Refer to section
10-11-8 of this title for additional drainage requirements.
New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures within
the floodplain shall meet the requirements of subsection
10-11-9(E)2a, "Residential Construction", of this title. (Ord. 2952, 9-8-2008)
   (B)   Justification For Development: Upon the determination that buildings
are planned within the floodplain or that alterations of any kind are
anticipated within the floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the
developer shall demonstrate conclusively to the commission that such
development will not present a hazard to life, limb or property and will not
have adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or
drainage channel or the natural environment.
No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills, structures
or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually or
collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If only
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the council shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent
with that determination.
The subdivision shall be reviewed to assure that:
      1.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
      2.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages;
      3.   All necessary state and federal permits required for the development
have been received pursuant to FEMA chapter 1, part 60, subpart 60.3(a)(2);
      4.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage;
      5.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated by the
developer for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which
contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less;
      6.   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems shall be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters,
and require on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of such systems or contamination from such systems during flooding;
      7.   In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
manufactured home subdivisions:
               a.   Stands or lots are to be elevated on compacted fill or
pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is above the base
flood level.
               b.   Adequate lot surface drainage and access for a tractor are
to be provided.
               c.   In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots are to be
large enough to permit steps, piling foundations are to be placed in stable
soil no more than ten feet (10') apart and reinforcement is to be provided for
pilings more than six feet (6') above the ground level. (Ord. 2226, 1-4-1988)
10-12-5-9: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as an area of critical concern by
the council or by the state.
Special consideration shall be given to any proposed development within an area
of critical concern to assure that the development is necessary and desirable
and in the public interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous
or unique areas that may be designated as areas of critical concern are as
follows:
Avalanche paths
Earthquake locations
Floodplain
Historical significance
Scenic areas
Unique animal life
Unique plant life
Unstable soils and rock formations
Other areas of critical concern
   (A)   Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an
environmental assessment along with the preliminary plan application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
   (B)   Content Of Environmental Assessment: The content of the environmental
assessment shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of
professionals that shall provide answers to the following questions:
      1.   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      3.   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      4.   What beneficial or detrimental effects would the development have on
the environment such as animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic
conditions, noise, audio and visual conditions? (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
      5.   Storm drainage: Refer to section
10-11-8 of this title for additional drainage requirements. (Ord. 2481, 5-1-
1995)
CHAPTER 13
ZONING PERMITS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Building Permit
10-13-2: Certificate of Appropriateness
10-13-3: Variances
10-13-4: Special Use
10-13-5: Revocation Of Zoning Permits
10-13-1: BUILDING PERMIT:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, convert or demolish any building or structure in the city or
cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit
for each such building or structure from the city building official.
   (B)   Certificate of Occupancy Required: It shall be unlawful to use,
occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building, premises, or part
thereof, thereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly
altered, or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued stating that the proposed use of the building and/or land
conforms to the requirements of this title, and with all conditional provisions
that may have been imposed.
      1.   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be initially issued for a
period not to exceed six (6) months.
         a.   A nonrefundable fee, and refundable retainer, as determined by
the adopted master fee schedule, shall be collected prior to issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
         b.   One extension may be granted for an additional three (3) months
upon new application and payment of additional nonrefundable fee.
         c.   Temporary Certificates expire at five o’clock (5:00) P. M. on the
date listed.
         d.   In the event a temporary certificate expires without completion
of the Required Improvements, the entire retainer amount shall be forfeited to
the City of Twin Falls. In addition to the retainer forfeiture, the City may
also initiate revocation proceedings of any permit, license, or any other
approval, according to thier respective revocation procedures.
   (C)   Application For Permit: To apply for a permit the applicant shall
first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that
purpose by the city building official, who shall determine the acceptability of
the request in conformance with the building code, and who shall thereupon
issue or deny the application. (Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-13-2: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   (A)   Permit Required: For those properties located within the Twin Falls
downtown historic district and the Twin Falls City Park historic district,
before applying for a building permit, the property owner shall apply for and
receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Twin Falls historic
preservation commission.
      1.   No exterior portion of any building or other structure, including
walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant
features, nor aboveground utility structures nor any type of outdoor
advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished
within these districts until after an application for a certificate of
appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by
the historic preservation commission. The historic preservation commission
shall review the “design guidelines” as they exist or as amended for compliance
before issuing a certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation
commission shall make its determination within ten (10) business days after
submission of the application. Such a certificate is to be issued by the
historic preservation commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or
other permit granted for purposes of construction or altering structures.
      2.   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a
building permit is required.
      3.   Appeal: A decision of the historic preservation commission regarding
an application for a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed by the
applicant to the city council. (Ord. 2017-009, 2-27-2027; amd. Ord. 2024-012,
9-9-2024)
10-13-3: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Definition: Variance is a modification of the requirements of this
title as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear
yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings or other title provisions
affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure
upon lots, or the size of lots and public ways.
   (B)   Authority To Grant: The commission may authorize in specific cases
such variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same
district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship or the loss of a building or site that is on a
national, state or local register of historic places or sites.
   (C)   Application: A variance from the terms of this title shall not be
granted by the commission unless and until a written application for a variance
is submitted to the administrator and the commission containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property.
      3.   Description of nature of variance requested. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1984)
      4.   A narrative statement and documentation demonstrating that the
building or site is on a national, state or local register of historic places
or sites or that the requested variance conforms to all the following
standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this title.
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
         e.   That a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship. For purposes of this section, where a
reasonable conforming use is, or can be, located on a lot or parcel, there is
no unnecessary hardship.
      A variance shall not be granted unless the commission makes specific
findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it
which support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and conditions
have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 2466, 2-6-1995)
   (D)   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: Under no circumstances shall
the commission grant an appeal or variance to allow a use not permissible under
the terms of this title in the district involved, or any use expressly or by
implication prohibited by the terms of this title in said district. In granting
any appeal or variance, the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal or variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1984)
   (E)   Public Hearing: Prior to granting a variance permit, at least one
public hearing before the commission in which interested persons shall have the
opportunity to be heard shall be held. Notice for public hearings shall be
provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
   (F)   Action By Commission: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing
the commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
request for appeal of variance.
      Upon granting or denying an application the commission shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
      The applicant or any affected person may appeal the decision of the
commission to the council, provided a written appeal is submitted to the
council within fifteen (15) days from the commission's decision.
   (G)   Notification To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has
been rendered, the administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request.
   (H)   Appeal To Council: Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of the
commission, the council shall set a hearing date under the same provisions as
the commission hearing to consider all information, testimony and commission's
minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision to uphold, conditionally
uphold or overrule the decision. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1984; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-
2024)
10-13-4: SPECIAL USE:
   (A)   Definition: A special use is a use otherwise prohibited by the terms
of this title in a given zone, but which may be allowed with conditions under
specific provisions of this title and when not in conflict with a comprehensive
plan.
   (B)   Authority To Grant: The commission may authorize in specific cases
special uses, subject, however, to the minimum conditions and requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located and subject to additional
conditions and requirements necessary to protect the best interest of affected
persons and the city as a whole.
   (C)   Application: An application for special use permit shall be filed with
the administrator by at least one owner or lessee of property for which such
special use is proposed or for which an expansion of more than twenty five
percent (25%) over the original square footage approved through the special use
permit process or a total increase in square footage over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, whichever is less, or relocation of an existing special use is
proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property.
      3.   Description of existing use.
      4.   Zoning district.
      5.   Description of proposed special use.
      6.   A plan of the proposed site for the special use showing the location
of all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to
determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and requirements of this
title.
      7.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property;
the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to a
comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Standards Applicable To Special Uses: The commission shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of each proposed special use in terms of the
following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at
the proposed location:
      1.   Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established by zoning
requirements for the zone involved.
      2.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of a comprehensive plan and/or zoning
regulations.
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area.
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services.
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property or
to the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares.
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic or historic feature of major importance.
   (E)   Restrictions: In granting any special use, the commission may
prescribe appropriate conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this
title. Violations of such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this title. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
   (F)   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the application for a special use, the
commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice for public hearings shall be
provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
   (G)   Action By Commission: Within thirty (30) days after the public
hearing, the commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the application as presented. If the application is approved or
approved with modifications, the commission shall direct the administrator to
issue a special use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the
commission for approval.
      Upon granting of a special use permit, conditions may be attached to a
special use permit including, but not limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments.
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
      3.   Controlling the duration of development.
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly.
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services.
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this title.
      Prior to granting a special use permit, the commission may request
studies from the planning staff or public agencies concerning social, economic,
fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed special use. A special use
permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant
other special use permit.
      Upon granting or denying an application the commission shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
      The applicant or any affected person who appeared in person or in writing
before the commission may appeal the decision of the commission to the council,
provided a written appeal is submitted to the council within fifteen (15) days
from the commission's action. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (H)   Notification To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has
been rendered the administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice
of the action on the request. (Ord. 2124, 10-15-1984)
   (I)   Transfer, Review And Discontinuance Of Special Use Permits: A special
use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another, but may be
transferable from one owner to another, provided all conditions of the special
use permit continue to be met except special use permits issued for in home
daycare services and for home occupations which are not transferable from one
owner to another.
      Special uses which have not been established within one year of the date
of issuance of the special use permit, may be reviewed by the commission to
determine if the facts and circumstances have changed; the commission may call
for a new special use permit application.
   A special use which has been discontinued for a period of one year shall not
be reestablished without a new special use permit. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999)
   (J)   Appeal To The Council: Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of
the commission, the council shall set a hearing date, under the same provisions
as the commission hearing, to consider all information, testimony and the
commission's minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision to uphold,
conditionally uphold or overrule the decision of the commission. (Ord. 2124,
10-15-1984)
   (K)   Conditional Approval: If a special use permit is approved on condition
that certain improvements be made to the subject property, no permit shall be
issued until the applicant has provided proof that the conditions have been
complied with. If the applicant fails to provide proof of compliance within six
(6) months of approval, the special use permit shall be void. (Ord. 2773, 12-
15-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
10-13-5: REVOCATION OF ZONING PERMITS:
   (A)   Any privilege, permit or license, hereinafter called permit, granted
pursuant to this title, including any permit granted prior to the passage of
this section, and with the exception of rezone requests, may be revoked for the
following reasons:
      1.   When a significant change in the use which does adversely impact
neighboring developments occurs.
      2.   For violation of supplementary conditions, safeguards and/or
restrictions imposed by the city council or the planning and zoning commission
at the time the permit was granted.
      3.   Use of a zoning permit or certificate for a use other than the use
for which said permit or certificate was issued.
   (B)   A petition for revocation may be initiated in the following manner:
      1.   By adoption of a motion by the commission for revocation of the
permit.
      2.   By adoption of a motion by the council for revocation of the permit.
      3.   By the filing of a petition by an aggrieved property owner or person
who has an existing interest in property within the area affected by the
contested use.
   (C)   Notice of initiation of revocation proceedings shall be provided to
the permit holder in writing within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the
petition for revocation or the passage of a motion initiating revocation
proceedings. Notice shall include the following:
      1.   The name of the party or parties petitioning for a permit
revocation.
      2.   The date and time of passage of a motion to revoke by the zoning
body, or the date of filing of the petition to revoke.
      3.   The change in circumstances which has been alleged to have occurred
and the adverse impact which said change in circumstances is expected to have.
      4.   The supplementary conditions, safeguards and restrictions alleged to
have been violated. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
   (D)   A public hearing on the motion or petition to revoke shall be held
before the appropriate zoning body. The permit holder, city staff and/or any
aggrieved party may present testimony or other evidence at said hearing. Said
hearing shall be held within forty five (45) days of the filing of a petition
for revocation or the passage of a motion initiating revocation proceedings.
Notice for public hearings shall be provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
   (E)   The decision of the zoning body hearing a revocation proceeding shall
be based on the record. If said zoning body finds substantial evidence on the
record that continuance of the use in question will result in a significant
adverse impact on the surrounding developments or other affected parties, and
that the permit holder is unable or unwilling to alleviate the adversity, or if
said zoning body finds substantial evidence on the record that conditions,
safeguards or restrictions imposed by the commission or council have been
violated, the zoning body may revoke the permit in question.
   (F)   A permit which has been revoked may be reinstated only by reapplying
for said permit. (Ord. 2045, 7-6-1982)
   (G)   Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
administrator shall provide the permit holder with written notice of the action
taken.
      Upon receipt of a decision from the planning and zoning commission, an
aggrieved party may appeal to the city council. The council shall set a hearing
date and shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the provisions provided
herein. (Ord. 2620, 8-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2024-012, 9-9-2024)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Authority To Amend
10-14-2: Initiation Of Zoning Amendments
10-14-3: Amendment Application, Contents
10-14-4: Commission Action
10-14-5: Public Hearing
10-14-6: Approval Or Denial Of Amendment
10-14-7: Action By Council
10-14-8: Resubmission Of Application
10-14-9: Zone Boundary Change; Publication Of Notice
10-14-1: AUTHORITY TO AMEND:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, the council may, by ordinance, after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the commission and subject to procedures provided
by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries or classification of property. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-14-2: INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
   (A)   By adoption of a motion by the commission.
   (B)   By adoption of a motion by the council.
   (C)   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has an existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-14-3: AMENDMENT APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
Applications for amendments to the official zoning map adopted as part of this
title 1  shall be provided by the administrator and shall contain at least the
following information:
   (A)   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
   (B)   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the council.
   (C)   Present land use.
   (D)   Present zoning district.
   (E)   Proposed use.
   (F)   Proposed zoning district.
   (G)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator showing the
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the administrator may require.
   (H)   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered.
   (I)   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to a comprehensive
plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding
area.
   (J)   A fee as established by the council. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-3-2 of this title.
10-14-4: COMMISSION ACTION:
Zoning districts, zoning subdistricts and overlay districts shall be amended in
the following manner:
   (A)   Requests for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested;
   (B)   If the request is in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the
commission may recommend and the council may adopt or reject the ordinance
amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided; and (Ord.
2012, 7-6-1981)
   (C)   If the request is not in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the
request shall be submitted to the commission or, in its absence, the council
which shall recommend and the council may adopt or reject an amendment to a
comprehensive plan under the notice and hearing procedures provided in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-14-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on proposed
zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map revisions.
   (A)   Zoning Title Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a zoning
title amendment to the council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in
which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice for
public hearings shall be provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. Following the commission's hearing, if the commission
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards the
amendment with its recommendation to the council.
   (B)   Zoning Map Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a zoning
map amendment that is in accordance with a comprehensive plan to the council,
shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice for public hearings shall be provided
as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-14-6: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF AMENDMENT:
Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the
commission shall transmit its recommendation to the council. The commission may
recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a
modification of the amendment requested, or it may recommend that the amendment
be denied. The commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for
amendments are in accordance with a comprehensive plan and established goals
and objectives. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-14-7: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
The council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment to this
title as recommended by the commission shall conduct at least one public
hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the council hearing, if said council makes a material change from
what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the council adopts the amendment.
Upon granting or denying an application to amend this title, the council shall
specify:
   (A)   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
   (B)   The reasons for approval or denial.
   (C)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
In the event the council shall approve an amendment, such amendment shall
thereafter be made a part of this title upon the preparation and passage of an
ordinance. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-14-8: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by
the council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or with
reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a
period of one year from the date of such final action; unless there is an
amendment in a comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions as
applying to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-14-9: ZONE BOUNDARY CHANGE; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE:
Whenever a zoning district boundary change is contemplated by the city, notice
of said proposed zoning district boundary change and the hearing thereon shall
be by publication in the Times-News once a week for three (3) consecutive
weeks, with at least one of said publications being fifteen (15) days prior to
the date set for hearing on the proposed zoning district boundary change and
for which said notice is given. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
CHAPTER 15
ANNEXATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Commission Recommendation Required
10-15-2: Public Hearing
10-15-1: COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the council shall request and
receive a recommendation from the commission on the proposed plan and zoning
ordinance changes for the unincorporated area. The council shall not hold a
public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing, nor take action upon the
plan, amendment or repeal until recommendations have been received from the
commission. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-15-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
   (A)   The commission shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall not
consider comments on annexation and shall be limited to the proposed plan and
zoning changes. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
   (B)   Notice for public hearings shall be provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. Following the commission's hearing, if the commission
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards the
proposal with its recommendations to the council. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
   (C)   The council, prior to adoption, amendment or repeal of the plan or
zoning ordinance, shall conduct at least one public hearing using the same
notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the hearing of the council, if the council makes a material change in
the plan or zone, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
council adopts the plan or zone
   (D)   Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an ordinance of
annexation, the council shall amend the planning and zoning regulations as
shall be found to be necessary. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
CHAPTER 16
VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Petition Procedure
10-16-2: Publication and Filing Costs
10-16-1: PETITION PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Petition Required: Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing
subdivision, plat or part thereof or within one mile of the boundaries of the
City, or within the City "area of impact", public right of way or easement, or
desiring to dedicate a street right of way or easement shall complete and file
a petition with the Administrator.
   (B)   The petition for vacation shall set forth the particular circumstances
of the request to vacate; contain a legal description of the platted area or
property to be vacated and the names of the persons affected thereby. In the
case where lots have been sold in a platted area, the petition should include
an acknowledged written statement from each of the owners of the aforesaid sold
lots indicating whether or not they are in agreement with the proposed
vacation.
   (C)   Administration Action: Upon receipt of the completed petition, the
Administrator shall affix the date of petition acceptance thereon. The
Administrator shall place the petition on the agenda for consideration at the
next regular meeting of the Commission.
   (D)   Public Hearing: The Commission shall hold a public hearing and make
recommendations on all petitions for vacation of an existing subdivision, plat
or part thereof inside or within one mile of the boundaries of the City, or
within the City "area of impact", and notice of said public hearing shall be
given, by certified mail with return receipt, at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the public hearing to all property owners within three hundred feet
(300') of the boundaries of the area described in the petition. Such notice of
public hearing shall also be published once a week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in the official newspaper of the City, the last of which shall not be
less than seven (7) days prior to the date of said hearing.
   (E)   Commission Recommendation: Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of
the petition for vacation, the Commission shall transmit its recommendation to
the Council. The Commission may recommend that the vacation be granted or it
may recommend a modification to the vacation, or it may recommend that the
vacation be denied.
   (F)   Action by Council: The Council, prior to approving, modifying or
denying the vacation, shall conduct a public hearing using the same notice and
hearing procedures as the Commission. Whenever public rights of way or lands
are vacated, the Council shall provide adjacent property owners with a Quit
Claim Deed for the vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed
by law.
   (G)   Petition for dedication shall set forth the particular circumstances
of the request to dedicate; contain a legal description of the property to be
dedicated and the names of the persons affected thereby.
   (H)   No Commission action is required for dedication.
   (I)   Council Action: When considering a petition for dedication procedures,
the Council may approve, deny or modify the petition. When a dedication is
approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed or a bond
furnished, assuring the construction, prior to acceptance of the dedication. To
complete the acceptance of any dedication of the land, the owner shall furnish
to the Council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be recorded with
the County Recorder.
10-16-2: PUBLICATION AND FILING COSTS:
All publications and filing costs shall be at the expense of the petitioner.
(Ord. 2012, 7-6-81)
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-17-1: City Planning Administrator
10-17-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
10-17-3: Bylaws Of Planning And Zoning Commission
10-17-4: Procedures For The Conduct Of Hearings
10-17-5: Mediation
10-17-1: CITY PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR:
There is hereby created the position of city planning administrator. The city
planning administrator shall be appointed by the city manager and the
appointment confirmed by the council.
The city planning administrator, throughout this title referred to as
administrator, shall administer the provisions of this title and provide
assistance and guidance to the commission and the council, and in addition,
shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Advise interested persons of the zoning title provisions.
   (B)   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest.
   (C)   Aid and assist applicants in the preparation and expedition of
required applications.
   (D)   Issue zoning permits, notifications and such similar administrative
duties.
   (E)   Investigate all violations of this title and notify in writing the
person responsible for such violations, ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation.
   (F)   Whenever there is doubt as to this classification of use not
specifically mentioned in this title, the determination shall be made by the
administrator. Such determination shall be based upon detailed description of
the proposed use and such other information as may be required. The
administrator shall make such investigations as are necessary to compare the
nature and characteristics of the proposed use with those of listed uses in the
various districts, and shall determine that the use is, in all essentials,
pertinent to the objectives of this title, of the same character as a use
listed as allowed or as a special use permitted in one of such specified
district or districts. No use added by such administrative determination shall
permit in any district a use which is a special use permitted in such districts
or in any less restricted district, nor shall same permit a use which is an
allowed use in a less restrictive district. The determination of the
administrator shall be final unless an appeal is made as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2526, 5-20-1996)
   (G)   Appeals to the commission concerning the administrator's
interpretation and administration of this title may be taken by any person
aggrieved by a decision of said administrator. Said appeal shall be taken
within fifteen (15) days after the decision of the administrator by filing with
the administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the
appeal is to be taken. The administrator shall transmit to the commission the
appeal and all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is based.
Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of the administrator the commission
shall, after publishing notice in a newspaper and giving written notice to all
parties concerned at least fifteen (15) days in advance, hold a public hearing.
Notice for public hearings shall be provided as set forth in section
10-7-20 of this title. The commission's determination shall be final unless
appealed to the council within the same time and pursuant to the same procedure
set forth above. (Ord. 3091, 3-2-2015)
10-17-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
There is hereby created, a planning and zoning commission and throughout this
title is referred to as the commission. The commission shall be constituted and
shall function according to the bylaws herein set forth and shall have all of
the power or authority to consider ordinances or to recommend amendments to or
repeal of any portion of this title. The commission shall provide guidance and
assistance to the council, holding public hearings as required by law, and
shall grant or deny applications presented to the commission, and shall make
timely written recommendations to the council in all matters relating to this
title in which the council has final decision making powers. Any action taken
by the commission which would be final unless appealed may be reviewed and
heard by the council when an appeal is not made but the council determines,
within fifteen (15) days of commission action, that there may be significant
adverse impact as a result of the commission action. (Ord. 2012, 7-6-1981)
10-17-3: BYLAWS OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
The following organizational bylaws for the planning and zoning commission are
hereby adopted and the same shall be considered an integral part of this title
and functional guidelines for said commission:
   BYLAWS
   OF
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   Twin Falls, Idaho
   * * * * *
Article I - Creation And Purpose
   There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for the city of
Twin Falls, Idaho. In fulfilling the powers and duties by law conferred upon
the commission, the commission shall, among other things, bear in mind the
following considerations:
      1.   The protection of property rights and property values.
      2.   Public facilities and service costs.
      3.   The effect on the economy of the city of Twin Falls, Idaho.
      4.   Environmental considerations.
      5.   Effects on prime agricultural, forestry and mining lands.
      6.   Organized and planned urban development within the city of Twin
Falls, Idaho.
      7.   The avoidance of undue concentration of population and overcrowding
of land.
      8.   Land development compatible with land characteristics.
      9.   The protection of life and property in areas subject to natural
hazards and disasters.
      10.   The protection of fish, wildlife and recreational resources.
      11.   The avoidance of water and air pollution.
Article II - Membership And Term
   The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. All members shall be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the full council.
One (1) member will represent the City of Twin Falls Area of Impact as provided
in section
10-8-4 of this title. The residency requirement in Twin Falls City Code section
2-1-1 is specifically waived for the member representing the Area of Impact.
   Members shall serve a term of three (3) years beginning regularly on March 1
of each year with a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms or six (6) years
provided, however, that the term of office for at least one-third (1/3) of the
regular membership shall be appointed as of the first class and their term of
office shall expire one year from the date of their appointment; one-third (1/
3) of the regular membership shall be appointed as of the second class and
their term of office shall expire two (2) years after the date of their
appointment; and one-third (1/3) of the regular membership shall be of the
third class and their term of office shall expire three (3) years from the date
of their appointment. Thereafter, regular members shall be appointed for a term
of three (3) years as provided.
Article III - Organization And Meetings
   Upon organization, and thereafter at the first regular meeting in March of
each year, the commission shall elect, by a majority of the full membership, a
chairman and shall create and fill in a similar manner any other office that it
may deem necessary.
   The chairman may establish subcommittees, advisory committees or
neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out the responsibilities
of the commission.
   The chairman (or vice chairman) shall preside at all regular meetings of the
commission which may be scheduled on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each
month for no less than nine (9) months in a year. All meetings and records
shall be open to the public and a record of all meetings, hearings,
resolutions, studies, findings, permits, recommendations and actions shall be
maintained by the commission.
Article IV - Special Meetings
   Special meetings of the commission may be held at such times and at such
places as agreed on by at least four (4) members at a regularly scheduled
public meeting. Written notice of all such special meetings, including the
time, date, and purpose of said meetings shall be provided to all members of
the commission. Provided, that written notice of said special meeting may be
waived by a member at said special meeting, duly entered and registered in the
minutes of such meeting.
   No business may be conducted at any such special meeting upon any
application or request of any citizen except and unless notice of the request
and of the special meeting has been published as required by law.
Article V - Order Of Business
   All regular and special meetings of the commission shall be conducted by the
chairman in an orderly fashion pursuant to the procedures for conduct of
meetings in section
10-17-4 of this chapter.
Article VI - Members Qualifications
   Persons recommended for appointment by the mayor and confirmed by the
council shall have resided in Twin Falls County, Idaho, for two (2) continuous
years preceding their appointment, shall be residents of the city of Twin Falls
at the time of appointment and said members must remain residents of the city
during the term of office to which they were appointed.
   The area of impact representatives shall have resided in Twin Falls County,
Idaho, for two (2) continuous years preceding their appointment and shall be
residents within the area of impact, residing outside the city limits, at the
time of appointment and must remain residents of the area of impact during the
term of office to which they were appointed.
   In appointing members to the commission, the council shall be certain that
the area and interest within its jurisdiction are broadly represented by the
appointed membership. Members shall be selected and appointed without respect
to political affiliations.
Article VII - Vacancies And Removal Of Commission Members
   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of appointed terms
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments. A member
appointed to fill an unexpired term shall serve the remainder of the unexpired
term and may be appointed to no more than two (2) full consecutive terms.
   Members may be removed for cause only by a majority vote of the full
council.
Article VIII - Conflict Of Interest
   A member of the commission shall not participate in any proceeding or action
when the member, his employer, or his employee, business partner or associate,
his business, or any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within
the second degree has an economic interest in the procedure or action. Any
action or potential interest in any proceedings shall be disclosed at or before
any meeting, duly entered and recorded in the minutes, at which the action is
being heard or considered.
Article IX - Duties Of Commission
   Consistent with the purposes of the commission hereinabove set forth, the
commission shall have the following duties together with such other duties as
are prescribed by law:
      1.   Initiate proposed amendments to this section and conduct a biennial
review of the complete zoning ordinance.
      2.   Review all proposed amendments to this title and make
recommendations to the council.
      3.   Conduct a comprehensive planning process designed to prepare,
implement, and review and update a comprehensive plan as required by law.
      4.   Review all districts, subdistricts and overlay districts and make
recommendations to the council.
      5.   Grant special use permits as specified in this title and under the
conditions as herein specified with such additional safeguards as will uphold
the intent of this title.
      6.   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
administrator.
      7.   Authorize such variances from the terms of this title as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done.
Article X - Public Hearings
   The chairman shall preside over and conduct all public hearings on all
matters presented to the commission. No public hearings shall be held except
and until notice has been provided the public in conformance with the statutes
of the state of Idaho made and provided in such case.
Article XI - Quorum For The Conducting Of Business And Voting
   A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business at any meeting of the commission.
   In the event more than one regular member is absent or not sitting due to a
conflict of interest, said member shall not be counted for the purposes of
constituting a quorum.
   Each member shall be entitled to one vote and the acts of a majority of a
quorum present at any regular or special meeting shall be the acts of the
commission.
Article XII
   All decisions of the commission on issues not requiring the passing of an
ordinance shall be final if not appealed to the council within fifteen (15)
days from the date of commission's decision.
Article XIII
   These bylaws may and shall be amended in the same manner provided for
amendments to this title in general.
(Ord. 2923, 10-22-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-006, 3-16-2020)
10-17-4: PROCEDURES FOR THE CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
The following rules hereby established, shall be observed in the conduct of any
public hearing before the city council of the city of Twin Falls and the
planning and zoning commission of the city of Twin Falls, hereinafter referred
to as the hearing body. The following rules shall be known as the "Twin Falls
rules of procedure":
   (A)   Prior to opening the public hearing, the presiding officer shall
review the public hearing process.
   (B)   The applicant shall not make any changes to the application or
proposal after publication of the notice of public hearing. If the applicant
wishes to make a change to the application after the publication of the notice
of public hearing, the applicant shall notify the administrator and the hearing
shall be canceled, to be rescheduled after the changes are submitted for staff
review.
   (C)   All persons permitted to testify or speak before the hearing body at a
public hearing shall write their name and residential address thereafter on
sign up sheets to be provided by the city. This rule shall not apply to staff
or technical witnesses directed by the presiding officer to give evidence or
information to the hearing body.
   (D)   No person shall be permitted to speak before the hearing body at a
public hearing until such person has approached the microphone at the podium
and been recognized by the presiding officer.
   (E)   All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or
stenographically and all persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak
before a microphone in such a manner as will assure that the recorded testimony
or remarks will be accurate and trustworthy.
   (F)   Any exhibit introduced by any person shall be retained by the hearing
body and made a part of the record therein. (Ord. 2835, 9-12-2005)
   (G)   The applicant will be limited to fifteen (15) minutes for the initial
presentation, unless a written request for additional time is submitted prior
to the hearing and the hearing body grants the request for additional time. The
staff report shall follow the applicant's presentation. Members of the hearing
body may then ask questions regarding the application. Testimony from the
public may be limited by the presiding officer to no less than two (2) minutes
per person. Five (5) or more persons receiving written notice of the public
hearing may appoint a person to speak for them, which person shall be limited
to fifteen (15) minutes for their presentation. No written comments, including
e-mail, received after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the date of the hearing
will be accepted for consideration by the hearing body. Written comments,
including e-mail, received by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the date of the
hearing shall be either read into the record or displayed to the public on the
overhead projector at the completion of public comment. Members of the hearing
body may ask questions of any person who has testified. The applicant will be
permitted five (5) minutes for rebuttal. After all testimony has been given,
the public hearing shall be closed and no additional information may be
requested or given, unless the public hearing is reopened. (Ord. 2951, 9-8-
2008)
   (H)   The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the hearing body
until his time limit has been expended or until he has finished his statement.
   (I)   At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, each member, when
recognized by the presiding officer, may be allowed to question the speaker and
the speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The presiding
officer may limit the time permitted for the answer. The question and answer
period shall not be included in the speaker's time limit, as established.
   (J)   Any person not conforming to any of the above rules may be prohibited
from speaking before the public hearing. Should any person refuse to comply
with such prohibition, he/she may be asked to leave the hearing, and thereafter
removed from the room by order of the presiding officer.
   (K)   The main motion on the application shall be in the affirmative, to
approve the application, and may include conditions from the staff report. The
main motion may be amended to establish or remove conditions. If the motion
passes, the application is approved. If the motion fails, the application is
deemed denied. Motions on appeals shall also be in the affirmative to approve
the zoning action requested by the applicant.
   (L)   The approval or denial of any application requiring a public hearing
provided for in this title shall be based upon standards and criteria which
shall be set forth in the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, or other
appropriate ordinance or regulation of the city.
   (M)   The approval or denial of any application requiring a public hearing
provided for in this title shall be in writing in the form of findings of fact
and conclusions of law that explain the criteria and standards considered
relevant, state the facts relied upon, and explain the justification for the
decision based on the criteria, standards and facts set forth. The
comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, the zoning map, and all prior acts of
the hearing body shall be considered, and are, a part of the record of any
public hearing.
   (N)   For those applications that require an ordinance, staff will prepare
and place on the next council agenda an ordinance with implementing language
including all conditions as specified in the zoning action. The ordinance shall
be published at the next available publication date.
   (O)   A transcribable verbatim record of the public hearing shall be made
and kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on
the matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for the
retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his
expense. (Ord. 2835, 9-12-2005)
10-17-5: MEDIATION:
   (A)   Mediation may be requested in writing by the applicant, an affected
person, the planning and zoning commission or the city council. Mediation may
occur at any point during the decision making process or after a final decision
has been made. If mediation occurs after a final decision, any resolution of
differences through mediation must be the subject of another public hearing
before the decision making body.
   (B)   The applicant and any other affected persons objecting to the
application shall participate in at least one mediation session if mediation is
requested by the commission or the city council. The city council shall select
and pay the expense of the mediator for the first meeting among the interested
parties. Compensation of the mediator shall be determined among the parties at
the outset of any mediation undertaking. An applicant may decline to
participate in mediation requested by an affected person, and an affected
person may decline to participate in mediation requested by the applicant,
except that the parties shall participate in at least one mediation session if
directed to do so by the governing board.
   (C)   During mediation, any time limitation relevant to the application
shall be tolled. Such tolling shall cease when the applicant or any other
affected person, after having participated in at least one mediation session,
states in writing that no further participation is desired and notifies the
other parties, or upon notice of a request to mediate wherein no mediation
session is scheduled for twenty eight (28) days from the date of such request.
   (D)   The mediation process may be undertaken pursuant to the general
limitations established by this section.
   (E)   The mediation process shall not be part of the official record
regarding the application. (Ord. 2725, 6-17-2002)
TITLE 11
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
11-1-1: Legislative Findings
11-1-2: Authority And Applicability
11-1-3: Intent
11-1-4: Definitions
11-1-5: Development Impact Fees Imposed
11-1-6: Service Areas
11-1-7: Use Of Development Impact Fee Funds
11-1-8: Refunds Of Development Impact Fees Paid
11-1-9: Credits Against Development Impact Fees
11-1-10: Appeals And Mediation
11-1-11: Enforcement And Collection
11-1-12: Miscellaneous Provisions
11-1-13: Penalty For Violation
11-1-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Twin Falls, Twin Falls County,, Idaho, finds
that:
   (A)   Based on the city of Twin Falls comprehensive plan adopted by the city
pursuant to chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, including, but not limited to,
the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and the general
governmental goal of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, it is necessary that the city’s public facilities for: 1)
police, 2) fire/emergency medical services (EMS), 3) parks and recreation, and
4) streets be expanded and improved to accommodate new development within the
city. Throughout this chapter, the system improvements for these four (4) types
of public facilities are sometimes collectively referred to as the “city
capital facilities” and sometimes individually referred to as a “city capital
improvements element”.
   (B)   The city has formed the development impact fee advisory committee
required by Idaho Code section 67-8205, and that committee has performed the
duties required of it pursuant to such statute. The city intends that the
committee continue to exist and to perform those duties identified in Idaho
Code section 67-8205 that occur following the adoption of development impact
fees.
   (C)   New residential and nonresidential development imposes and will impose
increasing and excessive demands upon city capital facilities.
   (D)   The revenues generated from new residential and nonresidential
development often do not generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary
improvements of these city capital facilities to accommodate new development.
   (E)   New development is expected to continue, and will place ever
increasing demands on the city to provide and expand city capital facilities to
serve new development.
   (F)   The city has planned for the improvement of the city capital
facilities in the capital improvements element of the city of Twin Falls
comprehensive plan.
   (G)   Chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code (the Idaho development impact
fee act) authorizes the city to adopt a development impact fee system to
offset, recoup, or reimburse the portion of the costs of needed improvements to
the city capital facilities caused by new development in the city.
   (H)   The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would
promote the purposes set forth in the Idaho development impact fee act, in that
it would: 1) ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new
growth and development; 2) promote orderly growth and development by
establishing uniform standards by which local governments may require that
those who benefit from new growth and development pay a proportionate share of
the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development;
3) ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are required
to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development; and 4) prevent duplicate and ad hoc
development requirements.
   (I)   The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would
enable the city to accommodate new development, and would assist the city to
implement the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan.
   (J)   In order to implement an equitable development impact fee system for
the city capital facilities, the city retained Galena Consulting to prepare an
impact fee study for these types of facilities. The resulting document is
titled “City Of Twin Falls, Idaho Impact Fee Study And Capital Improvement
Plans”, dated April 5, 2021 (the “development impact fee study”), and that
document is hereby incorporated by reference.
   (K)   The methodology used in preparing the development impact fee study,
when applied through this chapter, complies with all applicable provisions of
Idaho law, including those set forth in Idaho statutes sections 67-8204(2), 67-
8204(16), 67-8204(23), 67-8207 and 67-8209. The incorporation of the
development impact fee study by reference satisfies the requirement in Idaho
statutes section 67-8204(16) for a detailed description of the methodology by
which the development impact fees were calculated, and the requirement in Idaho
Code section 67-8204(24) for a description of acceptable levels of service for
system improvements.
   (L)   The development impact fee study contains the capital improvements
element of the city of Twin Falls comprehensive plan, and such element has been
prepared in conformance with the requirements of chapters 65 and 82 of title 67
of the Idaho Code.
   (M)   The development impact fee study sets forth reasonable methodologies
and analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new development on
the city capital facilities, and determines the cost of acquiring or
constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands for such facilities
created by new development.
   (N)   In accordance with Idaho Code, the development impact fee study was
based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs.
In addition, the development impact fee study uses a fee calculation
methodology that is net of credits for the present value of revenues that will
be generated by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns
and that are anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements,
including taxes, assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers.
   (O)   The development impact fees described in this chapter are based on the
development impact fee study, and do not exceed the costs of system
improvements for city capital facilities to serve new development that will pay
the development impact fees.
   (P)   The facilities for parks and recreation, streets, police, and fire/
emergency medical services (EMS) included in the calculation of fees in the
development impact fee study will benefit all new residential and
nonresidential development throughout the city, and it is therefore appropriate
to treat all areas of the city as a single service area for purposes of
calculating, collecting, and spending the development impact fees collected
from residential and nonresidential development.
   (Q)   There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between the
development impacts created by each type of development covered by this chapter
and the development impact fees that such development will be required to pay.
   (R)   This chapter creates a system by which development impact fees paid by
new development will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the
costs incurred by the city to construct improvements for city capital
facilities in ways that benefit the development for which each development
impact fee was paid within a reasonable period of time after the development
impact fee is paid, and in conformance with Idaho Code section 67-8210.
   (S)   This chapter creates a system under which development impact fees
shall not be used to correct existing deficiencies for any capital facilities,
or to replace or rehabilitate existing improvements, or to pay for routine
operation or maintenance of those facilities.
   (T)   This chapter creates a system under which there shall be no double
payment of impact fees, in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8204(19).
   (U)   This chapter is consistent with all applicable provisions of chapter
82, title 67, Idaho Code, concerning development impact fee ordinances. (Ord.
2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-2: AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s general police power,
the authority granted to the city pursuant to chapters 65 and 82, title 67,
Idaho Code, and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all areas of the city. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-
11-2021)
11-1-3: INTENT:
   (A)   This chapter is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement,
the City of Twin Falls comprehensive plan, and particularly the capital
improvements element of that plan.
   (B)   The intent of this chapter is to ensure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of improvements to City capital facilities; to
ensure that such proportionate share does not exceed the cost of improvements
to such facilities required to accommodate new development; and to ensure that
funds collected from new development are actually used for improvements to City
capital facilities that benefit such new development.
   (C)   It is the further intent of this chapter to be consistent with those
principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of new capital facilities to
new development, and for adopting development impact fee ordinances,
established by chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code.
   (D)   It is not the intent of this chapter to collect any money from any new
development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for
City capital facilities created by such new development.
   (E)   It is not the intent of this chapter that any monies collected from
any development impact fee deposited in an impact fee account ever be
commingled with monies from a different impact fee account, or ever be used for
a development impact fee component different from that for which the fee was
paid, or ever be used to correct current deficiencies in the City capital
facilities or ever be used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain, or operate any
City facility. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, some of which are assigned by Idaho Code section 67-8203, as
indicated:
               The parks capital facilities account, the street capital facilities account, the
               police capital facilities account, and the fire/EMS capital facilities account,
ACCOUNTS:      established as part of the Development Impact Fee Trust Fund established in
               section
               11-1-7 of this chapter.
AFFORDABLE     Housing affordable to families whose incomes do not exceed eighty percent (80%)
HOUSING:       of the median income for the City of Twin Falls. Section 67-8203(1) Idaho Code.
APPROPRIATE:   To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or
               other official act of a governmental entity. Section 67-8203(2) Idaho Code.
BUILDING       A building permit issued by the building official permitting the construction of
PERMIT:        a building or structure within the City of Twin Falls.
CAPITAL        An improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction
IMPROVEMENT:   or other action that increases the service capacity of a public facility. Section
               67-8203(3) Idaho Code.
CAPITAL        A component of the City of Twin Falls comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to
IMPROVEMENTS   chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, which component meets the requirements of a
ELEMENT:       capital improvements plan pursuant to chapter 65, title 67 of the Idaho Code.
               Section 67-8203(4) Idaho Code.
CAPITAL        A plan adopted pursuant to this chapter that identifies capital improvements for
IMPROVEMENTS   which development impact fees may be used as a funding source. Section 67-8203(5)
PLAN:          Idaho Code.
CITY:          City of Twin Falls, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL:  The City Council of the City of Twin Falls, Idaho.
               Any person or legal entity undertaking development, including a party that
DEVELOPER:     undertakes the subdivision of property pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1301
               through 50-1334. Section 67-8203(6) Idaho Code.
               Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use
               of a building or structure, or any change in the use, character or appearance of
DEVELOPMENT:   land, that creates additional demand and need for public facilities or the
               subdivision of property that would permit any change in the use, character or
               appearance of land. Section 67-8203(7) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT    Any written authorization from a governmental entity that authorizes the
APPROVAL:      commencement of a development. Section 67-8203(8) Idaho Code.
               The payment of money imposed as a condition of development approval to pay for a
               proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve
               development. Section 67-8203(9) Idaho Code. In the context of this chapter,
               development impact fee means one of the four (4) impact fees defined for the four
               (4) city capital facilities elements, and development impact fees (in the plural)
               means all four (4) impact fees (or all of them that apply to the proposed
               development pursuant to this chapter). The term does not include:
               (A)   A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review, or inspection costs
DEVELOPMENT    associated with permits required for development;
IMPACT FEE:    (B)   Connection or hookup charges;
               (C)   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation for
               services provided directly to the development; or
               (D)   Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city or
               another governmental entity has incurred expenses in constructing capital
               improvements for the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be
               financially responsible for the construction or installation of the capital
               improvements, unless a written agreement is made pursuant to Idaho Code section
               67-8209(3) for credit or reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT    That individual designated from time to time by the city manager of Twin Falls,
IMPACT FEE     Idaho, to administer the development impact fee system established by this
ADMINISTRATOR: chapter.
               The document entitled “City Of Twin Falls, Idaho Development Impact Fee Study And
DEVELOPMENT    Capital Improvement Plans”, dated April 5, 2021, prepared by Galena Consulting
IMPACT FEE     for the city, that sets forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for
STUDY:         determining the impacts of various types of development on the city capital
               facilities and determines the cost of expansions to those facilities necessary to
               meet the demands created by new development.
               The trust fund established by section
DEVELOPMENT    11-1-7 of this chapter that includes: a) a parks capital facilities account, b) a
IMPACT FEE     street capital facilities account, c) a police capital facilities account, and d)
TRUST FUND:    a fire/EMS capital facilities account. The development impact fee trust fund is
               also sometimes called the trust fund.
               A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other governmental action
DEVELOPMENT    approving or authorizing a particular development project including, but not
REQUIREMENT:   limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or
               contribution of goods, services, land, or money as a condition of approval.
               Section 67-8203(10) Idaho Code.
EXTRAORDINARY  Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary impact. Section 67-8203(11)
COSTS:         Idaho Code.
               An impact that is reasonably determined by the governmental entity to: a) result
               in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will significantly exceed
EXTRAORDINARY  the sum of the development impact fees to be generated from the project or the
IMPACT:        sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development agreement as allowed by Idaho
               Code section 67-8214(2), or b) result in the need for system improvements that
               are not identified in the capital improvements plan. Section 67-8203(12) Idaho
               Code.
               A person or legal entity that pays or is required to pay a development impact
FEE PAYER:     fee. Taxing districts are expressly included within this definition of “fee
               payer”, unless the taxing district enters into a written agreement with the City
               of Twin Falls that provides otherwise. A fee payer may include a developer.
               Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related equipment and
FIRE/EMS       vehicles meeting the definition of “capital improvement”, used for fire and
CAPITAL        emergency medical service facilities included in the calculation of the fire/EMS
FACILITIES:    impact fee in the development impact fee study, and specifically including those
               related costs included in the definition of “system improvement costs”, but not
               including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
               Land development designed or intended to permit a use of the land that will
IMPACT-        contain more dwelling units or floor space than the then existing use of the
GENERATING     land, or the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land in
LAND           a manner that increases demand for City capital facilities. The type of proposed
DEVELOPMENT:   impact-generating land development shall be based on the proposed use of the
               land.
               A study prepared by a fee payer, calculating the cost of expansions or
               improvements to one or more of the City capital improvements elements required to
INDIVIDUAL     serve the fee payer’s proposed development, that is based on the established LOS
ASSESSMENT:    standard, is performed on an average cost (not marginal cost) methodology, that
               uses the service units and unit construction costs stated in the development
               impact fee study, and is performed in compliance with any criteria for such
               studies established by this chapter or by the City.
LAND USE       A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities,
ASSUMPTIONS:   intensities, and population in the service area over at least a twenty (20) year
               period. Section 67-8203(16) Idaho Code.
LEVEL OF       A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for
SERVICE:       public facilities. Section 67-8203(17) Idaho Code.
               A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction and safety
               standards, transportable in one or more sections, that, in the traveling mode, is
               eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
               when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and that
               is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
MANUFACTURED   without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
HOME:          includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
               contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure that meets
               all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with
               respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by
               the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards
               established under 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. Section 67-8203(18) Idaho Code.
               Any building or building component, other than a manufactured or mobile home,
MODULAR        which is of closed construction and is either entirely or substantially
BUILDING:      prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site. Sections 67-
               8203(19) and 39-4301, Idaho Code.
               Open space lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related
               equipment meeting the definition of “capital improvement”, used for public parks,
PARKS CAPITAL  recreation, open space, and trail facilities included in the calculation of the
FACILITIES:    park impact fee in the development impact fee study, and specifically including
               those related costs included in the definition of “system improvement costs”, but
               not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand
               capacity.
               An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate,
PERSON:        partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common
               interest, or any other entity.
               Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related equipment and
               vehicles meeting the definition of “capital improvement”, used for police
POLICE CAPITAL facilities included in the calculation of the police impact fee in the
FACILITIES:    development impact fee study, and specifically including those related costs
               included in the definition of “system improvement costs”, but not including
               maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
               The total current monetary value of past, present, or future payments,
PRESENT VALUE: contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or
               money. Section 67-8203(20) Idaho Code.
PROJECT:       A particular development on an identified parcel of land. Section 67-8203(21)
               Idaho Code.
               Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service
PROJECT        for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and
IMPROVEMENTS:  convenience of the occupants or users of the project. Section 67-8203(22) Idaho
               Code.
PROPORTIONATE  That portion of the cost of system improvements determined pursuant to Idaho Code
SHARE:         section 67-8207, that reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the
               project. Section 67-8203(23) Idaho Code.
               (A)   Water supply production, treatment, storage and distribution facilities;
               (B)   Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
               (C)   Roads, streets and bridges, including rights- of-way, traffic signals,
               landscaping and any local components of State or Federal highways;
PUBLIC         (D)   Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal
FACILITIES:    facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and
               enhancement improvements;
               (E)   Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital improvements;
               and
               (F)   Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency
               medical and rescue and street lighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL   A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational,
VEHICLE:       camping, or travel use, that either has its own motive power or is mounted on or
               drawn by another vehicle. Section 67-8203(25) Idaho Code.
               Any defined geographic area identified by a governmental entity or by
SERVICE AREA:  intergovernmental agreement in which specific public facilities provide service
               to development within the area defined, on the basis of sound planning or
               engineering principles or both. Section 67-8203(26) Idaho Code.
               A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable
SERVICE UNIT:  to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally
               accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital
               improvements. Section 67-8203(27) Idaho Code.
               Lands, improvements to land, and equipment meeting the definition of “capital
               improvement”, used for intersection improvements (signals, round-a-bouts,
               pedestrian crossings, etc.) and for improvements to arterial and collector roads
STREET CAPITAL (bridges, lanes, shoulders, pedestrian facilities, etc.) with the purpose of
FACILITIES:    expanding capacity, included in the calculation of the street impact fee in the
               development impact fee study, and consistent with the capital improvements
               element, and specifically including those related costs included in the
               definition of “system improvement costs”, but not including maintenance,
               operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
SUCCESSOR IN   A “person”, as defined by this chapter, who gains a fee simple interest in land
INTEREST:      for which a development impact fee is paid or a credit is approved pursuant to
               the terms of this chapter.
               Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system improvements,
               including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs attributable thereto,
               and also including, without limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code
               section 50-1702(h), to provide additional public facilities needed to serve new
               growth and development. For clarification, system improvement costs do not
               include: a) construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other
               than capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan; b) repair,
SYSTEM         operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements; c) upgrading,
IMPROVEMENT    updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing
COSTS:         development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or
               regulatory standards; d) upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing
               capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; e)
               administrative and operating costs of the governmental entity unless such costs
               are attributable to development of the capital improvement plan, as provided in
               Idaho Code section 67-8208; or f) principal payments and interest or other
               finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations
               issued by or on behalf of the governmental entity to finance capital improvements
               identified in the capital improvements plan. Section 67-8203(29) Idaho Code.
               In contrast to project improvements, means capital improvements to public
               facilities that are designed to provide service to a service area including,
SYSTEM         without limitation, the type of improvements described in Idaho Code section 50-
IMPROVEMENTS:  1703. Section 67-8203(28) Idaho Code. For the purposes of this chapter, the
               system improvements are the park capital facilities, street capital facilities,
               police capital facilities, fire/EMS capital facilities. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-
               2021)
 
11-1-5: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Obligation:
      1.   After the effective date hereof, any person who commences any impact
generating land development, except those exempted pursuant to subsection (B)
of this section, shall be obligated to pay development impact fees upon
commencement of such activity. The amount of the development impact fees shall
be determined in accordance with this chapter.
      2.   If the fee payer is applying for an extension of a permit issued
previously, then the development impact fees required to be paid shall be the
net increase between the development impact fees applicable at the time of the
current permit application and any development impact fees previously paid
pursuant to this chapter to finance similar types of system improvements to
accommodate demands created by the same development.
      3.   If the fee payer is applying for a permit to allow a change of use
or for the expansion, redevelopment, or modification of an existing
development, the development impact fees required to be paid shall be based on
the net increase in the development impact fees for the new use as compared to
the previous use.
   (B)   Exemptions: The following types of development shall be exempted from
payment of the development impact fees. Any claim for exemption shall be made
no later than the time when the applicant applies for the first building permit
for the proposed development that creates the obligation to pay the development
impact fees, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall
have been waived. The Development Impact Fee Administrator or a designee shall
determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set
forth below:
      1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
      2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not increase the
number of service units;
      3.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured home, with
another residential unit on the same lot, provided that the number of service
units does not increase;
      4.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure that does not
increase the number of service units;
      5.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
      6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis courts or clubhouses, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
      7.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured home, or
recreational vehicle if the fee payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either: a) a modular building, manufactured
home, or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the lot or space prior to
the effective date hereof, or b) a development impact fee has been paid
previously for the installation of a modular building, manufactured home or
recreational vehicle on that same lot or space;
      8.   Projects for which a development impact fee for each type of public
facility covered by this chapter has previously been paid in an amount that
equals or exceeds the development impact fee that would be required by this
chapter;
      9.   Projects built by the Federal government or the State government;
and,
      10.   Projects which meet all of the following criteria may apply for an
individualized assessment pursuant to subsection C4 of this section, except
that the applicant may simply rely on the documented project history rather
than retaining a qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment:
         a.   A development agreement was entered into by the project developer
and the City setting forth the entitlements and obligations of the developer,
which agreement was approved by the City Council prior to January 1, 2008; and
         b.   The final plat for the development, or site plan attached to the
development agreement, was approved by the City prior to January 1, 2008; and
         c.   The development, through the terms of the development agreement,
or otherwise, has built, or is obligated to build public facilities, which
facilities are not “project improvements”, in excess of the amount that would
be collected under this chapter.
   (C)   Fee Table And Calculation Of Amount Of Development Impact Fees:
      1.   Fee Table and subsequent increases:
Police fees:
 Residential    $218.00  per dwelling unit
 Nonresidential 0.1      per square foot
Fire fees:
 Residential    871.00   per dwelling unit
 Nonresidential 0.44     per square foot
Parks fees:
 Residential    1,512.00 per dwelling unit
 Nonresidential n/a       
Street fees:
 Single-family  1327.00  per dwelling unit
 Multi-family   710.00   per dwelling unit
 Retail         2.94     per square foot
 Office         1.75     per square foot
 Industrial     0.54     per square foot
 Institutional  0.33     per square foot
 
This fee schedule shall be in effect thirty (30) days after the approval of the
master Fee Schedule.
On January 1, 2023, and on January 1 of each year thereafter in which an impact
fee is in effect, the amount of the impact fee shall be automatically adjusted
to account for year over year inflation increases in the cost of providing
police, fire, parks and recreation, and street public facilities to serve new
development utilizing the latest available municipal cost index as published by
“American Cities And County Magazine”. Nothing herein shall prevent the city
from electing to maintain a then existing police, fire, parks and recreation,
and street impact fee or from electing to waive the inflation adjustment for
any given fiscal year, or years. Any such action to determine an inflation
factor shall be by city council resolution.
      2.   Levels Of Service: The levels of service upon which the foregoing
fees are calculated are as follows:
         a.   Police level of service from page 12 of the impact fee study is
1.48 officers per thousand population.
         b.   Fire level of service from page 15 of the impact fee study is
ninety percent (90%) of all calls to be responded to in a time of six (6)
minutes.
         c.   Parks and recreation level of service from page 19 of the impact
fee study is 4.7 developed acres per thousand population.
         d.   City Street level of service from page 24 of the impact fee study
is level of service C on arterials and collectors at the P.M. peak period.
      3.   Using The Fee Table: Development impact fees shall be calculated
using the fee table above (or as subsequently amended by Council per automatic
adjustments criteria above) unless: a) the fee payer requests an individualized
assessment pursuant to subsection (C)4 of this section, or b) the City
designates the proposed development as a development of extraordinary impact in
writing to the fee payer, in which case the provisions of subsection (C)5 of
this section shall apply.
         a.   Any person who commences any new impact generating land
development, except those exempted pursuant to this chapter, or those preparing
an individual assessment pursuant to this chapter, shall pay all development
impact fees applicable to the proposed development, as determined by the fee
table. Persons choosing to pay applicable development impact fees pursuant to
the fee table shall be deemed to have made a full and complete payment of the
project’s proportionate share of City capital facilities costs for system
improvements, except as noted in subsection
11-1-12(I) of this chapter.
         b.   If the proposed development is of a type not listed in the fee
table, then the City shall apply the development impact fees applicable to the
most nearly comparable type of land use listed in the fee table. The
determination as to which type of development is most nearly comparable to the
proposed development shall be made by referring to traffic generation rates for
land uses published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and by
identifying that land use listed in the fee table whose traffic generation
rates are most comparable to the proposed land use. If no traffic generation
rate for the proposed land use appears in a publication of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, or if it is not possible to determine which land use
listed in the fee table has the most comparable traffic generation rates, then
the most nearly comparable land use shall be determined by the Development
Impact Fee Administrator based on comparison of other characteristics of the
proposed land use (including employment or occupancy, the size of the facility,
and the amount of parking to be provided) with the characteristics of those
land uses listed in the fee table.
         c.   If the proposed development includes a mix of those uses listed
in the fee table, then the development impact fees shall be determined by
adding up the development impact fees that would be payable for each use as if
it were a freestanding use pursuant to the fee table. For example, development
impact fees for a church without ancillary facilities will be determined
through the process in subsection (C)3.b. of this section; but development
impact fees for a church with a daycare center shall be established by adding:
1) fees determined through the process in subsection (C)3.b. of this section
for the church itself, and 2) fees identified in the fee table for the daycare
portion of the facility.
         d.   If the fee payer requests that the city calculate the amount of
development impact fees due pursuant to the fee table, the city shall notify
the fee payer of such amount within thirty (30) days after receipt of that
request.
      4.   Using An Individual Assessment:
         a.   In lieu of calculating the amount(s) of development impact fees
by reference to the fee table, a fee payer may request that the amount of the
required development impact fee be determined through an individual assessment
for the proposed development. The individual assessment process shall permit
consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by
the fee payer to adjust the amount of the fee. If a fee payer requests the use
of an individual assessment, the fee payer shall be responsible for retaining a
qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment that complies with
the requirements of this chapter, at the fee payer’s expense. The fee payer
shall bear the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the
resulting individual assessment is a more accurate measure of its proportionate
share of the cost of city capital improvements, based on the city’s adopted
levels of service, than the development impact fees that would otherwise be due
pursuant to the fee table. The city may hire a professional consultant to
review any independent impact fee calculation study on behalf of the city, and
may charge the reasonable costs of such review to the fee payer.
         b.   Each individual assessment shall be based on the same level of
service standards and unit costs for system improvements used in the
development impact fee study, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost)
methodology, and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions
used.
         c.   An application for an individual assessment may be submitted at
any time that the number of dwelling units in the proposed development and the
types and amounts of development in each nonresidential category identified in
the fee table is known. The city shall issue a decision within thirty (30) days
following receipt of a completed application for individual assessment and
supporting information from the applicant, so as not to unreasonably delay
subsequent applications for or issuance of building permits.
         d.   Each individual assessment shall be submitted to the development
impact fee administrator or a designee, and may be accepted, rejected, or
accepted with modifications by the development impact fee administrator or a
designee as the basis for calculating development impact fees. The criteria for
acceptance, rejection, or acceptance with modifications shall be whether the
individual assessment is a more accurate measure of demand for the city capital
improvements element(s) created by the proposed development, or the costs of
those facilities, than the applicable fee shown in the fee table.
         e.   The decision by the development impact fee administrator or
designee on an application for an individual assessment shall include an
explanation of the calculation of the impact fee, shall specify the system
improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used, and shall
include an explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code section 67-
8207.
         f.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with
modifications by the development impact fee administrator or a designee then
the development impact fees due under this chapter for such development shall
be calculated according to such individual assessment.
      5.   Extraordinary Impacts:
         a.   If the city determines that a proposed development generates
extraordinary impacts that will result in extraordinary costs, the city will
notify the fee payer of such determination within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a request for a certification pursuant to subsection D of this
section or a request for a building permit or development approval, whichever
occurs first. Such notice shall include a statement that the potential impacts
of such development on system improvements are not adequately addressed by the
development impact fee study, and that a supplemental study at the fee payer’s
expense will be required.
         b.   Circumstances that may lead to a determination of extraordinary
impacts include, but are not limited to: 1) an indication that traffic
generation from the proposed development or activity will exceed those typical
for a facility or activity of its type, 2) an indication that employment
generated by the development or activity will exceed those typical for a
facility or activity of its type, 3) an indication the assumptions used in the
development impact fee study underestimate the level of activity or impact on
city capital facilities from the proposed development or activity, or 4) an
indication that levels of calls for law enforcement, fire, or emergency
services from developments or activities owned or operated by the fee payer or
its agents exceed the assumptions used in the development impact fee study.
         c.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a
development with extraordinary impacts, the city shall meet with the fee payer
to discuss whether the fee payer wants to: 1) pay for the supplemental study
necessary to determine the system improvement costs related to the proposed
development, or 2) modify the proposal to avoid generating extraordinary
impacts, or 3) withdraw the application for certification, building permit, or
development approval.
         d.   If the fee payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study
required to document the proposed development’s proportionate share of system
improvement costs, then the city and the fee payer shall jointly select an
individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study, the fee
payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization
to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental
study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless
the fee payer agrees to a longer time.
         e.   Once the study has been completed, the fee payer may choose to:
1) pay the proportionate share of system improvement costs documented by the
supplemental study, or 2) modify the proposed development to reduce such costs,
or 3) withdraw the application. If the fee payer agrees to pay the system
improvement costs documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be
reduced to writing between the city and the fee payer prior to review and
consideration of any application for any development approval or building
permit related to the proposed development.
         f.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the
proportionate share of system improvement costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve development
that results in an extraordinary impact.
   (D)   Certification: After the development impact fees due for a proposed
development have been calculated pursuant to the fee table or the individual
assessment, the fee payer may request the development impact fee administrator
or a designee for a certification of the amount of development impact fees due
for that development. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such request, the
development impact fee administrator or a designee shall issue a written
certification of the amount of development impact fees due for the proposed
development. Such certification shall establish the development impact fee so
long as there is no material change to the particular project as identified in
the individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule set forth in
the fee table. The certification shall include an explanation of the
calculation of the impact fee including an explanation of factors considered
under Idaho Code section 67-8207 and shall also specify the system improvement
(s) for which the development impact fee is intended to be used.
   (E)   Payment Of Fees:
      1.   All development impact fees due shall be paid to the city at the
following times:
         a.   If a building permit or building placement permit is required,
then at the time such permit is issued; or
         b.   If no building permit or building placement permit is required,
then at the time that construction commences; or
         c.   At such other time as the applicant and the city have agreed to
in writing, pursuant to applicable Idaho law.
      2.   All monies paid by a fee payer pursuant to the fee table shall be
identified as development impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the
appropriate account(s) described in section
11-1-7 of this chapter.
      3.   A fee payer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order
to avoid delay in the issuance of a building permit or development approval. A
fee payer making a payment under protest shall not be estopped from exercising
the right of appeal provided in section
11-1-10 of this chapter, nor shall such fee payer be estopped from receiving a
refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 2021-017,
10-11-2021)
11-1-6: SERVICE AREAS:
The following service areas are established for each development impact fee
element:
   (A)   The park impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and
park impact fees may be expended for park capital facilities located anywhere
in the city.
   (B)   The street impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and
street impact fees may be expended for street capital facilities located
anywhere in the city.
   (C)   The police impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and
police impact fees may be expended for police capital facilities located
anywhere in the city.
   (D)   The fire/EMS impact fee service area shall include the entire city,
and fire/EMS impact fees may be expended for fire/EMS capital facilities
located anywhere in the city. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-7: USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE FUNDS:
   (A)   Establishment Of Trust Fund And Accounts:
      1.   A development impact fee trust fund (the “trust fund”) is hereby
established for the purpose of ensuring that the development impact fees
collected pursuant to this chapter are used to address impacts reasonably
attributable to new development for which the development impact fees are paid.
      2.   The trust fund shall be divided into four (4) accounts: a police
capital facilities account, a fire/EMS capital facilities account a, parks and
recreation capital facilities account, and a street capital facilities account.
      3.   The development impact fee trust fund shall be maintained in an
interest bearing account. The interest earned on each account shall not be
governed by Idaho Code section 57-127, but shall be considered funds of the
account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the
development impact fees on which the interest is generated.
      4.   Monies in each account shall be spent in the order collected, on a
first in/first out basis.
   (B)   Deposit And Management Of The Trust Fund:
      1.   All development impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this
chapter shall be promptly deposited into the appropriate account in the trust
fund.
      2.   The city shall maintain accounting records for each account.
      3.   As part of its annual audit process, the city shall prepare an
annual report: a) describing the amount of all development impact fees
collected, appropriated, or spent during the preceding year for each capital
improvements element and service area; and b) describing the percentage of
taxes and revenues from sources other than development impact fees collected,
appropriated or spent for system improvements during the preceding year by
capital improvements element and service area.
   (C)   Limitations On Expenditures Of Fees In Accounts:
      1.   Park And Recreation Impact Fee: The monies collected from the park
and recreation impact fee shall be used only to plan for, acquire, or construct
park and recreation capital facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion
of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar
instrument used to finance the acquisition or construction of park capital
facilities within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
      2.   Street Impact Fee: The monies collected from the street impact fee
shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct street capital
facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future general
obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to
finance the acquisition or construction of street capital facilities within the
city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
      3.   Police Impact Fee: The monies collected from the police impact fee
shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct police capital
facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future general
obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to
finance the acquisition or construction of public safety capital facilities
within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
      4.   Fire/EMS Impact Fee: The monies collected from the fire/EMS impact
fee shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct fire/EMS capital
facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future general
obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to
finance the acquisition or construction of public safety capital facilities
within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
      5.   Development Impact Fees: Development impact fees shall not be used
to pay for any purpose that does not involve system improvements that create
additional service available to serve new growth and development. (Ord. 2021-
017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-8: REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES PAID:
   (A)   Duty To Refund: Development impact fees shall be refunded to the fee
payer, or to a successor in interest, in the following circumstances:
      1.   Service is available but never provided;
      2.   A building permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured
home, is denied or abandoned;
      3.   The fee payer pays a development impact fee under protest and a
subsequent review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment
determines that the fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the
governmental entity was entitled to receive; or
      4.   The city has collected a development impact fee and has failed to
appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to subsection B of this
section.
   (B)   Failure To Encumber Trust Funds Or Commence Construction: Any
development impact fees paid shall be refunded if the city has failed to
commence construction of system improvements in accordance with this chapter,
or to appropriate funds for such construction, within eight (8) years after the
date on which such fee was paid. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of
record of the parcel for which the development impact fees were paid. The city
may hold development impact fees for longer than eight (8) years if it
identifies in writing: 1) a reasonable cause why the fees should be held longer
than eight (8) years; and 2) an anticipated date by which the fees will be
expended, but in no event greater than eleven (11) years from the date they
were collected. If the city complies with the previous sentence, then any
development impact fees identified in such writing shall be refunded to the fee
payer if the city has failed to commence construction of system improvements in
accordance with this chapter, or to appropriate funds for such construction on
or before the date identified in such writing.
   (C)   No Refund Due:
      1.   Later Changes To Development: After a development impact fee has
been paid pursuant to this chapter and after a certificate of occupancy has
been issued, no refund of any part of such fee shall be made if the project for
which the fee was paid is later demolished, destroyed, or is altered,
reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce the size of the project or the
number of units in the project.
   (D)   Interest: Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half
(½) the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date
on which the fee was originally paid.
   (E)   Timing: The city shall make a determination of whether a refund is due
within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request for a refund from
the owner of record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right
to a refund exists, the city shall send the refund to the owner of record
within ninety (90) days after the city determines that a refund is due.
   (F)   Standing: Any person entitled to a refund shall have standing to sue
for a refund under the provisions of this chapter if there has not been a
timely payment of a refund pursuant to subsections A through E of this section.
(Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-9: CREDITS AGAINST DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
   (A)   Credits To Be Issued: When a developer, or their predecessor in title
or interest, has constructed system improvements of the same category as a city
capital improvements element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards
the completion of system improvements of the same category as a city capital
improvements element, and the city has accepted such construction,
contribution, or dedication, the city shall issue a credit against the
development impact fees otherwise due for the same city capital improvements
element in connection with the proposed development, as set forth in this
section. Credit shall be issued regardless of whether the contribution or
dedication to system improvements was required by the city as a condition of
development approval or was offered by the developer and accepted by the city
in writing, and regardless of whether the contribution or dedication was
contributed by the developer or by a local improvement district controlled by
the developer.
   (B)   Limitations: Credits against development impact fees shall not be
given for: 1) project improvements, or 2) any construction, contribution, or
dedication not agreed to in writing by the city prior to commencement of the
construction, contribution, or dedication. Credits issued for one city capital
improvements element may not be used to reduce development impact fees due for
a different capital improvements element. No credits shall be issued for system
improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the effective date hereof.
   (C)   Valuation Of Credit At Present Value:
      1.    Land: Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the fee
payer’s option, be valued at the present value of: a) one hundred percent
(100%) of the most recent assessed value for such land as shown in the records
of the county assessor, or b) that fair market value established by a private
appraiser acceptable to the city in an appraisal paid for by the fee payer. In
the event that city and the fee payer cannot agree upon an appraiser, either
may petition the district court for appointment of an appraiser.
      2.    Improvements: Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
system improvements shall be valued by the city at the present value of such
improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and
construction cost estimates submitted by the fee payer to the city. The city
shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted,
or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on
alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable to the city as a more
accurate measure of the value of the offered system improvements to the city.
   (D)   When Credits Become Effective:
      1.    Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when
the land has been conveyed to the city in a form acceptable to the city at no
cost to the city, and has been accepted by the city. When such conditions have
been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon request of the fee
payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
      2.    Approved credits for acquisition or construction of system
improvements shall generally become effective when: a) all required
construction has been completed and has been accepted by the city, b) a
suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the
city, and c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the city and the state of Idaho. Approved credits for the
construction of system improvements may become effective at an earlier date if
the fee payer posts security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable
letter of credit, or escrow agreement and the amount and terms of such security
are accepted by the development impact fee administrator or a designee. At a
minimum, such security must be in the amount of the approved credit or an
amount determined to be adequate to allow the city to construct the system
improvements for which the credit was given, whichever is higher. When such
conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon
request of the fee payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of
credit available.
   (E)   Application Procedures:
      1.   In order to obtain a credit against development impact fees
otherwise due, a fee payer shall submit a written offer to dedicate to the
development impact fee administrator or a designee for specific parcels of
qualifying land or a written offer to contribute or construct specific system
improvements to the city capital facilities in accordance with all applicable
state or city design and construction standards, and shall specifically request
a credit against the type of development impact fees for which the land
dedication or system improvement is offered. No request for a credit against
development impact fees shall be accepted unless a written offer to dedicate,
contribute, or construct has previously been approved in writing by the city.
      2.   After receipt of the request for credit, the development impact fee
administrator or a designee shall review the request and determine whether the
land or system improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of
providing city capital facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of
the credit. If the development impact fee administrator or a designee
determines that the offered credit satisfies that criterion, then the credit
shall be issued. The city shall complete its review and determination of an
application for credit within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application
for credit.
   (F)   Transferability Of Credit: A credit may only be transferred by the fee
payer that has received the credit to a successor in interest pursuant to the
terms of this chapter. The credit may be used only to offset development impact
fees for the same city capital improvements element for which the credit was
issued. Credits shall be transferred by any written instrument clearly
identifying which credits issued under this chapter are being transferred, the
dollar amount of the credit being transferred, and the city capital
improvements element for which the credit was issued. The instrument of
transfer shall be signed by both the transferor and transferee, and a copy of
the document shall be delivered to the development impact fee administrator or
a designee for documentation of the change in ownership before it shall become
effective.
   (G)   Accounting Of Credits: Each time a request to use approved credits is
presented to the city, the city shall reduce the amount of the development
impact fees for the type of fee for which the credit is provided, and shall
note in the city’s records the amount of credit remaining, if any. Upon request
of the fee payer or successor in interest to whom the credit was issued, the
city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit remaining.
   (H)   Credits Exceeding Fee Amounts Due: If the credit due to a fee payer
pursuant to subsections A through G of this section exceeds the development
impact fee that would otherwise be due from the fee payer pursuant to section
11-1-5 of this chapter (whether calculated through the fee table in section
11-1-5 of this chapter or through an independent assessment), the fee payer may
choose to receive such credit in the form of either: 1) a credit against future
development impact fees due for the same capital improvements element, or 2) a
reimbursement from development impact fees paid by future development that
impacts the system improvements contributed or dedicated by the fee payer.
Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the fee payer, the city shall be
under no obligation to use any city funds, other than development impact fees
paid by other development for the same city capital improvements element, to
reimburse the fee payer for any credit in excess of development impact fees
due.
   (I)   Written Agreement Required: If credit or reimbursement is due to the
fee payer pursuant to this section, the city shall enter into a written
agreement with the fee payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
contribution, dedication, or funding of the system improvements giving rise to
the credit. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount,
time and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10)
years. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-10: APPEALS AND MEDIATION:
Disputes regarding decisions made in the application of this chapter shall be
resolved through appeal to the city council, or through mediation, as set forth
below:
   (A)   Right To Appeal:
      1.   Any fee payer that is or may be obligated to pay a development
impact fee, or that claims a right to receive a refund, reimbursement, or
credit under this chapter, and who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the
development impact fee administrator or a designee in applying this chapter,
shall first request that the development impact fee administrator reconsider
the decision. A fee payer requesting reconsideration shall state in writing to
the development impact fee administrator the reasons why the fee payer believes
the decision to be in error. The development impact fee administrator shall
issue a written decision confirming or modifying the decision within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of a written request for reconsideration.
      2.   Any fee payer that is dissatisfied with the decision of the
development impact fee administrator upon reconsideration pursuant to
subsection A1 of this section, may appeal such decision to the city council.
The fee payer shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence
that the decision was in error.
      3.   In order to pursue the appeal described in subsection A2 of this
section, the fee payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the
development impact fee administrator or a designee within thirty (30) days
after the date of the reconsideration, or the date on which the fee payer
submitted a payment of development impact fees under protest, whichever is
later. Such written application shall include a statement describing why the
fee payer believes that the decision was in error, together with copies of any
documents that the fee payer believes support the claim.
      4.   The city council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after
receipt of a written notice of appeal. The fee payer shall have a right to be
present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The development
impact fee administrator or designee who made the decision under appeal shall
likewise have the right to be present and to present evidence in support of the
decision. The criteria to be used by the city council in considering the appeal
shall be whether: a) the decision or interpretation made by the development
impact fee administrator after reconsideration, or b) the alternative decision
or interpretation offered by the fee payer more accurately reflects the
proportionate share of the costs of system improvements to city capital
facilities necessary to serve new development and whether this chapter has been
correctly applied. The city council shall issue a decision upholding,
reversing, or modifying the decision being appealed within thirty (30) days
after hearing the appeal.
   (B)   Mediation:
      1.   Any fee payer that has a disagreement with the city regarding a
development impact fee that is or may be due for a proposed development
pursuant to this chapter, may enter into a voluntary agreement with the city to
subject the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party
acceptable to both the fee payer and the city.
      2.   Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a
timely appeal pursuant to this section, or as an alternative to such appeal,
provided that the request for mediation is filed no later than the last date on
which a timely appeal could be filed pursuant to subsection A of this section.
      3.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in subsection A of this section.
      4.   If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be
shared equally by the fee payer and the city, and a written agreement regarding
the payment of such costs shall be executed prior to the commencement of
mediation.
      5.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues between the
parties, the fee payer retains all rights to seek relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-11: ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION:
When any development impact fee is due pursuant to the terms of this chapter,
or pursuant to the terms of any written agreement between a fee payer and the
city authorized by this chapter, and such fee has not been paid in a timely
manner, the city may exercise any or all of the following powers, in any
combination, to enforce the collection of the fee:
   (A)   The city may withhold building permits or other development approvals
related to the development for which the fee is due until all development
impact fees due have been paid.
   (B)   The city may withhold utility services from the development for which
the fee is due until all development impact fees due have been paid.
   (C)   The city may add to the amount of the fee interest at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
due.
   (D)   The city may impose liens for failure to timely pay a development
impact fee following procedures contained in chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-12: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional
right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating
the orderly development of real property.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any
development request that may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service
below minimum acceptable levels established in the development impact fee
study.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or diminish the power of the
city: 1) to impose reasonable conditions on the annexation of any property to
the city in accordance with Idaho Code, including conditions for recovery of
project or system improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary
annexation, or 2) to negotiate and execute development agreements that may
impose additional conditions on development, including the recovery of project
or system improvement costs, either in connection with a proposed annexation or
in connection with any other development within the city.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a
project for which a complete application for a building permit has been
received by the city prior to the effective date hereof shall not be subject to
the development impact fees imposed by this chapter. If the resulting building
permit is later revised or replaced after the effective date hereof, and the
new building permit reflects a development density, intensity, or number of
units more than ten percent (10%) higher than that reflected in the original
building permit, then development impact fees may be charged on the difference
in density, intensity, or number of units between the original and the revised
or replacement building permit.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the city from requiring fee
payer or an applicant for a development approval or building permit to
construct reasonable project improvements required to serve the applicant’s
project, provided that such request does not duplicate a system improvement in
a category for which costs were included in the development impact fee study.
   (F)   Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific
system improvements within such capital improvements program and not expended
pursuant to section
11-1-7 of this chapter or refunded pursuant to section
11-1-8 of this chapter shall be retained in the same account until the next
fiscal year.
   (G)   The city shall be entitled to collect and retain a surcharge on each
development impact fee collected in order to recoup that portion of the cost of
preparing the capital improvements plan that is attributable to determining the
development impact. Such surcharge does not exceed each development’s
proportionate share of the cost of preparing the plan.
   (H)   If the city discovers an error in the development impact fee study
that results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share of
system improvement costs on any proposed development, the city shall: 1) adjust
the development impact fee to collect no more than a proportionate share or 2)
discontinue the collection of any development impact fees until the error is
corrected by ordinance.
   (I)   If development impact fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake
or misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a fee
payer shall be refunded by the city within thirty (30) days after the City’s
acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided
for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid.
Any amounts underpaid by the fee payer shall be paid to the City within thirty
(30) days after the City’s acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest
at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on
which the fee was paid. In the case of an underpayment to the City, the City
may withhold issuance of building permits or development approvals for the
project for which the development impact fee was paid until such underpayment
is corrected, and if amounts owed to the City are not paid within such thirty
(30) day period, the City may also repeal any building permits or development
approvals issued in reliance on the previous payment of such development impact
fee and refund such fee to the fee payer.
   (J)   The City Council shall consider the Development Impact Fee Advisory
Committee’s recommended revision(s) to this chapter at least once every twelve
(12) months. The committee’s recommendations and the City Council’s actions are
intended to ensure that the benefits to a fee paying development are equitable,
in that the fee charged to the development shall not exceed a proportionate
share of the costs of system improvements, and the procedures for administering
development impact fees remain efficient.
   (K)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit
private agreements between developers, the City, the Idaho Transportation
Department, and/or other governmental entities in regard to the construction or
installation of system improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements
for system improvement costs incurred by a developer or fee payer, including
interproject transfers of credits, or providing for reimbursement for project
improvements that are used or shared by more than one development project. If
it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct impact on a public
facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Transportation Department, then
the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of development
impact fees collected from the developer or fee payer for the improvement of
the public facility by the Idaho Transportation Department.
   (L)   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be subject
to those remedies provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Knowingly furnishing
false information to any official of the City charged with the administration
of this chapter on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter,
including, without limitation, the furnishing of false information regarding
the expected size, use, or impacts from a proposed development, shall be a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-11-2021)
11-1-13: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   (A)   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall subject the
violator to those remedies provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   (B)   Knowingly furnishing false information to any official of the City
charged with the administration of this chapter on any matter relating to the
administration of this chapter, including, without limitation, the furnishing
of false information regarding the expected size, use, or impacts from a
proposed development, shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-017, 10-
11-2021)
