COUNTY CODE
of
VALLEY COUNTY, IDAHO
2011
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-05, passed 4-28-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the County of Valley County, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-05, passed April 28, 2025.
Ordinances of the County adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the County office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
To be published on November 20, 2025
VALLEY COUNTY
ORDINANCE NO: 2025-06
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING VALLEY COUNTY CODE, IN ORDER TO MODIFY THE CITY OF MCCALL
IMPACT AREA BOUNDARY SO AS TO ESTABLISH THE AREA OF IMPACT WHERE GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT ARE EXPECTED TO OCCUR IN ACCORDANCE WITH IDAHO CODE 67-6526; AND TO
AMEND THE EXISTING VALLEY COUNTY CODE 7-1.
WHEREAS, the Valley County Board of Commissioners held a properly noticed
public hearing on September 3, 2025;
WHEREAS, the Valley County Board of Commissioner’s verbal decision was
announced on September 10, 2025, and their written decision was approved on
November 5, 2025;
WHEREAS, the Board of County Commissioners is tasked with providing for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Valley County; and
WHEREAS, one of the primary and essential services provided by Valley County is
the power to enact licensing and zoning ordinances; and
WHEREAS, during the 2024 Legislative Session, the Idaho State Legislature
amended Idaho Code 67-6526 to place impact areas properly under the
jurisdiction of the county and required boundaries to be based upon specified
criteria;
WHEREAS, the Board of County Commissioners has determined that passage of this
Ordinance is in conformance with the requirements of the new law;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF VALLEY
COUNTY, IDAHO, THAT THE FINAL VERSION OF VALLEY COUNTY CODE TITLE 7-1 TO
ESTABLISH THE CITY OF MCCALL IMPACT AREA BOUNDARY BE APPROVED AND CODIFIED.
(Full text can be found on the Valley County website.)
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND APPROVED by the Valley County Board of
Commissioners, with an effective date being January 1, 2026.
Cynda Herrick, AICP, CFM
Valley County Planning and Zoning Director
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
VALLEY COUNTY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the board of county commissioners, this code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official county code of
Valley County, state of Idaho. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited
as the VALLEY COUNTY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the board of
county commissioners and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent
legislation of the county as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2011 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the county of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2011 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2011 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
shall be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the board of county commissioners. The county clerk shall see that the
replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the county clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of this
code shall make every effort to maintain said code current as to the most
recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of
new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such
person through the office of the county clerk. Said code books, while in actual
possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the
property of the county and shall be returned to the office of the county clerk
when directed so to do by order of the board of county commissioners. (2011
Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the county passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of
contracts or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
county; and all special ordinances. (2011 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2011 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the county herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the county under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2011 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference herein is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof, or
any portion adopted by reference herein. The board of county commissioners
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the county has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the county ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2011 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   BOARD: The board of county commissioners of Valley County, Idaho.
   CODE: The county code of Valley County.
   COMMISSIONERS: The board of county commissioners, Valley County, Idaho.
   COUNTY: The county of Valley, state of Idaho 1 .
   COUNTY CLERK: The clerk of the district court, who shall be ex officio
auditor and recorder, and ex officio clerk of the board of county commissioners
of the county of Valley, state of Idaho.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a county employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Valley
County".
   GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the county, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a county officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Valley
County".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 31-145.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Fee For Issuance Of Warrants Of Distraint
1-4-5: Fees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code,
where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense; or by a fine
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) with no imprisonment, when the
offense is designated as an infraction by state law or by any section or
provision of this code. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113, 18-113A, 31-714.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   Imposition Of Penalty: In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2011 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the board of county commissioners to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty. (2011 Code)
1-4-4: FEE FOR ISSUANCE OF WARRANTS OF DISTRAINT:
   A.   Authority: Inasmuch as Idaho Code section 63-1013(2) allows for the
collection of fees for issuing warrants of distraint, collection, levy and
return of the same and such expenses of doing so are incurred by the Valley
County treasurer. (Ord. 11-6, 6-20-2011)
   B.   Fee Imposed: It has been determined that a fee as established by
section
1-4-5 of this chapter is reasonable and sufficient to cover the costs of
service and associated activities by the Valley County treasurer. (Ord. 11-6,
6-20-2011; amd. Ord. 13-2, 6-24-2013)
1-4-5: FEES:
All fees for Valley County shall be set by resolution, state statutes, or by
order of the court. (Ord. 13-2, 6-24-2013)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings
1-5-1: MEETINGS:
The board of county commissioners shall meet every Monday of each month of the
year, except for the following:
   A.   When any such Monday is a designated federal holiday, in which case
that meeting will be held on the immediately following Tuesday.
   B.   When canceled by a majority of the board. (Ord. 11-4, 4-25-2011)
CHAPTER 6
COUNTY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Law Enforcement Training
1-6-1: LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING:
   A.   The board of county commissioners declares that it desires to qualify
to receive aid for law enforcement training from the law enforcement planning
commission under the provisions of Idaho Code chapter 51.
   B.   Pursuant to Idaho Code chapter 51, the county, while receiving aid from
the law enforcement planning commission pursuant to Idaho Code chapter 51, will
adhere to the standards for employment and training established by the Idaho
peace officers standards and training advisory council. (Ord. 76-2, 6-14-1976;
amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 7
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-7-1: Short Title
1-7-2: Purpose
1-7-3: Scope
1-7-4: Definitions
1-7-5: Filing And Form Of Petition
1-7-6: Printing Petition; Sheets For Signatures; Time Limit For Perfecting
Petition
1-7-7: Verification Of Signatures
1-7-8: Examination, Certification Of Signatures; Election
1-7-9: Effect Of Vote
1-7-10: Violations; Penalty
1-7-11: Civil Action
1-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the VALLEY COUNTY INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to allow by initiative for a sufficient
number of the electorate to propose law and to submit the same to a direct vote
of the electorate, and to allow by referendum for a sufficient number of
electorate to submit to popular vote law passed upon or proposed by the county
commissioners. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to direct legislation by the
residents of the county through initiative and referendum. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-
1981)
1-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the
following meanings:
   INITIATIVE: The right of the people at an election to adopt, amend or repeal
legislation.
   REFERENDUM: The right of the people at an election to approve or reject
legislation adopted by the board of county commissioners.
   RESIDENT: A person who is residing within the county coupled with the intent
to remain in the county. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7-5: FILING AND FORM OF PETITION:
Persons desiring direct legislation by initiative and referendum shall file a
petition. Petitions for initiative or referendum shall be as follows:
   A.   Filing: The petition shall be filed with the county clerk and must be
signed by qualified electors of the county equal to twenty percent (20%) of the
qualified electors voting in the county in the last general election.
   B.   Form: The petition shall be in substantially the following form:
   PETITION FOR INITIATIVE OR REFERENDUM
To the Honorable                               , County Clerk for the County of
Valley:
We the undersigned qualified electors of Valley County, Idaho respectfully
demand that the following proposed law, to-wit: (setting out full text of
measured proposed) shall be submitted to the qualified voters of Valley County
for their approval or rejection. That a special election therefor be called;
that we, each for himself, say: I am a qualified elector of the county of
Valley, my residence, post office address, county, election precinct and the
date I signed this petition are correctly written after my name.
                      Election
   Name      Residence   Post Office    Precinct   Date
      (If a city, street and number)
   (Here follow twenty numbered lines for signatures)
(Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7-6: PRINTING PETITION; SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES; TIME LIMIT FOR PERFECTING
PETITION:
   A.   Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any petition for
initiative or referendum the person or persons, organization or organizations
under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, shall send or deliver
to the county clerk, a copy of such petition duly signed by at least twenty
(20) electors eligible to sign such petition. The clerk shall immediately
examine the petition and specify the form and kind and size of paper on which
the petition shall be printed and circulated for further signatures. All
petitions for recall and sheets for signatures shall be printed on a good
quality bond or ledger paper, on pages eight and one-half inches (81/2") in
width by thirteen inches (13") in length, with a margin of one and three-
fourths inches (13/4") at the top for binding, and the sheets for signatures
shall have numbered lines thereon from one to twenty (20) for signatures. The
petition shall be prepared in sections, with each section numbered
consecutively. Each section of a petition must have a printed copy of the
petition as the first page, and each section shall have attached to it not more
than ten (10) sheets for signatures.
   B.   The county clerk shall indicate, in writing, on the petition that he
has approved it as to form and the date of such approval. Upon approval as to
form, the clerk shall inform the person or persons, organization or
organizations under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, in
writing, that the petition must be perfected with the required number of
certified signatures within sixty (60) days following the date of approval as
to form. Any petition that has not been perfected with the required number of
certified signatures within the sixty (60) days allowed shall be declared null
and void ab initio in its entirety, except for the extension allowed. (Ord. 81-
7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-7: VERIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be
verified on the face thereof in substantially the following form by the person
who circulated said sheet of the petition, by his or her affidavit thereon, as
a part thereof:
   STATE OF IDAHO   )
            ) ss.
   County of Valley   )
I,                               , swear, under penalty of perjury, that every
person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name
thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that
the person was eligible to sign this petition.
                                                                        
         Address                                                    
                                                                        
SUBSCRIBED and SWORN To before me this        day of                , 20     
                                                                        
          Notary Public
         Residing at:                                                
(Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-8: EXAMINATION, CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES; ELECTION:
   A.   Examination By Clerk: All petitions with attached signature sheets
shall be presented to the county clerk, and a cursory examination of the
petitions shall be made by the clerk within thirty (30) days. The cursory
examination shall be made to determine whether the petitions apparently contain
the necessary number of signatures.
      1.   Insufficient Signatures: If the total number of signatures on the
petitions is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by section
1-7-5 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the clerk who shall notify, in writing, the persons filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered.
      2.   Rejected Signatures: If the cursory examination of the signature
sheets reveals:
         a.   Erasures on any signature;
         b.   Illegible or undecipherable signatures;
         c.   Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
         d.   Duplicate signatures;
         e.   Signatures of persons who have requested, in writing, to have
their names removed from the petition;
the clerk shall summarily reject such signatures and such rejected signatures
shall not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink
and initialed by the clerk, if the total number of signatures not rejected is
not sufficient to satisfy the number required by section
1-7-5 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the clerk who shall notify, in writing, the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered.
      3.   Defective Petition: In the event that a petition filed with a county
clerk does not contain the required number of certified signatures, the county
clerk shall inform the person or organization under whose authority the
petition was circulated that the petition is defective for lack of certified
signatures, and specify the number of addition signatures required to make the
petition valid. The petition must be perfected within thirty (30) days of the
date that the clerk finds the petition defective for lack of certified
signatures. If the petition is not perfected within the thirty (30) day period,
the clerk shall declare the petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
   B.   Perfected Petition: In the event the petition is perfected, the clerk
shall certify the petition and the county commissioners shall forthwith order a
special election for the initiative or referendum to be held not more than
ninety (90) days following the certification of the petition; provided, that in
the event a general or primary election will occur within the ninety (90) days,
the initiative or referendum shall be submitted at the time of the general or
primary election. The election shall be conducted and the results thereof
canvassed and certified in all respects as nearly as practicable in accordance
with the general election laws of the state. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-9: EFFECT OF VOTE:
   A.   Vote In Favor: If the majority vote is in favor of the proposed law,
the county commissioners shall forthwith, at their next scheduled meeting,
enter an order declaring said law to be in full force and effect from the date
of such order.
   B.   Vote Against: If the majority vote is against said law, the county
commissioners shall enter an order so finding and declaring that said law shall
not be passed. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
1-7-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or exhibits any
false statement or representation concerning the contents, purpose or effect of
any petition mentioned herein for the purpose of obtaining any signature to any
such petition or for the purpose of persuading any person to sign any petition,
or who files in the office of the county clerk any petition mentioned herein to
which is attached, appended or subscribed any signature which the person so
filing such petition knows to be false or fraudulent or not the genuine
signature of the person purporting to sign such petition or whose name is
attached, appended or subscribed thereto, or who circulates or causes to be
circulated any petition mentioned herein knowing the same to contain false,
forged or fictitious names, or who makes any false affidavit concerning any
petition mentioned therein or the signatures appended thereto, or who knowingly
signs his own name more than once to any petition mentioned herein, or to sign
his name to any such petition knowing himself at the time of such signing not
to be qualified to sign the same, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7-11: CIVIL ACTION:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available, any person in an individual
capacity, damaged as a result of a violation of this chapter, has a cause of
action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person who committed
the violation, and if such damaged person prevails, he shall be entitled to a
reasonable attorney fee to be determined by the court together with court
costs. (Ord. 81-7, 11-23-1981)
CHAPTER 8
TAX EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Rural Fire District, Tax Exemption Notice
1-8-2: McCall Rural Fire District And Unimproved Real Property
1-8-3: Donnelly Rural Fire District, Ag And Timber Lands
1-8-4: Tax Exemption For Non-Retail Commercial And Industrial Development
1-8-1: RURAL FIRE DISTRICT, TAX EXEMPTION NOTICE:
Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 31-1422 and 67-6511(b), adequate notice, when
notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers
of record located within a fire protection district, in the event such district
chooses to utilize exemption provisions in accordance with Idaho Code section
31-1422, shall be given as follows:
   A.   Publication Of Notice: Prior to the Board of County Commissioners
considering passage of such exemption ordinance, a summary of the ordinance and
notice of the time and place such ordinance shall be considered by the Board of
County Commissioners, shall be published for three (3) successive weeks in a
paper of general circulation within the district.
   B.   Mailing Of Notice: Prior to the Board of County Commissioners
considering passage of such exemption ordinance, a summary of the ordinance,
and notice of the time and place such ordinance shall be considered by the
Board of County Commissioners shall be provided by mail to property owners or
purchasers of record within the district. Such notice shall be postmarked no
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of consideration of such
ordinance by the Board of County Commissioners. (Ord. 89-1, 4-24-1989)
1-8-2: McCALL RURAL FIRE DISTRICT AND UNIMPROVED REAL PROPERTY:
Pursuant to the application and recommendation of the McCall Rural Fire
District Board of Commissioners and in accordance with Idaho Code section 31-
1422, all of the unimproved real property and all of the taxable personal
property within the McCall Rural Fire Protection District is exempt from
taxation and, further, that each category of property shall be treated
uniformly. (Ord. 89-3, 6-12-1989)
1-8-3: DONNELLY RURAL FIRE DISTRICT, AG AND TIMBER LANDS:
Pursuant to the application and recommendation of the Donnelly Rural Fire
Protection District Board of Commissioners, and in accordance with Idaho Code
section 31-1422, all of the agricultural and timber lands, more specifically
known as categories 1 through 7, within the Donnelly Rural Fire Protection
District are exempt from taxation and, furthermore, that each category of
property shall be treated uniformly. (Ord. 04-1, 7-12-2004)
1-8-4: TAX EXEMPTION FOR NON-RETAIL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT:
The Board of County Commissioners is authorized to grant certain tax exemptions
for qualifying projects, up to five (5) years, for non-retail commercial and
industrial development pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 63-602NN, 31-714; and, Article
12, Section 2, Idaho Constitution.
The purpose of this section is to define qualifying projects, establish an
application process, and provide the criteria for evaluating the level of tax
relief to be authorized.
   A.   Qualifying Projects:
      1.   An application for property tax exemption under this section may
include an investment in new or existing plant and building facilities. Plant
and building facilities include buildings, structural components of buildings,
related parking facilities, food service facilities, business office facilities
and other building facilities directly related to the business making the plant
investment.
      2.   An investment in any qualifying project shall not be less than
$500,000 at all project sites within the county.
      3.   Plant and building facility investments do not include the
investment in land or any infrastructure.
      4.   A renovation or remodel of an existing plant or building facility
may be considered under this section if the investment in the renovation or
remodel is $500,000 or greater.
      5.   Plants, building facilities, structural components of buildings and
personal property associated with a plant or building facility must be owned or
leased by the applicant in order to qualify under this chapter.
      6.   Plants and building facilities are eligible for property tax
exemption under this section if the investment will be used for nonretail
purposes that is either commercial or industrial. Qualifying non-retail
commercial or industrial plants or building facilities may include:
         a.   Multi-use plants or building facilities that includes an
investment of $500,000 or more in non-retail space.
         b.   Multi-family housing projects that include five or more units.
         c.   Qualifying multi-family housing projects do not include stand-
alone units that are sold separately, such as condominiums, and housing units
that occupancy is offered to any tenant for less than one hundred and eighty
(180) days or fewer.
      7.   Applicant must be in compliance with Title 9 of the Valley County
Code.
   B.   Application Process:
   Any taxpayer may apply for property tax exemptions under this section for
new or existing project sites provided the project proposal will meet all the
criteria outlined in Idaho Code § 63-6022NN and this section.
   Prospective applicants, or their authorized agents, may request to meet with
the Board to engage in preliminary negotiations and discussions regarding
eligibility. Applicants may operate under a pseudonym and meetings may be held
in executive session under Idaho Code § 74-206(l)(e) if an agent of the
prospective applicants with authority to negotiate is present, and when
approved by the Board.
   Prior to completing an application, prospective applicants should prepare a
written project plan that addresses all requirements under Idaho Code § 63-
602NN and this section. The project plan can be used during preliminary
negotiations and must be included as part of any application. A document
showing the nature and timing of investments and proposed exemptions should be
part of the project plan.
      1.   Application must be made prior to construction, including receiving
a building permit and beginning excavation at the project site.
      2.   Application shall be on a form provided by the Valley County
Assessor’s Office. A sample form can be found under the Assessor’s Office on
the Valley County website.
      3.   The application shall include a written project plan.
      4.   The application may be filed under a pseudonym, but no application
will be granted until:
         a.   The applicant has secured the right to obtain the property; and
         b.   The applicant is prepared to make the project public.
      5.   The application package shall contain ten complete copies unless
more are requested.
      6.   Once a complete application is received, the Board will schedule a
public meeting and invite the public, all affected taxing districts, West
Central Mountains Economic Development Council, urban renewal agencies and the
Idaho department of commerce to participate.
   C.   Evaluation of Application:
   Requests for a property tax exemption under this section will be considered
by the Board taking into account comments received from affected parties and
the criteria outlined in Valley County Code §§
1-9-1 et seq. In addition, the Board will evaluate the following:
      1.   Information provided by the applicant that demonstrates or certifies
that “but for the incentive,” the business would not locate in Valley County.
      2.   The investment will create jobs that pay competitive wages that
exceed the average wage, including benefits.
      3.   The investment will provide significant indirect economic benefits.
      4.   The applicant is willing to agree to all terms and conditions
imposed by the Board, including, but not limited to, recoupment provisions that
might encumber project property.
   D.   Approvals or partial approvals of an application for a property tax
exemption under this section is at the sole discretion of the Board of County
Commissioners and will be based on a determination that the approval, or
partial approval, is in the best interest of Valley County. The Board retains
full authority to structure the duration and terms of any exemption granted as
deemed appropriate and in accordance with Idaho Code § 63-602NN. The Board may
consider:
      1.   Whether the application demonstrates that the proposed project(s)
will meet the minimum plant investment and building facilities investment
requirements set forth in Idaho Code § 63-602NN.
      2.   Whether approval of an application will result in significant
economic benefits to the county.
   E.   Additional Considerations of Application:
      1.   The criteria outlined in Valley County Code
1-9-1 et seq. are intended to give applicants guidance on the extent the Board
is willing to grant full or partial tax exemption requests.
      2.   The Board may require additional information from an applicant in
order to make a fully informed decision. If any information provided by the
applicant includes a trade secret, as that term is defined by Idaho law, the
Board may review the application materials in executive session.
      3.   If an application is approved, or partially approved, the applicant
and Valley County shall enter into a contract as a condition of approval for
the duration of the exemption period. The contract shall provide the terms and
conditions upon which the exemption is granted and shall give Valley County the
authority to terminate, modify, or impose additional requirements if the
contract is breached or if a project ceases to qualify for the tax exemption.
      4.   No later than March 1 of each year, beginning the year an exemption
is effective, and continuing each year thereafter until the exemption ends,
each recipient of an exemption under this section shall submit a written report
and certification of compliance to the Assessor’s Office. The report shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The average number of full-time employees during the previous
calendar year.
         b.   A schedule of employee positions, together with salaries paid,
and employee benefit costs listed separately, including Employer Quarterly
Unemployment Insurance Tax Report for the previous calendar year.
         c.   An itemized list of all new equipment and the cost and
capitalization of each.
         d.   A compliance statement explaining whether recipient is in
compliance with the terms and conditions of the exemption, and fully explaining
any areas of non-compliance.
         e.   The Assessor may also solicit input from service providers during
the annual reporting process to determine if there have been indirect impacts
not considered during the original approval. If it is determined that there is
a substantial change, it may be taken back to the Board of County Commissioners
for additional review.
      NOTICE: FAILURE TO TIMELY SUBMIT A COMPLETE ANNUAL REPORT IS GROUNDS FOR
TERMINATION OF THE EXEMPTION.
   F.   Termination or Expiration:
      UPON TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION OF THE EXEMPTION, THE PROPERTY SHALL BE
VALUED FOR ASSESSMENT PURPOSES AT 100% OF CURRENT MARKET VALUE PURSUANT TO
IDAHO CODE § 63-201. (Ord. 18-03, 6-25-2018; amd. Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019; Ord.
21-07, 5-17-2021)
CHAPTER 9
SCORING EVALUATION FOR TAX EXEMPTION
SECTION:
1-9-1: General; Purpose
1-9-2: Job Creation And Wages
1-9-3: Growth
1-9-4: Housing
1-9-5: Impact To Infrastructure
1-9-6: Scoring Matrix
1-9-1:  GENERAL; PURPOSE:
   A.   General: Title 1, Chapter 8 of the Valley County Code provides for the
property tax exemptions for certain types of commercial and industrial uses as
designated by Idaho State Statute. The exemption is intended to provide an
economic incentive for construction of capital improvements. Section
1-8-4 .F of this code is a Tax Percentage Reduction Table that uses the scoring
matrix as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Purpose:
      1. The scoring matrix is to be used as a tool to assist in the
determination of the percentage of property tax exemption.
      2. The Assessor prepares a preliminary scoring matrix. The Board of
County Commissioners shall review and may change based upon information
gathered in the public meeting with providers.
   C.   Response values will use the following criteria in the consideration of
scores in the matrix. (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
1-9-2:  JOB CREATION AND WAGES:
   A.   New or existing business in Valley County:
      Is the business new to the county (yes or no)? Yes = 10 No= 0
   B.   How many Jobs in the first year, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, 5+ years:
      There are expected to be several jobs created at the start of business,
but long term growth is what we want to score. Assuming positive market
conditions, will the project consistently grow and add jobs? The more jobs
created over time, the higher the score.
      Example 1. 1st year 10 jobs, 2nd year 5 jobs, 3rd year 5 jobs, 4th year
10 jobs, 5th year 10 jobs = a score of 9-10;
      Example 2. 1st year 5 jobs, 2nd year 3 jobs, 3rd year 3 jobs, 4th year 0
jobs, 5th year 0 jobs. A score of 2-3
   C.   Wages of jobs. What percentage of PCI:
      Using the United States Census bureau most recent PCI (Per Capita
Income), what is percentage of the annual wages being paid by the project
compared to the PCI. Data can be found at this location https://www.census.gov/
quickfacts/fact/table/valleycountyidaho/POP010210
      Annual income / PCI = %:
      Example 1. Employee earns $35,000 a year, PCI $34,400. 35,000/
34,400=102%; score 10.
      Example 2. Employee earns $18,000 a year, PCI is $34,400 18,000/
34,400=52%; score 5.
   D.   Hiring from within local workforce:
      Are jobs going to be filled by local residents? Are jobs that need
specialized skill going to be transferred to Valley County permanently/
temporarily? Residents = % *1 , nonresident permanent = % *.5, nonresident
temporary
      Residents multiple by 1, nonresident permanently relocated multiply by
.5, nonresident temporary multiply by 0
      Example 1. 70% hired residents 30% hired nonresidents temporary. 70%*1.0=
7 30%*0=0; 7+0= score 7
      Example 2. If 50% hired residents, 30 % nonresident temporary, 20%
nonresidents permanent.
      50% * 1 =5, 30% *0 =0, 20% * . 5 =1; 5 +0 + 1= Score 6
   E.   Estimated full and part time jobs:
      Percentage of full time jobs to part time jobs. Full time jobs/total jobs
= Score
      Example 1. 50 employees. 30 are full time, 20 are part time. 30/50= 60%
full time score 6
      Example 2. 14 employees. 5 are full time, 9 are part time. 5/14=35% score
4 (rounded up) (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
1-9-3:  GROWTH:
   A.   Long term business plan:
      Well thought out viable long term plan which includes growth in positive
market conditions, plans for economic slowdowns with minimal layoffs, no
closure = high score, No business plan = no score.
      Example 1. The project has detailed outline and expects continued annual
growth, there is a contingency for a market slowdown Score 10
      Example 2. The project describes what they plan to do, but not in detail,
no projected growth, unsure of how well the business will operate over time
Score 3
   B.   Estimated growth over 5 years, 10 years:
      Duration of project 25 years or more = higher score; short term projects
10 years = low score.
      Example 1. The project plans on operating for 8 years then relocating.
Score 0
      Example 2. The project plans to operate indefinitely in Valley County.
Score 10 (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
1-9-4:  HOUSING:
   (Emphasis on employer provided housing).
   A.   Will the project offer employee housing:
      Example 1. The project will offer housing to all employees. Score 10
      Example 2. The project will offer housing to 50% of its workforce. Score
5
      Example 3. The project will only offer housing to management staff. Score
3
   B.   How many units:
      Percentage of housing to employees, some latitude for projects that have
large employee bases. Under 30 employees. # of employees receiving housing /
total # of employees.
      For large employers, in excess of 30 employees, the difference between
the percentage of employees housed versus not housed will receive only .5
deduction (60% not offered housing 60 *.5 =30% reduction).
      Example 1. The project plans to have 20 employees, all of whom will
receive on site housing. Score 10
      Example 2. The project will have 50 employees, but only have 25 housing
units, 50% * 1.5 = score 7.5
      Example 3. The project will not offer housing. Score = 0
      Example 4. The project will have 25 employees, only management staff of 4
is offered housing. 4 / 25 = 1.6 Score 2 (rounded up)
      Example 5. The project will have 28 employees. 14 employees will be
offered housing. 14 / 28 = Score 5
   C.   New structure:
      Multifamily housing, cannot be sold or used as temporary vacation
rentals, individual housing, cannot be sold or used as temporary vacation
rentals. If housing is built for more than 50% of employees, score 10, if
housing is built for less than 50% but more than 25% score 5, if housing is
built for less than 25% of employees, score 2.
   D.   Existing structure (Location):
      Impact on where housing is located, did it take away from overall market
rental opportunities?
      Example 1. Buildings exist on site, but were warehouses previously, then
converted into individual living units. Score 10
      Example 2. The project is going to utilize existing dwellings located on
site. Score 7
   Example 3. The project is purchasing existing building and converting it to
living units Score 10
   Example 4. The project purchases existing off site multifamily dwellings for
employee only use, displacing others. Score = 0 (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
1-9-5:  IMPACT TO INFRASTRUCTURE:
   (less impact = higher score)
   A.   Local Roads:
      Will the project include heavy equipment on the roads, will the employees
be commuting long distances?
      Example 1. Project will bus employees from specific location to site,
minimizing impact. Score 10
      Example 1a. Same as above, but the project will also have many heavy
equipment vehicles on the roadways. Score 6
      Example 2. The company will have 30 employees who commute. Score 4
      Example 2a. Same as above, however the project will also have several
heavy equipment vehicles on the roadways. Score 1
   B.   Local EMS, Fire District:
      Will the project consist of services that may put a strain on local
emergency services?
      Projects that have higher personal injury risk will get a low score.
      Projects that have new dwellings on site housing units will also have a
low score.
      May consult with EMS supervisors for guidance and impact.
      Example 1. The project will be a manufacturing facility that will employ
40 people. The people use heavy machine/tools for manufacturing. The potential
for injury or needed emergency response will be greater. Score 6
      Example 2. The project will have 20 dwelling units on site for employee
housing. Increasing the need for emergency services. Score 5
      Example 3. The project will relocate 30 employees to Valley County. More
demand on the emergency services. Score 6
      Example 4. The project is a manufacturing facility that uses large
machine tools and will employ 80, 30 people have been relocated to Valley
County, the project built 25 housing units on site, and 20 more units off site.
Using the above examples this will create a high demand for emergency services,
the score will be 0.
   C.   Local Law Enforcement District:
      Depending on which law enforcement district the project will be located
could have an impact towards law enforcement response time. Areas covered by
Valley County Sheriff's office may have an effect on response time; whereas
projects in the City of McCall may be able to respond faster.
      Example 1. The project is located in Yellow Pine. The Valley County
Sheriff office will have much longer response time versus if the project was
located in Cascade. Score will be 1.
   Example 2. The project is located in the City of McCall, response time would
be quicker. However, depending on the number of employees the project hires,
the City of McCall may need additional staff.
   D.   Local Hospital District:
      Will the project have an impact on the hospital district it is located
in? Is the project considered non-hazardous or hazardous?
      Example 1. The project is a sawmill that fabricates large glulam beams
and employs 20 people. This particular industry has a higher percentage of
worker injuries. The score would be 4.
      Example 1a. The same glulam sawmill will employ 200 people. The number of
employees would have a much larger impact versus the project that has 20
employees. The score would be 1.
      Example 2. The project will manufacture fishing poles. There are less
than 20 employees. This industry has a lower percentage of worker injuries. The
score would be 10
      Example 2a. The same fishing pole manufacture project will employ 200
people. While this is a statistically safer manufacturing project, the number
of employees would have a larger impact versus the project that has 20
employees. The score would be 7.
   E.   Local School District:
      If the project is primarily located in McCall school district, the amount
of employee's children put a strain on the school. If the project is located
primarily within the Cascade school district will the amount of employees'
children create an additional base for the school? This may need to be adjusted
over time as the capacity fluctuates.
      Example 1. Project is expected to employee 30 people in the McCall school
district, these employee's may have children who will attend public schools.
Score 3
      Example 2. Project is expected to employ 30 people in the Cascade school
district, these employee's may have children who will attend public schools.
Since Cascade Schools are under quota this could be seen as a positive impact.
Score 7
   F.   Environmental Impact/Pollution:
      Will the project emit pollution via air, water, land, noise, waste.
      Example 1. Project will have 2 smoke stacks, use existing water resources
for operations, will include machinery at the site, will operate 24 hours a
day. Score 1
      Example 2. Project has ensured every measure to limit the impacts of air,
noise, light, water pollutions. Score 10
   G.   Utilities (LEED):
      What measures will the project utilize to have less impact on the
environment?   
      Example 1. Solar panels and energy efficiency has been taken into account
during construction. Score 10
      Example 2. Poorly insulated building, heavy electric usage on the grid.
Score 1
   H.   Utilities - Electricity, Water, Sewer.
      Will the project place a strain on existing services, will those services
need upgraded to accommodate the project?
      Example 1. Project will need to tie into city sewer system, city water
system. Idaho Power will need to install new electric lines for the project.
Score 1
      Example 2. Project will tie into city sewer, but have their own well
system. Score 5
      Example 3. Project will provide their own septic, water and solar
electrical systems. Score 10
   I.   Utilizing of local businesses for material/goods.
      Will the project buy materials locally? Utilize legal, advertising, etc.
in their operations.
      Example 1. Project plans to contract a local machine company to make
parts, hires a local accountant and law firm. Score 10
      Example 2. Project will ship materials from out of the area when
resources are available in area. Does hire a local accountant, but hires other
services from out of the area. Score 3
      Example 3. Project does not utilize any existing businesses for
resources, tangible or intangible. Score 1 (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
1-9-6:  SCORING MATRIX:
Scoring Matrix for 63-602NN attached to Ord. 19-08 as Title 1 - Chapter 9:
Appendices. (Ord. 19-08, 9-30-2019)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR, BEER AND WINE
SECTION:
2-1-1: Beer And Wine Licensing
2-1-2: Liquor And Beer Sales, Hours Extended
2-1-1: BEER AND WINE LICENSING:
   A.   Application: An application form provided by the county shall be
completed by the applicant prior to the issuance of a license. This application
form relates to the initial application, transfer, and renewal. This
application shall be filed with the Valley County clerk, courthouse, Cascade,
Idaho.
   B.   Submittal To County Commissioners: Each application form shall be
submitted to the board of county commissioners for decision within thirty (30)
days of the date the application is filed.
   C.   Decision Of Board: The board of county commissioners shall render a
decision to approve or deny the submitted application within thirty (30) days
of the date the application was submitted to the board.
   D.   Denial Of Application: Whenever the board of county commissioners
denies an application, the board shall specify, in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reasons for denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   E.   Decision Mailed To Applicant: Any decision to deny a license shall be
mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days of the date of denial. (Ord. 83-3,
11-14-1983)
2-1-2: LIQUOR AND BEER SALES, HOURS EXTENDED:
   A.   Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred
by Idaho Code section 23-927, as amended in 1986, and Idaho Code section 23-
1012, as amended in 1987, which provide that a county may, by ordinance, allow
the sale of liquor by the drink on Sundays, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving, and
may also extend until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the hours of the sale of liquor
by the drink and the sale of beer.
   B.   Liquor, Hours Of Sale:
      1.   Hours Prohibited: No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or
given away upon any licensed premises, and all liquor not in sealed bottles
must be locked in a separate room or cabinet during the following hours:
         a.   Christmas Day from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. the following day.
         b.   On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M.
         c.   On any day of a general or primary election until after the time
when the polls are closed.
      2.   Consumption Of Beverages Already Served:
         a.   Time Limitation: Any patron present on the licensed premises
after the sale of liquor has stopped as provided in subsection B1 of this
section shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to
consume any beverages already served.
         b.   Penalty: Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon licensed premises after the time
provided for in subsection B1 of this section shall be guilty of a
"misdemeanor" as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-111 and 18-113.
      3.   Duty To Comply: It shall be the duty of every person who is employed
at or upon a licensed premises or who owns or manages a licensed premises and
is present upon the licensed premises during the hours and at the time set
forth in subsection B1 of this section to lock up and keep locked up in a
locked room or locked cabinet all unsealed containers of liquor during the
hours and at the times set forth in subsection B1 of this section, and any such
person who fails to perform the duty provided herein shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-111 and 18-113.
   C.   Hours Of Sale Of Beer:
      1.   Hours Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person in any place licensed to sell beer or where beer is sold or dispensed to
be consumed on the premises, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell,
dispense or give away beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      2.   Consumption Of Beer Already Served:
         a.   Time Limitation: Any patron present on the licensed premises
after the sale of beer has stopped as provided in subsection C1 of this section
shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any
beverage already served.
         b.   Penalty: Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises after the time
provided in subsection C1 of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 87-2, 6-22-1987)
TITLE 3
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND LAND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Fees Established
3-1-2: Installation Of Sewage Disposal System, Permit Required
3-1-3: Penalty
3-1-4: Additional Remedy
3-1-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
Valley County hereby establishes fees to augment the funding of the sewage
disposal and land development programs for public health district IV. These
fees will include those currently authorized for collection by the Idaho state
board of health. (Ord. 02-2, 4-8-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
3-1-2: INSTALLATION OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property or other person to install or
have installed any sewage disposal system without first obtaining a permit.
(Ord. 02-2, 4-8-2002)
3-1-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 02-2, 4-8-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
3-1-4: ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
In addition to any criminal penalty, public health district IV may impose a
double fee against any person who is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 02-2,
4-8-2002)
CHAPTER 2
SEWAGE DISPOSAL NEAR BODIES OF WATER
SECTION:
3-2-1: Intent
3-2-2: Applicability
3-2-3: Guidelines
3-2-4: Noncompliance
3-2-5: Penalty
3-2-1: INTENT:
It is recognized that recreational usage of and around water bodies located in
the county has rapidly increased in recent years. It is further recognized that
many of the public land areas surrounding said water bodies are not served by
approved sanitary waste and solid waste disposal facilities. Therefore, it is
the intent of this chapter to eliminate a potential health hazard by regulating
the disposal of sewage wastes in the immediate vicinity of specified water
bodies located in the county. (Ord. 87-3, 6-22-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
3-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply only to public lands located within five hundred feet
(500') of the high water mark of the following described water bodies:
   A.   Cascade Reservoir.
   B.   Payette Lake.
   C.   Warm Lake. (Ord. 87-3, 6-22-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
3-2-3: GUIDELINES:
All persons disposing of sewage wastes within any of the areas described in
section
3-2-2 of this chapter shall comply with the following guidelines:
   A.   Black Water: All black water must be contained in self-contained
holding tanks. Portable toilets are to be disposed of at a dump station or
covered garbage can for bagged wastes. "Black water" shall be defined as
wastewater contaminated with human fecal material.
   B.   Gray Water:
      1.   All gray water must be contained in holding tanks and disposed of at
approved dumping stations. "Gray water" shall be defined as wastewater from
bathing, clothes washing and dishwashing.
      2.   In the event gray water generation is less than five (5) gallons per
day, such gray water may be discarded on the ground or in shallow pits provided
that:
         a.   Campground rules allow for such disposal;
         b.   The water is disposed of at least fifty feet (50') away from the
high water mark of a lake or tributary;
         c.   The water is disposed of at least fifty feet (50') from the
camping area; and
         d.   The gray water is relatively free of food scraps and other
organic matter. (Ord. 87-3, 6-22-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
3-2-4: NONCOMPLIANCE:
Any person found not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter by a
health inspector or law enforcement officer must immediately remove the subject
waste upon the request of such inspector or officer and dispose of it in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. If the person fails to
immediately remove the subject waste upon the request of such officer or
inspector, such person shall then be cited for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 87-3, 6-22-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
3-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of an
"infraction" as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subsection 18-113A.
Violations shall be punishable by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00) and no imprisonment. (Ord. 87-3, 6-22-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
CHAPTER 3
NOXIOUS WEEDS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: County Noxious Weed Advisory Committee
3-3-4: Enforcement
3-3-5: Duty To Control
3-3-6: Notices For Control
3-3-7: State And Federal Lands
3-3-8: Cost Of Controlling
3-3-9: Prevention Of Entry And Dissemination; Entry Of Unknown Plants
3-3-10: Special Management Zones
3-3-11: Inspection
3-3-12: Designation Of County Noxious Weeds And Action Plans
3-3-13: Funds
3-3-14: Appeals
3-3-15: Violation; Penalty
3-3-16: Exhibits
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the designation and control of
weeds within the county which have not been designated as noxious by state of
Idaho department of agriculture but which nonetheless have the potential to
cause injury to the public welfare. Those weeds are referred to herein as
"county noxious weeds". (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   AGENCY: A. Federal Government: In the case of federal government, any
authority which exercises administrative control over defined areas of federal
property within the county.
   B.   State Government: In the case of the state of Idaho, any department,
board, commission, or institution.
   C.   Local Government: In the case of local government, the county, cities
and any legal subdivisions thereof, drainage districts, highway districts, or
any special taxing district.
   COMMISSIONERS: The board of Valley County commissioners.
   CONTAINMENT: Prevention of seed production, seed dissemination and/or
production of new plants by vegetative means.
   COUNTY: Valley County.
   COUNTY NOXIOUS WEED: Any kind, species of plant or propagules thereof having
the potential to cause injury to public welfare, including, but not limited to,
health, crops, livestock, land or other property and for which it is feasible
to devote county resources for purposes of eradication, prevention, or
otherwise protecting the county or part thereof from infestation by such weed,
and which is designated noxious by the board of county commissioners, but does
not refer to weeds declared as noxious by rules and regulations promulgated
under authority of Idaho Code chapter 24, section 22.
   ERADICATION: Completely eliminating all aboveground plant growth of a target
county noxious weed species for a time period longer than the expected
longevity of propagules of the species.
   LAND: All soil or water or other growing media.
   PERSON AND/OR PEOPLE: Any individual, partnership, firm, agency,
corporation, company, society, association, drainage district, irrigation
district, highway district or any taxing district or other organization.
   PREVENTION: Action designed to stop the introduction or establishment of a
plant species in areas not currently infested with that species.
   QUARANTINE: The regulation of the production, movement, or existence of
plants, plant products, animals, animal products, or any other article or
material, or the normal activity of persons, to prevent or limit introduction
or spread of a county noxious weed.
   SPECIAL MANAGEMENT ZONE: An area where in the requirements of this chapter
to control certain named county noxious weeds may be suspended or modified in
any other way.
   WEED: County noxious weed.
   WEED CONTROL: Any and all of the following: prevention, eradication, or
containment. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-3: COUNTY NOXIOUS WEED ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Appointment: The commissioners shall appoint a county noxious weed
advisory committee consisting of not less than five (5) members, who shall be
knowledgeable of county noxious weeds and the damage done by such weeds. The
members of the county noxious weed advisory committee shall be appointed on an
annual basis.
   B.   Meetings; Duties: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the county
noxious weed advisory committee: 1) to meet at least once in each calendar year
to review and report on the status of the county noxious weed program and this
chapter to the commissioners; 2) to consult with and advise the commissioners
and the county weed superintendent in implementation of this chapter and
planning county noxious weed control programs; 3) to act as liaison to noxious
weed committees of other counties; and 4) to provide a forum for public input
on matters relating to the control of county noxious weeds.
   C.   Reimbursement For Expenses: Members of the county noxious weed advisory
committee may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses when on committee
business. Expense payments may be made from the noxious weed fund. (Ord. 01-3,
4-9-2001)
3-3-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Vested In Commissioners: The duties of enforcing this chapter and
carrying out its provisions are vested in the commissioners.
   B.   Inspection And Certification: The commissioners may inspect and certify
county crops and imports and exports and any other materials or items to verify
freedom from county noxious weeds, and may authorize the county weed
superintendent and others to perform such inspections and certification.
   C.   Other Necessary And Appropriate Acts: The commissioners may perform
such other acts as may be necessary or appropriate for the administration of
the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Noncompliance:
      1.   Notice: If, at any time, the commissioners determine that any person
or agency has failed to cooperate or carry out duties and responsibilities
required by this chapter, the commissioners shall notify them of the
deficiency, and designate corrective action and deadline which will constitute
compliance.
      2.   Failure To Comply: If the violation is not satisfactorily corrected
within seven (7) days after the time outlined in the commissioners' corrective
action plan, the commissioners may initiate appropriate action, which could
include quarantine and charge to the violator of all expenses including the
hiring of necessary labor, materials and equipment.
   E.   Petition; Public Hearing: The commissioners shall, within sixty (60)
days of receipt of a petition by an affected person, arrange for a public
meeting to be held to review the county noxious weed program and allow public
comment.
   F.   County Weed Superintendent; Duties: It shall be the duty of the county
weed superintendent to examine all land within the county for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with; to
compile data and submit reports as the commissioners may require; consult,
advise and provide direction on matters pertaining to the most effective and
most practical methods of county noxious weed control; investigate or aid in
the investigation and prosecution of any violation of this chapter; and to
cooperate with and assist other county weed superintendents for the mutual
benefit of counties so involved. The county weed superintendent may enter upon
all lands within the county where there are county noxious weeds to ascertain
conditions, if a reasonable attempt has been made to contact the owner prior to
entry, and if there is probable cause for the entry. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-5: DUTY TO CONTROL:
   A.   Duty Of Owner Or Manager: It is the duty and responsibility of all
people, organizations and agencies who own or manage land within the county to
control county noxious weeds on that land, in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Prevention Or Eradication: Weed control must be for prevention or
eradication unless the special management zone provision of subsection
 3-3-10A of this chapter applies. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-6: NOTICES FOR CONTROL:
   A.   Kinds Of Notices: Notices for control of county noxious weeds shall
consist of two (2) kinds:
      1.   General Notice: A general notice for control of county noxious weeds
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county; and
      2.   Individual Notices: Individual notices in a form prescribed by the
commissioners.
   B.   Failure To Publish Or Serve: Failure to publish the notice for control
or to serve individual notices herein provided does not relieve any person of
the responsibility to fully comply with this chapter. In all cases, such
published notices shall be deemed legal and sufficient notice. The general
notice for control shall be published at least one time between March 1 and
April 30 and shall contain a list of both the Idaho noxious weeds and the
county noxious weeds and shall specifically indicate those noxious weeds known
to be in or imminently threatening to the county, and shall stipulate the
obligation of control.
   C.   Individual Notice: Whenever the commissioners find it necessary to
secure more prompt or definite control of county noxious weeds than is
accomplished by the general notice, they shall cause individual notices to be
served upon the person or agency owning and controlling such land, giving
specific instructions when and how certain named weeds are to be controlled.
The individual notice shall also contain information concerning the right to
appeal pursuant to section
3-3-14 of this chapter.
   D.   Neglect Or Failure To Control:
      1.   Control By County: Whenever the owner of any land on which county
noxious weeds are present has neglected or failed to initiate control as
required pursuant to this chapter within five (5) working days from receipt of
an individual notice given pursuant to this section, the commissioners shall
use such control methods as they deem appropriate on such land, including, if
necessary, destruction of crops, and shall advise the owner of the cost
incurred in connection with such operation.
      2.   Cost; Lien: The cost of any control on private or public land shall
be at the expense of the owner or agency. If unpaid for sixty (60) days or
longer, the amount of such expense shall become a lien upon the property.
Thereafter the lien shall be subject to collection by the county by sale of the
property in the same manner as for delinquent taxes.
      3.   Suit For Collection: If the costs have not been paid to the control
authority which performed the work within sixty (60) days, the commissioners
may direct that suit be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
unpaid charges.
      4.   Additional Remedies: Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to require satisfaction of the obligation imposed by the sale of
property or to bar the application of any other available remedy.
      5.   Amounts Collected: Amounts collected under the authority of this
section shall be deposited to the county noxious weed fund.
   E.   Infestation Uncontrollable By Owner:
      1.   Quarantine; Destruction: When it appears to the commissioners that
upon any land under its jurisdiction there is an infestation of county noxious
weeds beyond the ability of the owner of such land to control, the
commissioners may quarantine such land and immediately apply any necessary
control of such noxious weeds including destruction of crops.
      2.   Consideration Of Alternatives: The commissioners shall, prior to
entry upon such land, request consultation with the owner to consider
alternatives.
      3.   Notice: Prior to entry, commissioners shall serve individual notices
on the owner thereof of such quarantine and of the date of the proposed entry,
and shall advise the owner of the completion of the control operation and the
cost thereof. If the owner is not known or readily available, notice shall be
deemed satisfied after eight (8) days from postmark of registered mail to the
address as shown on the assessment roll of the county. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-7: STATE AND FEDERAL LANDS:
The county is hereby authorized, and the commissioners shall have the
responsibility, to cooperate with the state or federal government or any
established agency thereof, in any program of county noxious weed control which
shall be deemed advisable for the welfare of the people of the county. With
consent of the agency involved, the commissioners may control county noxious
weeds on state or federal land within the county, with or without
reimbursement. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-8: COST OF CONTROLLING:
   A.   Obligation:
      1.   Private Land: The cost of controlling county noxious weeds on
private land shall be the obligation of the owner.
      2.   Other Land: On other land, the cost of control of county noxious
weeds shall be the obligation of the entity or organization that has the
authority to set management and maintenance revenues for the land. In the case
of divisions which have the responsibilities for roads, highways, airports,
fairgrounds, landfills, and any other lands, it shall be the responsibility of
the respective departments to budget for the control of county noxious weeds
from their general maintenance and operation accounts.
   B.   No Cost To Owner: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter
relating to payment of cost, when determined by the commissioners to be
justified in the interest of an effective weed control program, the
commissioners may control county noxious weeds on land in the county without
costs to the owner. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-9: PREVENTION OF ENTRY AND DISSEMINATION; ENTRY OF UNKNOWN PLANTS:
   A.   County Noxious Weeds:
      1.   Publication Of List Of Articles Capable Of Dissemination And
Designated Treatment: To prevent the entry and dissemination of county noxious
weeds through any article, including machinery, equipment, plants, materials
and other things, the commissioners shall, from time to time, publish a list of
articles capable of disseminating county noxious weeds and designate treatment
of such articles as, in their opinion, would prevent such dissemination.
      2.   Treatment Required Prior To Moving From Designated Premises; Written
Permission Required: Until such article is treated in accordance with the
applicable regulations, it shall not be moved from designated premises except
under and in accordance with the written permission of the commissioners, and
the commissioners may hold or prevent its movement from such premises.
      3.   Movement Of Untreated Article: The movement of any such article
which has not been so treated, except in accordance with such written
permission, may be stopped by the commissioners and further movement and
disposition shall only be in accordance with the commissioners' direction.
   B.   Unknown Plants: No plant, including seed or other propagules, shall be
transported within or admitted into the county without accurate taxonomic
identification (as to species by either Latin name or by common name listed in
locally available standard reference works). All such plants shall be
automatically and immediately designated county noxious weeds until their
taxonomic identity is verified. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-10: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT ZONES:
   A.   Designation; Modification Of Requirements: The commissioners may permit
modification of specific county noxious weed control requirements in certain
areas after they have consulted with or notified the landholders, have
designated the area as a "special management zone", have modified the county
plan for control of that species in accordance with such special management
zone provisions and after public notice of this modification.
   B.   Plans Extended Over Period Of Years: The commissioners may propose to
and accept plans from landowners for county noxious weed control which may be
extended over a period of years if such plans include provisions to ensure
against spread of the county noxious weed infestation under consideration.
(Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-11: INSPECTION:
   A.   Right Of Entry: For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter, the commissioners or the county weed superintendent may enter on any
public or private land at reasonable times.
   B.   Denied Access: Should the commissioners or the county weed
superintendent be denied access to any land where such access was sought for
the purposes set forth in this chapter, they may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction for a search warrant authorizing access to such land for
said purposes. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-12: DESIGNATION OF COUNTY NOXIOUS WEEDS AND ACTION PLANS:
   A.   Request For Designation:
      1.   Right To Request: Any county resident may submit to the
commissioners a request for county noxious weed designation of a species, if
such request is in writing and includes reasons and a proposed plan for county
action on such species.
      2.   Consideration And Recommendation By County Noxious Weed Advisory
Committee: All requests for county noxious weed designation must be considered
by the county noxious weed advisory committee for recommendation for county
noxious weed designation to the commissioners within six (6) months of the
request.
      3.   Records: Records of all such considerations must be maintained on
permanent file by the commissioners. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
   B.   Action Plans: Every species for which county noxious weed designation
is deemed feasible, including species considered for temporary designation,
shall be designated a county noxious weed only upon recommendation including
reasons and a written plan for county action to control such species, including
clear designation of any special management zones, from the county noxious weed
advisory committee and subsequent approval by the commissioners, using the form
shown in subsection
3-3-16A of this chapter. County noxious weeds under this chapter shall be
designated by separate resolution of the commissioners, and shall be listed by
both common and scientific names. Any species designated noxious pursuant to
this chapter shall automatically and immediately become no longer designated
under this chapter if and when that species is designated noxious under Idaho
Code. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001; amd. 2011 Code)
3-3-13: FUNDS:
Monies received by the county under this chapter shall be apportioned to the
county weed fund. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-14: APPEALS:
   A.   Protest:
      1.   Amount Of Charge: Any person dissatisfied with the amount of any
charge for control work may, within thirty (30) days after being advised of the
amount of the charge, file a protest with the commissioners.
      2.   Control Measures: Any person dissatisfied with the control measures
used or the manner in which control is conducted upon his property may, within
thirty (30) days, file a protest with the commissioners.
   B.   Served With Individual Notice: Any person served with an individual
notice may, within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice, appeal to the
commissioners. A hearing shall be arranged by the commissioners at their next
regular meeting after receipt of notice of the appeal. Notice of the hearing
shall be sent by the commissioners to the appellant.
   C.   Additional Procedures For Hearings And Appeals: Other than the
procedures specifically set out in this chapter, procedures for hearings and
appeals pertaining to this chapter shall be as provided by county law. (Ord.
01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: Any person knowing of the existence of any county noxious
weed on lands owned or controlled by them who fails to control such weeds in
accordance with this chapter and any person who intrudes upon any land under
quarantine or who moves or causes to be moved any article covered by this
chapter except as provided or who prevents or threatens to prevent entry upon
land as provided in this chapter, or who interferes with the carrying out of
the provisions of this chapter or who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. All fines shall be deposited in the county weed fund. (Ord.
01-3, 4-9-2001; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Authority To Issue Citations: Control authorities and law enforcement
officers are authorized to issue citations to anyone who violates any provision
of this chapter. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
3-3-16: EXHIBITS:
   A.   Exhibit 1, Valley County Noxious Weed Review And Decision Record:
   EXHIBIT 1
   VALLEY COUNTY NOXIOUS WEED REVIEW AND DECISION RECORD
Review requested by:                                         Date prepared:
               
                                               
                                               
                                               
            Name - Address - Phone
Weed
                                                                                          
         Family         Genus/species      Common name
   A.   Criteria for review ("Yes" answers on all four criteria are necessary
for noxious designation):
      1.   Is it absent from the state noxious   Yes        No     
         weed list?
      2.   Is it potentially more harmful than   Yes        No     
         beneficial to this County overall?
      3.   Is a sufficient plan for economically,   Yes        No     
         physically, and biologically feasible
         eradication or prevention in the County
         attached to this exhibit?
      4.   Will the potential adverse impact of   Yes        No     
         the weed exceed the cost of control?
   B.   Other information (comments or additional information may be entered on
reverse side of this sheet; if so, check here     ):
      1.   Is it verified to be in this County?   Yes        No     
      2.   Is it non-native?      Yes        No     
      3.   Known distribution in this County
                                           
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
   C.   County Noxious Weed Advisory Committee recommendation:
      1.   Should this species be designated   Yes        No     
      2.   Noxious Weed Advisory Committee
Signature                             
         Date               
   D.   Board of County Commissioner's approval   Yes        No     
      of County Noxious Weed Advisory Committee
      recommendation: (attach copy of resolution or
      include reason hereon, if not approved)
(Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001)
   B.   Exhibit 2, Watch List: See Idaho's website, as follows: www.idahoag.us/
Categories/PlantsInsects/NoxiousWeeds/watchlist.php
See also noxious weeds designated under authority of Idaho Code title 22,
chapter 24. (Ord. 01-3, 4-9-2001; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SERVICE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Contract For Services; Fees Established
3-4-2: Nonpayment Of Fees
3-4-1: CONTRACT FOR SERVICES; FEES ESTABLISHED:
The county, in compliance with Idaho Code section 31-4403, has contracted for
solid waste disposal service and has established fees for collection of said
service. (Ord. 85-2, 7-22-1985)
3-4-2: NONPAYMENT OF FEES:
All rates, fees or charges imposed shall, if not paid within sixty (60) days of
notice when due, become a special assessment upon the real property serviced by
the county's contractor. (Ord. 85-2, 7-22-1985)
CHAPTER 5
VALLEY COUNTY TRANSFER STATION
SECTION:
3-5-1: Established
3-5-2: Hours For Use
3-5-3: Charges For Use
3-5-4: Salvage Rights
3-5-5: Transportation Of Trash, Garbage And Solid Waste
3-5-6: Unlawful Practices
3-5-7: Penalty
3-5-1: ESTABLISHED:
For the protection and preservation of the safety, health and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the county, there is hereby established the Valley County
transfer station upon the premises in the county more particularly described as
follows:
The SE1/4SW1/2 of Section 19, and the NE1/4NW1/4 of Section 30, in Township 17,
N. Range 4 East, BM.
(Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011; amd. 2011 Code)
3-5-2: HOURS FOR USE:
The Valley County transfer station will be open to the public from the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday,
and closed Sunday and holidays (or as otherwise posted). (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
3-5-3: CHARGES FOR USE:
   A.   To deposit trash, garbage, refuse or solid waste of any kind in the
Valley County transfer station, charges will be established by resolution,
which charges must be paid in advance.
   B.   There shall be no charge for deposit of ordinary household garbage by
individual or commercial haulers of household garbage. (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
3-5-4: SALVAGE RIGHTS:
Upon deposit of any materials in the Valley County transfer station, title
thereto shall vest in the county and no public salvage rights shall be
permitted. (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
3-5-5: TRANSPORTATION OF TRASH, GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE:
No person shall transport trash, garbage or refuse of any kind over the public
streets and ways of the county in violation of the following conditions:
   A.   Loads: No person shall cause or permit any vehicle used for such
transportation of trash, garbage or refuse of any kind to be so loaded, or to
be of such construction or condition, so as to permit any of such trash,
garbage or refuse of any kind to drop or fall upon or in any street or public
way.
   B.   Cover Required: All vehicles used for such purpose shall be provided
with a suitable cover securely fastened so as to retain dust and prevent the
scattering or dropping of such trash, garbage or refuse of any kind in or upon
the public streets or public ways. (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
3-5-6: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or aid in creating or
contributing to, or to maintain a nuisance, or to cast or having thrown and
cast, to allow to remain upon or in any street, road, ditch, gutter, public
place, private premises, vacant lot, watercourse, lake, spring or well, or in
any building, any refuse, offal, garbage, dead animals, decaying vegetable
matter, or solid waste substance of any kind. (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
3-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 11-8, 7-11-2011)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
MINORS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Curfew
4-1-2: Runaways
4-1-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   Under Sixteen: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
sixteen (16) years to be or to remain, and it shall be unlawful for any parent,
guardian or other person having the care and custody of any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years to permit such person to be or to remain, in or upon
any street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the public
or exposed to public use within the boundaries of the political boundaries
hereof between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M.
      2.   Sixteen To Eighteen: It shall be unlawful for any person having
attained the age of sixteen (16) years and prior to having attained the age of
eighteen (18) years to be or to remain, and it shall be unlawful for any
parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of any person who
has attained the age of sixteen (16) years and prior to having obtained the age
of eighteen (18) years to permit such person to be or to remain, in or upon any
street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the public or
exposed to public use within the boundaries of the political boundaries hereof
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
Sunday through Thursday evenings and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday evenings.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person
who is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of him, nor to any person who is in the performance of an
errand or duty directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of him, nor to any person who is actually at the time
engaged in legitimate employment for profit.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment of
not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment within the
discretion of the court. (Ord. 2-78, 5-8-1978)
4-1-2: RUNAWAYS:
   A.   Definition: "Runaway", as defined in this subsection, is any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years who has left home, place of abode or
custody of parents, guardian or legal custodian of said person, without the
knowledge, permission or consent of the parents, guardian or legal custodian of
said person.
   B.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years, living or found in the county, to run away from the
parents, guardian, or legal custodian of said person.
   C.   Aid, Harbor Or Encourage: It shall be unlawful for any person to aid,
harbor or encourage any person who is a runaway.
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by
imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the county jail or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1-79, 7-9-1979)
CHAPTER 2
LARGE PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose; Intent
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: License; Fee
4-2-4: Conditions For Issuance
4-2-5: Application
4-2-6: Issuance
4-2-7: Revocation
4-2-8: Enforcement
4-2-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
It is the purpose of Valley County to regulate the assemblage of large numbers
of people in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary, fire,
police, transportation, and utility services regularly provided in the county
in order that the health, safety, and welfare of all persons in the county,
residents and visitors alike, may be protected. (Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   ASSEMBLY: A company of persons gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.
   PERSON: Any individual natural human being, partnership, corporation, firm,
company, association, society, or group. (Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986)
4-2-3: LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Required; Application: No person shall permit, maintain, promote,
conduct, advertise, act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, sell or
give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of five hundred
(500) or more people which continues or can reasonably be expected to continue
for four (4) or more consecutive hours, whether on public or private property
unless a license to hold the assembly has first been issued by the county
commissioners, application for which must be made at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly issued to one person
shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in connection with the
holding of the licensed assembly.
   B.   Separate License Required; Fee: A separate license shall be required
for each location in which five hundred (500) or more people assemble or can
reasonably be anticipated to assemble; the fee for each license shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day.
   C.   Restricted To Maximum Number Permissible Under License: A license shall
permit the assembly of only the maximum number of people stated in the license.
The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor permit to assemble at the licensed
location more than the maximum permissible number of people.
   D.   Exemptions:
      1.   Regular Assemblies Under Two Hundred Fifty People: This chapter
shall not apply to any regular established, permanent place of worship,
stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or other similar
permanently established place of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by
more than two hundred fifty (250) people, the maximum seating capacity of the
structure where the assembly is held, and are for the purpose for which said
places of assembly were established.
      2.   Government Sponsored Fairs; Assemblies Licensed Under Other County
Ordinances Or Regulations: This chapter shall not apply to government sponsored
fairs held on regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to
be licensed by other ordinances and regulations of the county.
      3.   Farm Auctions: This chapter shall not apply to farm auctions. (Ord.
86-3, 8-11-1986)
4-2-4: CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Determination Of Maximum Number: Before an applicant may be issued a
license, the applicant shall first determine the maximum number of people which
will be assembled or admitted to the location of the assembly; provided, that
the maximum number shall not exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of the nature of the
assembly; and provided, that where the assembly is to continue overnight, the
maximum number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries
of the location of the assembly by the zoning or health ordinances of the
county.
   B.   Proof Of Required Facilities: Before an applicant may be issued a
license, the applicant shall provide proof that he will furnish, at his own
expense, before the assembly commences:
      1.   Potable Water: Potable water, meeting all federal and state
requirements for purity, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least two (2) gallons per
person per day.
      2.   Toilets: Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting
all state and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the
grounds, sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of people to
be assembled at the rate of at least one toilet for every one hundred (100)
females, and at least one toilet for every one hundred (100) males, together
with an efficient, sanitary means of disposing of waste matter deposited, which
is in compliance with all state and local laws and regulations.
      3.   Method Of Disposing Of Solid Waste: A sanitary method of disposing
of solid waste, in compliance with state and local laws and regulations,
sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the maximum number of
people to be assembled, together with a plan for holding and a plan for
collecting all such waste at least once each day of the assembly and sufficient
trash cans with tightfitting lids and personnel to perform the task.
      4.   First Aid Station: A first aid station with supplies adequate to
provide first aid for the maximum number of people to be assembled and
arrangements made for ambulance service.
      5.   Illumination: If the assembly is to continue during hours of
darkness, illumination sufficient to light the central area of the assembly,
but not to shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the central area of the
assembly.
      6.   Parking Area: A parking area inside of or immediately adjacent to
the assembly grounds sufficient to provide parking space for the maximum number
of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for every
four (4) persons.
      7.   Camping Facilities: If the assembly is to continue overnight,
camping facilities in compliance with all federal, state, and local
requirements sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the maximum
number of people to be assembled.
      8.   Security People: Qualified individuals acceptable to the Valley
County sheriff's office as responsible persons to whom authority can be
entrusted and sufficient in number to provide adequate security for the maximum
number of people to be assembled.
      9.   Fire Protection: Fire protection, sufficient to meet all federal,
state, and local standards for the location of the assembly.
   C.   Bond: A bond, filed with the clerk of Valley County, either in cash or
underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business in Idaho, at the rate
of ten dollars ($10.00) per person for the maximum number of people permitted
to assemble, which shall indemnify and hold harmless the county or any of its
agents, officers, servants and employees from any liability or causes of action
which might arise by reason of granting this license, and from any cost
incurred in cleaning up any waste material produced or left by the assembly.
(Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986)
4-2-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   Time Of Filing: Application for a license to hold an actual or
anticipated assembly of five hundred (500) or more persons shall be made, in
writing, to the county commission at least thirty (30) days in advance of such
assembly.
   B.   Affirmation; Required Signatures: The application shall contain a
statement made upon oath or affirmation that the statements contained therein
are true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed
and sworn to or affirmed by the individual making application in the case of an
individual natural human being, by all officers in the case of a corporation,
by all partners in the case of a partnership or by all officers, by all members
of such association, society, or group or, if there be no officers, by all
members of such association, society or group.
   C.   Required Information: The application shall contain and disclose:
      1.   The name and mailing address of all persons required to sign the
application, and, in the case of a corporation, a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation together with the name, and mailing address of each
person holding ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of said corporation.
      2.   The address and general description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and mailing address
of the record owner(s) of all such property.
      3.   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by record owner(s) of such
property that the applicant has permission to use such property for an assembly
of five hundred (500) persons or more.
      4.   The nature or purpose of the assembly.
      5.   The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is
to last.
      6.   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to
assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of the nature of the
assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the
boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning ordinances of the
county if the assembly is to continue overnight.
      7.   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any.
      8.   The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of persons
permitted to assemble.
      9.   The plans for supplying potable water, including the source, amount
available, and location of outlets.
      10.   The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities including
the source, number and location, type, and the means of disposing of solid
waste deposited.
      11.   The plans for holding, collection, and disposing of solid waste
material.
      12.   The plans to provide for medical facilities including the location
and construction of a medical structure, the names and addresses and hours of
availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions for emergency ambulance
service.
      13.   The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly.
      14.   The plans for parking vehicles.
      15.   The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities
available and their location.
      16.   The plans for security.
      17.   The plans for fire protection.
   D.   Bond; License Fee: The application shall include the bond required and
the license fee. (Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986)
4-2-6: ISSUANCE:
The application for a license shall be processed within five (5) working days
of receipt and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with. (Ord. 86-3,
8-11-1986)
4-2-7: REVOCATION:
The license may be revoked by the commission at any time if the conditions
necessary for the issuing of or contained in the license are not complied with,
or if any condition previously met ceases to be complied with. (Ord. 86-3, 8-
11-1986)
4-2-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Injunctive Relief: The holding of any assembly in violation of any
provisions or conditions contained in this chapter shall give cause to the
county to seek injunctive relief for creation of a public nuisance. Said action
to be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986)
   B.   Misdemeanor: Any person who wilfully, knowingly and intentionally
violates any condition upon which he is granted a license is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense. The criminal provisions of this section are not enforceable against
the licensee in the event injunctive relief is granted. (Ord. 86-3, 8-11-1986;
amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Reporting
4-3-2: Control
4-3-3: Procedure
4-3-4: Expense Liability
4-3-5: Penalty
4-3-1: REPORTING:
Anyone having knowledge or reason to believe that any animal in the county has
bitten a person shall report such incident within twenty four (24) hours to the
Valley County sheriff's office or other local law enforcement agency, so far as
is known, the name and address of the owner and circumstances of the animal.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-11-1986)
4-3-2: CONTROL:
Whenever any animal has bitten a person, it shall thereupon be securely
quarantined at the direction of the Valley County sheriff or one of his
deputies, for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such
quarantine except by written permission of said sheriff or deputy. At the
direction of said sheriff or deputy, such quarantine may be on the premises of
the owner, at an animal shelter, or in a veterinary clinic at the owner's
expense. It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any animal which has
bitten a person to refuse or fail to promptly surrender said animal to said
sheriff or deputy. (Ord. 86-2, 8-11-1986)
4-3-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Not Affected: When a licensed veterinarian files a written report with
the Valley County sheriff's office indicating that a quarantined animal is not
affected by rabies, said sheriff or deputy shall terminate the quarantine by
written permission and the owner may reclaim the animal after the expense
liability provisions outlined in section
4-3-4 of this chapter have been satisfied.
   B.   Affected Or Suspected Of Being Rabid: When an animal under quarantine
has been diagnosed by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid or suspected of
being rabid, the sheriff or deputy shall cause the immediate destruction of the
affected animal, shall send the head of such animal to the health department
for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer
of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis made of the animal.
   C.   Exposure To Rabid Animal: Any animal bitten by or exposed to an animal
adjudged to be rabid shall be quarantined in accordance with subsections A and
B of this section and section
4-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 86-2, 8-11-1986)
4-3-4: EXPENSE LIABILITY:
The owner or harborer of any animal requiring veterinarian, quarantine,
destruction or disposition services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be responsible for all such expenses. (Ord. 86-2, 8-11-1986)
4-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 86-2, 8-11-1986)
CHAPTER 4
HUNTING AT NIGHT BY ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: Prohibited
4-4-3: Exceptions
4-4-4: Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, "hunting" shall mean chasing, driving,
flushing, attracting, pursuing, worrying, following after or on the trail of,
trapping, shooting at, stalking, or lying in wait for, any wildlife, whether or
not such wildlife is then or subsequently captured, killed, taken, or wounded.
Such term does not include stalking, attracting, searching for, or lying in
wait for, any wildlife by an unarmed person solely for the purpose of watching
wildlife or taking pictures thereof. (Ord. 77-4, 12-12-1977)
4-4-2: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to cast or throw, after sunset, the beam or rays of any
spotlight, headlight or other artificial light capable of utilizing six (6)
volts or more of electrical power upon any field, forest or other place, upon
any animal, or birds, or in attempting to locate any animals or birds by any
person while having in his possession or under his control any uncased firearm
or contrivance capable of killing same, which shall be prima facie evidence of
hunting with an artificial light. (Ord. 77-4, 12-12-1977)
4-4-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply where the headlights of a motor vehicle,
operated and proceeding in a normal manner on any highway or roadway, cast a
light upon any animal on or adjacent to such highway or roadway and there is no
intent or attempt to locate such animal; also, nothing in this section shall
apply where a landowner, or his agent, lessees, or assigns deems it necessary
to protect his livestock and/or property from damage by malicious animals;
also, nothing in this chapter shall apply to any peace officer in the
performance of his duty. (Ord. 77-4, 12-12-1977)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person guilty of violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 77-4, 12-12-1977; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VALLEY COUNTY WATERWAYS ORDINANCE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Title
4-5-2: Purpose And Coverage
4-5-3: Authority
4-5-4: Definitions
4-5-5: Operational Rules, Regulations And Behavioral Standards For All Public
Waterways In Valley County
4-5-6: Additional Operational Rules, Regulations And Behavioral Standards For
Certain Public Waterways In Valley County
4-5-7: Summary Of Rules And Regulations Or Changes
4-5-8: Posting Of Restricted Areas
4-5-9: Enforcement
4-5-10: Violations And Penalties
4-5-11: Exceptions
4-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Valley County Waterways
Ordinance. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-2: PURPOSE AND COVERAGE:
   A.   Purpose: The general purpose of the chapter is to promote and protect
the health, safety and general welfare of the public, to enhance boating and
other uses and to protect public and private property and the natural
environment of the public waterways of Valley County. This Ordinance
establishes rules for vessel and watercraft use and operation as well as for
swimming, diving, waterskiing and other uses, in order to accomplish the
following:
      1.   To provide for a safe waterways experience for all users including
abutting landowners;
      2.   To protect all County waterways against pollution from contaminants;
      3.   To protect the public and private property that abut County
waterways from erosion;
      4.   To conserve and enhance the habitat afforded by the waterways for
avian, terrestrial and aquatic wildlife;
      5.   To assure continuance of the County's high quality of life that is
closely associated with its waterways and its watershed;
      6.   To preserve the high quality of life values that are associated with
waterway use and especially the peace and quiet of the lake and river
experiences;
      7.   To work with all waterway-front owners, watercraft users and owners,
swimmers, divers, water-skiers and others in order to bring all users into
compliance with this Ordinance;
      8.   To work with all agencies and regulatory bodies functioning in or
affecting Valley County in order to meet the purposes of this Ordinance.
   B.   Coverage And Applicability:
      1.   This Valley County Waterways Ordinance covers Deadwood Reservoir,
Granite Lake, Horsethief Reservoir, Lake Cascade, Little Payette Lake, Payette
Lake, Upper Payette Lake, Warm Lake, and specific reaches of the north fork of
Payette River. It establishes regulations for use of said waterways in Valley
County, Idaho in order to promote and protect the health, safety and general
welfare of citizens of the county.
      2.   This Ordinance repeals the following Valley County Ordinances:
Ordinance 78-1 (3-13-1978), Ordinance 02-3 (8-12-2002), Ordinance 03-3 (5-27-
2003) and Ordinance 08-1 (2-11-2008); and establishes an effective date.
      3.   In addition to the provisions herein, all waterways in Valley County
are subject to the provisions of the Idaho state boating laws as found in The
Idaho Safe Boating Act, Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 70, other applicable Idaho
State Statutes and The Idaho Administrative Code, IDAPA 26.01.30. (Ord. 20-11,
6-15-2020)
4-5-3: AUTHORITY:
The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the general authority
granted to the Board of County Commissioners by the Idaho Constitution, Article
XII, Section 2, and Idaho Code, Sections 31-714, 31-807 and 67-7031. (Ord. 20-
11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
ADULT          Having a person age eighteen (18) years of age or over on or in a vessel.
SUPERVISION:
DAY:           From one hour before sunrise to one hour after sunset.
               A wave of water or track of turbulence resulting from the passage of a vessel
               through the water that, by its size, height, speed, intensity, repetition or
EXCESSIVE,     duration, is observed to, or could reasonably be expected to cause within the no
DANGEROUS OR   wake safe water zone or in designated swimming areas: property damage; shoreline
DAMAGING WAKE: erosion; damage to or dispersal of aquatic plants or navigational or safety
               hazard signage; or harassment or endangerment of other boaters, swimmers or other
               water users.
HOUSE BOAT:    A vessel designed solely for live-aboard activities and powered solely by a motor
               or other mechanical device.
               The act of overnighting in or on a vessel that is anchored to the bottom of a
LIVE ABOARD:   water body or is attached or moored to a public or private dock, pier, mooring
               buoy or other structure.
MOTOR DRIVEN   Any vessel of any type which is propelled by any type of motor or machinery.
VESSEL:
               The west side of the channel between the north basin and the southwest arm of
NARROWS, THE:  Payette Lake from “Simplot Point” to the south boundary of the settlement at “KP
               Cove”; and on the east side of that same channel from the exposed rocks known as
               “Hen and Chicks” north to the northern most point of Ponderosa State Park.
NIGHT:         From one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise.
NO MOTOR
DRIVEN VESSEL  A designated area where no motor of any type is allowed to power a watercraft.
AREA:
NO WAKE SPEED: The slowest speed at which it is possible to maintain steering but not more than
               five (5) miles per hour.
               A designated area where the operation of watercraft must be accomplished at not
NO WAKE ZONE:  more than five (5) miles per hour and where no watercraft shall produce a wake
               showing whitewater.
OVERNIGHTING:  Spending more than six (6) hours between sunset and sunrise in a vessel in order
               to sleep.
               A small vessel which uses an outboard motor or an inboard motor powering a water
PERSONAL       jet pump as its primary source of power and is designed to be operated by a
WATERCRAFT:    person sitting, standing or kneeling on, rather than the conventional manner of
               sitting or standing inside the vessel.
               An area which is a portion of the waters of Valley County, marked with regulatory
POSTED AREA:   markers in compliance with Idaho Code Section 67-7031, in order to regulate the
               actions of watercraft and persons.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any river, lake or other body of water within Valley County other than those
               which are entirely privately owned, regardless of navigability.
SHERIFF'S      The Valley County Sheriff's Office.
OFFICE:
               The line of demarcation between water and land, known as the Natural or Ordinary
SHORELINE:     High Water Line as established by the State of Idaho Department of Lands and as
               defined in IDAPA 20.03.04.010.14 (v. 9-13-90).
UNATTENDED     A watercraft that is left without any human on board or in the immediate vicinity
VESSEL:        and is currently not being used.
VALLEY COUNTY
BOARD OF       The governing board of Valley County, Idaho.
COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS:
               Every description of watercraft, including a seaplane on the water, used or
               capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, but does not include
               float houses as defined in Idaho Code Section 67-7003, diver's aids operated and
VESSEL:        designed primarily to propel a diver below the surface of the water, and non-
               motorized devices not designed or modified to be used as a means of
               transportation on the water, such as inflatable air mattresses, single inner
               tubes and beach and water toys.
WAKE:          The visible track of turbulence created by watercraft moving through the water.
               Those devices designed as a means of transportation on water. Watercraft does not
               include diver's aids operated and designed primarily to propel a diver below the
WATERCRAFT:    surface of the water or non-motorized devices not designed or modified to be used
               as a means of transportation on the water, such as inflatable air mattresses,
               single inner tubes, beach and water toys, or float houses as defined in Idaho
               Code Section 67-7003.
               Any act that involves a person being towed by a motor-powered vessel utilizing a
WATERSKIING:   tow rope, tow line, or training boom, regardless of the type of device being
               towed.
WATERWAYS      The Valley County Waterways Advisory Committee as appointed by the Valley County
ADVISORY       Board of Commissioners. (The Idaho Safe Boating Act, Idaho Code Section 67-7012)
COMMITTEE:
               As provided for under Idaho Code Section 67-7031, areas in which certain uses are
               regulated on certain waters. Herein they include:
               No motor driven vessel area, where no motor of any kind can be used to propel a
               watercraft;
WATERWAYS WITH Restricted swimming area, where swimming and the operation of float tubes and
VESSEL         other nonmotorized devices not designed or modified to be used as a means of
RESTRICTED     transportation, such as inflatable air mattresses, single inner tubes and beach
AREAS:         and water toys, may be regulated;
               Restricted waterskiing area, where waterskiing may be regulated;
               Personal watercraft operational zone, where personal watercraft may be regulated
               as to no wake zones, exclusive use, no use, or distance of use from shoreline;
               and a Diver protection area where activities in the vicinity of a diver are
               regulated. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
 
4-5-5: OPERATIONAL RULES, REGULATIONS AND BEHAVIORAL STANDARDS FOR ALL PUBLIC
WATERWAYS IN VALLEY COUNTY:
   A.   Purpose: These rules, regulations and standards are in addition to and
supplemental of those of other Valley County ordinances, as amended, the Idaho
Safe Boating Act, other applicable State laws and the rules in the Idaho
Administrative Code.
   B.    Applicability: These operational rules, regulations and standards
apply to any user of the public waterways of Valley County, except for law
enforcement officials acting in their official capacity during an enforcement
or emergency action:
      1.   Basic Operational Standard: It shall be unlawful and considered as
negligent behavior for any person to operate any type of vessel on the public
waters of Valley County in such a manner as to not pay proper attention to the
actual and potential hazards then existing; to operate at a rate of speed
greater than stated herein as permissible; or to operate in a manner that,
given the exercise of reasonable care, will prevent being able to stop said
vessel within the assured clear distance ahead. Specifically prohibited and
deemed negligent behavior is engaging any vessel in wake jumping or having it
become fully airborne; weaving at a speed greater than no wake through
congested traffic; or using a vessel to willfully harass another vessel, a
swimmer, a diver or any wildlife.
      2.    Age For Operation Of A Vessel Of Certain Type Or Horsepower:
         a.   It shall be unlawful to operate, or to allow someone to operate,
a motor driven vessel of 15 horsepower or less if the operator is a person
under the age of twelve (12) years, unless the operator is under direct adult
supervision.
         b.   It shall be unlawful to operate, or to allow someone to operate,
a motor driven vessel of greater than fifteen (15) horsepower or a personal
watercraft unless:
            1)   The operator is at least sixteen (16) years of age; or
            2)   The operator is at least fourteen (14) years of age and either
under direct adult supervision or have an Idaho Boater Education Card; or
            3)   The operator is at least twelve (12) years of age and under
direct adult supervision.
      3.   Live Aboard:
         a.   It shall be illegal to use a vessel for live aboard activities on
Valley County waterways unless that vessel is equipped with a holding tank for
human waste.
         b.   It shall be illegal to use any vessel for such live aboard
activities for longer than fifteen (15) days in any thirty (30) day period.
      4.   Unattended Vessel: It shall be illegal to leave a vessel unattended
for more than three (3) continuous days on any Valley County waterway while
anchored to the bottom or moored to any structure not permitted by the State of
Idaho Department of Lands or by another federal, state or local permitting
authority. Moving the vessel or breaking the unattended time by being onboard
does not remedy the illegality if a reasonable person would determine that the
vessel is not being used and is being left unattended for more than three (3)
days.
      5.   Houseboat Anchoring: Houseboats, when overnighting on any Valley
County waterway, must tie up to a structure permitted for such use by the State
of Idaho Department of Lands or by another federal, state or local permitting
authority; and must have written permission from such authority to do so. In no
case shall an overnighting houseboat anchor to the bottom.
      6.   Swimmers Using Waters Outside A No Wake Area: Any person swimming in
an area that lies outside a no wake safe water zone shall be accompanied by a
vessel, or tow a readily visible float or other type of warning device such
that shall clearly serve as notice to all other motorized vessels and water
users that swimming is occurring.
      7.   No Wake Safe Water Zone: A No Wake Safe Water Zone shall exist
within one hundred feet (100') of any anchored or moored vessel, swim float,
marked swimming area, person in the water, person in a vessel engaged in
fishing or any manually propelled vessel.
      8.   Unlawful Noise:
         a.   No person, while on the waters defined in this Ordinance, shall
disturb the peace of others as defined in Idaho Code § 18-6409.
         b.   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
      9.   Personal Watercraft Operational Time Zone: All Valley County public
waterways shall be a no personal watercraft zone during the hours between
sunset and sunrise.
      10.   Diver Protection Area: A diver shall deploy a recognized “diver
down” warning flag or the international code flag A or Alpha at all times while
diving. No vessel shall operate within one hundred feet (100') of the display
of any such diver down warning flag, except a vessel servicing a diver, and all
vessels approaching such a flag shall do so at a reduced or safe speed.
      11.   Dumping In Waters Of Valley County:
         a.   In addition to the statutory and regulatory laws and rules set
out under the Idaho Marine Sewage Disposal Act, Title 67, Chapter 75, Idaho
Code, it is unlawful to discharge, deposit, abandon, dump, spill, leak, pump,
pour or emit any extraneous matter of any kind whatsoever into the public
waters of Valley County, including but not limited to sewage, garbage, refuse,
docks, wood and fuel.
         b.   Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
      12.   Speed Regulation For All Lakes:
         a.   During the day, where the speed is not otherwise subject to a
specific greater restriction, the speed limit shall be that which is reasonable
and prudent given the circumstances at the time of day.
         b.   At night, where the speed is not otherwise subject to a specific
greater restriction, the speed limit shall be reasonable and prudent given the
circumstances at the time. A suggested maximum speed of 20 mph is recommended
during night time operation.
         c.   No motor driven vessel shall be operated at a speed or in a
manner that creates an excessive, dangerous or damaging wake. (Ord. 20-11, 6-
15-2020)
4-5-6: ADDITIONAL OPERATIONAL RULES, REGULATIONS AND BEHAVIORAL STANDARDS FOR
CERTAIN PUBLIC WATERWAYS IN VALLEY COUNTY:
In addition to the forgoing regulation that apply to all public waters in
Valley County, the Board of Valley County Commissioners has determined, through
citizen reports and recommendations of the Valley County Waterways Advisory
Committee, that it is in the best interests of the citizens of the county and
those who wish to use and enjoy the waterways of the county to institute
certain restrictions on the use on certain public waters within the county.
The following regulations apply to all users of the specified waterbodies, with
the exception of law enforcement officials acting in their official capacity:
   A.   Lake Cascade: No Wake Safe Water Zone shall exist within three hundred
feet (300') of any Lake Cascade shoreline. Provided, however, the following
exceptions shall apply:
      1.    Lake Cascade, Boulder Creek Arm, Gold Fork Arm, Lake Fork Arm, and
the shoreline of Sugarloaf Island unless otherwise provided by law a No Wake
Safe Water Zone of 100 feet from docks, structures, and persons in the water.
      2.   Lake Cascade, Willow Creek: No Wake Zone - It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate, or allow to be operated, a vessel on the Willow Creek
area leading into Southwest Idaho Senior Citizens Recreation Association
Campground off the Boulder Creek Arm at any time in such a manner as to create
a wake.
   B.   North Fork Payette River, North Of Lake Cascade - No Motor Driven
Vessel Area: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or allow to be
operated, a motorized vessel at any time on the North Fork of Payette River
from its confluence with Lake Cascade at Fisherman's Bridge, upstream to the
dam at the south end of Payette Lake.
   C.   North Fork Payette River, North Of Payette Lake - No Motor Driven
Vessel Area: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or allow to be
operated, a motorized vessel at any time on the North Fork of Payette River
from its confluence with Payette Lake at North Beach, upstream to Upper Payette
Lake.
   D.   Payette Lake And Upper Payette Lake:
      1.   No Wake Safe Water Zone: A No Wake Safe Water Zone shall exist
within three hundred feet (300') of any Payette Lake shoreline. Provided,
however, the following exceptions shall apply:
         a.   Unless otherwise provided by state law, a no wake safe water zone
shall not exist off the shoreline of Channel Island, Cougar Island, and
Shellworth Island in Payette Lake.
         b.   Unless otherwise provided by state law, a no wake safe water zone
shall not exist off the shoreline in the waters of The Narrows.
      2.   The Valley County Board of County Commissioners may also adopt, by
resolution, after notice, maps and/or a series of maps that may be supplemental
to items already adopted within this ordinance and may be used as reference
materials.
   E.   Warm Lake - No Wake Zone During Certain Hours: It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate, or allow to be operated, any vessel on Warm Lake on any
day in such a manner as to create a wake between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-7: SUMMARY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OR CHANGES:
   A.   A summary of the rules and regulations governing the use of Valley
County Waterways as enacted shall be made available at convenient locations.
   B.   Any changes to this ordinance will be done through a properly noticed
public hearing process. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-8: POSTING OF RESTRICTED AREAS:
For any restricted area, Valley County and the Valley County Sheriff's Office
shall clearly post warning signs in the waterway or at public boat launch
ramps, as appropriate, that provide ample notice to a person entering the
restricted area. In areas where the waterway is over 60 feet deep, there shall
be no duty to place signs in the water. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-9: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall be enforced by any officer of the Valley County Sheriff's
Office. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
4-5-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate a watercraft, personal watercraft,
vessel or to swim, dive or waterski or enter into any other activity in a
manner contrary to the restrictions or prohibitions set forth in this section,
and to any Valley County Board of County Commissioner rules enacted pursuant to
this section.
   B.   Unless otherwise specified herein or by the Idaho Code, a violation of
any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall constitute an infraction and
subject the violator to a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00)
(Idaho Code Section 18.111).
   C.   If a violator is charged and convicted of a specific infraction, as
defined under this Ordinance, three times within a five year period, the fourth
such charge shall be deemed a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment in a
county jail not exceeding six (6) months or a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or both (Idaho Code §18-111 et. seq.). (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-
2020)
4-5-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The Valley County Board of County Commissioners retain the authority to issue
special use permits in order to relax the requirements of this ordinance. The
process to obtain such a permit is as follows:
   A.   Submit a request in writing using a standardized application form
available from either the Valley County Clerk or the Valley County Sheriff's
Office.
   B.   The request shall be submitted to the Valley County Clerk no later than
twenty-one (21) days in advance of the anticipated use date and shall be
scheduled on the next available Valley County Board of County Commissioner
agenda.
   C.   The Clerk shall place the request on the Valley County Board of County
Commissioners' agenda as an action item. The request shall be included in the
agenda packet compiled by the Valley County Clerk.
   D.   Public comments can be made in writing and forwarded to the Valley
County Clerk. (Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 6
POWERBOATING ON WARM LAKE
(Rep. by Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 7
NO WAKE ZONE, CERTAIN WATERS
(Rep. by Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 8
BIG PAYETTE LAKE WATERSHED REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 20-11, 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 9
4TH OF JULY ALCOHOL BAN
SECTION:
4-9-1: Title
4-9-2: Definition
4-9-3: Purpose And Reason
4-9-4: Standards
4-9-5: Penalty And Enforcement
4-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the 4TH OF JULY ALCOHOL BAN.
(Ord. 16-04, 6-6-2016)
4-9-2: DEFINITION:
4TH OF JULY HOLIDAY: The 4th Of July holiday typically includes July 3 and July
5, but also includes the weekend immediately before or after July 4. (Ord. 16-
04, 6-6-2016)
4-9-3: PURPOSE AND REASON:
   A.   Valley County has a public responsibility to ensure the health and
safety of visitors to Ponderosa State Park, which is in the jurisdiction of the
Valley County sheriff.
   B.   During the Fourth Of July holiday, crowds at the North Beach unit of
Ponderosa State Park have exceeded the reasonable capacity of the unit and have
become unmanageable, with numerous instances of intoxication and underage
drinking, resulting in threats to the health and safety of park visitors and to
recreationists on Payette Lake.
   C.   The possession and consumption of alcohol is a major contributing
factor to the unruliness of crowds at the North Beach unit during the Fourth Of
July holiday.
   D.   The county has an interest in managing such crowds by temporarily
banning the possession and consumption of alcohol at the North Beach unit of
Ponderosa State Park during the Fourth Of July holiday.
   E.   The Idaho department of parks and recreation has previously adopted an
interim rule pursuant to IDAPA 26.01.20.075.02 temporarily banning the
possession and consumption of alcohol at the North Beach unit during the Fourth
Of July holiday, in order to ensure the public safety, use, and enjoyment of
the North Beach unit (hereinafter "interim rule") and has recognized the
authority of the Valley County sheriff to enforce the same. (Ord. 16-04, 6-6-
2016)
4-9-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Valley County bans parking on the East Side Road and Warren Wagon Road
during the Fourth Of July holiday, except in those areas specifically
designated as available for parking by the county.
   B.   Valley County sheriff may assist the Idaho department of parks and
recreation with the enforcement of the interim rule.
   C.   Valley County temporarily bans the possession and consumption of
alcohol at the North Beach unit during the Fourth Of July holiday. (Ord. 16-04,
6-6-2016)
4-9-5: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   This chapter shall be published in summary form allowed by Idaho Code.
   C.   This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon passage
and publication as required by the laws of the state of Idaho.
   D.   Any ordinances or resolutions which are in conflict with this chapter
are hereby repealed, but only insofar as the conflict exists.
   E.   If any portion of this chapter should be found to be unconstitutional
or unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the chapter shall be applied
to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-04, 6-6-2016)
CHAPTER 10
PARCEL “L” SHOOTING PROHIBITION ORDINANCE
SECTION:
4-10-1:    Title
4-10-2:    Structure
4-10-3:    Purpose
4-10-4:    Authority
4-10-5:    Definitions
4-10-6:    Designation As A No Shooting Area/Discharge Of Firearm Prohibited
4-10-7:    Destruction Of Signs And/Or Markers Prohibited
4-10-8:    Penalty
4-10-1: TITLE:
   This Chapter shall be known as the Parcel “L” Shooting Prohibition
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17-24)
4-10-2: STRUCTURE:
   Titles and subtitles of this Chapter are only used for organization and
structure and the language in each paragraph of this Chapter should control
with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of the Board.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17- 24)
4-10-3: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for and further the health, safety
and welfare of the public by prohibiting the discharge of firearms at and/or
from a certain parcel, LR19N03E320005, which is owned by the State of Idaho,
within Valley County and commonly referred to as Parcel "L".
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17-24)
4-10-4: AUTHORITY:
   This Chapter is authorized by article 12, section 2, Idaho Constitution,
Idaho Code §§ 31-601, 31-714, 31-801, 31-828 and 18-3302J(3).
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17- 24)
4-10-5: DEFINITIONS:
   For purposes of this Chapter, words shall have the following meanings:
 
COUNTY:  Valley County, Idaho.
         The instrument from which a shot, projectile or other object may be discharged
FIREARM: by force of combustion, explosive, gas and/or mechanical means. This term
         includes crossbows and bows and arrows.
         The entirety of Parcel LR19N03E320005 comprising that area within NE4 NE4 S32
         T19N R3E more particularly described as shown below:
PARCEL   All of Section 3; all of Section 4; all of Section 9; W ½, W ½, NE, NWSE,
“L”: Section 10; NW ¼, parts SW ¼, Section 15; all of Section 16; N ½ of the N ½,
         SWNW, W ½ SW, parts SENE, parts SE ¼, Section 21; parts NW ¼, Section 22; parts
         N ½ of the N ½, SWNW, parts W ½ SW, Section 28; E ½, Section 29; N ½, SWNW,
         parts W ½ SW, Section 32; Township 19 North, Range 3 East.
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17-24)
4-10-6: DESIGNATION AS A NO SHOOTING AREA/DISCHARGE OF FIREARM PROHIBITED:
   Parcel "L" shall be designated as a "no shooting" area. Parcel "L" may be
posted and/or marked as a "no shooting" area. No person shall discharge any
firearm from or within Parcel "L". This prohibition does not apply to a peace
officer or county officials and/or employees acting within the course and scope
of their duties. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the
rights accorded to individual citizens under Idaho Code §§ 18-3302J(3)(a-e).
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17- 24)
4-10-7: DESTRUCTION OF SIGNS AND/OR MARKERS PROHIBITED:
   No person shall maliciously injure or destroy signs and/or markers referred
to in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17-24)
4-10-8: PENALTY:
   A violation of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable in accordance with Idaho Code § 18-113, as amended.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-17-24)
TITLE 5
COUNTY ROADS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE REGISTRATION, COUNTY FEE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Administration Fee Imposed
5-1-2: Fee
5-1-3: Payment Required
5-1-4: Penalty
5-1-1: ADMINISTRATION FEE IMPOSED:
In addition to the registration fee chargeable by the state of Idaho under
Idaho Code section 49-127, there is hereby imposed an additional administration
fee as established by section
1-4-5 of this code for each vehicle licensed through the county other than
boats, off road motorbikes, snowmobiles, and recreational vehicle stickers.
(Ord. 88-2, 6-27-1988; amd. Ord. 13-2, 6-24-2013)
5-1-2: FEE:
   A.   Annual Fee: The fee shall be an annual fee payable at the same time as
the current fee chargeable by the state. (Ord. 88-2, 6-27-1988; amd. Ord. 13-2,
6-24-2013)
   B.   Current Expense Fund: The revenues collected under the said fee shall
be payable to the current expense fund.
   C.   Alteration Of Fees: These fees may be altered by resolution. (Ord. 88-
2, 6-27-1988)
5-1-3: PAYMENT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle to allow said
vehicle to be driven upon any highway, street, or bridge or upon public or
private property open to the public of the county without payment of said fee.
(Ord. 88-2, 6-27-1988)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 88-2, 6-27-1988; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Basic Rule
5-2-2: Maximum Speed
5-2-3: Minimum Speed
5-2-4: Construction Zones
5-2-5: Penalty
5-2-1: BASIC RULE:
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive
at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection
or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding highway, and
when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by
reason of weather or highway conditions. (Ord. 97-1, 7-14-1997)
5-2-2: MAXIMUM SPEED:
Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with
section
5-2-1 of this chapter, the limits as hereinafter authorized shall be the
maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess
of the maximum limits:
   A.   Residential Neighborhood: Thirty five (35) miles per hour or a lesser
maximum speed as adopted in any residential neighborhood of any urban district.
   B.   Urban District: Thirty five (35) miles per hour or a lesser maximum
speed as adopted in any urban district.
   C.   Highway 55: Sixty five (65) miles per hour on State Highway 55 unless
otherwise posted.
   D.   Posted Speed Limits: Posted speed limits on certain county roads as
approved by the county commissioners on November 9, 1981.
   E.   All Other Locations: Fifty five (55) miles per hour in all other
locations. (Ord. 97-1, 7-14-1997)
5-2-3: MINIMUM SPEED:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law. (Ord. 97-1, 7-14-
1997)
5-2-4: CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the posted maximum speed limit
established for a highway construction danger zone when the construction danger
zone is designated by appropriately placed signs indicating: construction
danger zone; the reduced speed limit; and notice of enhanced penalty for
exceeding the reduced speed limit. (Ord. 97-1, 7-14-1997)
5-2-5: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction, the penalty for
which shall correspond with the payment schedule adopted by the Idaho supreme
court and published annually by the administrative director of the courts.
(Ord. 97-1, 7-14-1997)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING ON COUNTY ROADS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Parking Prohibited
5-3-3: Exceptions
5-3-4: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular traffic.
   INFRACTION: A civil public offense which is not punishable by incarceration
and for which there is no right to a trial by jury or right to court appointed
counsel and which is punishable by only a penalty not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and no imprisonment.
   PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE: The fact that a motor vehicle which is illegally
parked under this chapter is registered in the name of a person shall be
considered prima facie evidence that such person was in control of the vehicle
at the time of such parking.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a public highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of a sidewalk, berm or shoulder even
though such a sidewalk, berm or shoulder is used by persons riding bicycles or
other human powered vehicles.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 83-2, 1-10-1983)
5-3-2: PARKING PROHIBITED:
In the interest of providing for the public safety, snow removal, maintenance
and free movement of traffic at all times and promoting the health and
prosperity and improving the comfort and convenience of the county and its
inhabitants, it is hereby made unlawful for any owner or operator to stop,
park, or leave a vehicle or trailer, whether attended or unattended, upon the
public roadways and highways of the county. (Ord. 83-2, 1-10-1983)
5-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Authorized Emergency Vehicles: Authorized emergency vehicles operated
by any fire department or law enforcement agency of the state of Idaho, or any
political subdivision thereof, or municipality within, and emergency vehicles
or ambulances of any public utility or public service corporation.
   B.   Authorized Maintenance Vehicles: Authorized maintenance vehicles
operated by any agency or department of the state of Idaho or any political
subdivision thereof.
   C.   Disabled Vehicle: This chapter shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle or trailer in
such position. (Ord. 83-2, 1-10-1983)
5-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than thirty dollars ($30.00). (Ord. 83-2, 1-10-1983)
CHAPTER 4
STREET NAME, ADDRESS SYSTEM, AND ROAD DECLARATION
SECTION:
5-4-1: Short Title, Purpose And Applicability
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Approvals Required
5-4-4: Designation Of Road Names
5-4-5: Private Lanes
5-4-6: Subdivisions
5-4-7: Changes In Road Names And Public/Private Declaration
5-4-8: Road Address Numbering
5-4-9: Variances; Appeals
5-4-10: Fees
5-4-11: Violation; Penalty
5-4-1: SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be known as the VALLEY COUNTY UNIFORM STREET NAMING, ADDRESS
NUMBERING, AND PRIVATE/PUBLIC ROAD DECLARATION ORDINANCE and is adopted for the
purpose of providing a uniform street name and addressing grid system to aid
local emergency vehicles in the countywide 9-1-1 program, ensure, the proper
administration and enforcement of these systems; and, for common knowledge,
listing, administration, maintenance categorization, and signage for public and
private roads. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the unincorporated
areas of the county and to such incorporated cities as may adopt it or a
similar ordinance. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   BOARD: The board of Valley County commissioners.
   COMMISSION: The Valley County Planning and Zoning commission.
   COUNCIL: The city councils of the incorporated cities located in Valley
County.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street that provides a turnaround at its terminus
(court or place).
   OFFICIAL ROAD NAME LIST: The list containing the official road names within
the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county. Said list shall be
composed of all road names having been given official recognition by the board
and/or the councils, identify whether said road is a public or private road,
and shall be filed and maintained in the office of the planning and zoning
administrator or their designee. Roads listed in Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990 are
assumed to be public unless specifically identified as private or shown to be
private in the 2019 Official Road Name List.
   OFFICIAL ROAD NAME MAPS: The GIS maps showing all of the public and private
roads within the county with the official name shown thereon. The map(s) shall
have been approved by resolution of the board and shall be filed and maintained
in the office of the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designee.
   OFFICIAL RURAL ADDRESSING SYSTEM NUMBERING MAP: The maps showing all of the
roads within the county with the official address numbering grid system and
address number ranges. These maps shall be filed and maintained in the office
of the planning and zoning administrator or his designee.
   PLAT: A subdivision plat.
   PRIVATE ROAD: A private access not dedicated to or maintained by the county
and listed in the Official Road Name List.
   PUBLIC ROAD: A public access that is listed in the Official Road Name List
and has been deeded, dedicated, platted, recognized as prescriptive, common
law, or some other form accepted by the Board prior to this 2019 ordinance, or
a previous action or prescriptive use, provided, however, that the declaration
of public road status in this article is intended to reflect the current status
as established under the above-listed methods or other applicable law, and is
not intended to have the effect of independently establishing or changing
public road status, and shall not foreclose or supplant any rights of a party
with standing to address public road status under applicable law
   ROAD: A right of way, road, thoroughfare, alley or highway, which provides
vehicular and/or pedestrian access. Its designation includes the following
terms: avenue, boulevard, court, drive, place, road, parkway, lane, circle,
trail and way.
   SHALL: The requirement is mandatory.
   VALLEY COUNTY STREET NAME COMMITTEE: The advisory group on street naming
shall mean the persons appointed by the board. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. 2011
Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-3: APPROVALS REQUIRED:
   A.   Approval Of Road Name And/Or Road Address: Before any road is named or
any address numbers posted on any road, there shall be obtained from the
Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designee approval for the road name
and/or road address. Official road names shall be maintained on an official
road name map and official road name list filed in the office of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator or their designee.
   B.   Failure Of Planning And Zoning Administrator To Act: If, in any
instance, the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designee fails to act
or carry out his responsibilities according to the regulations contained
herein, the board may assume the duties of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator or designee, as herein specified. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd.
2011 Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-4: DESIGNATION OF ROAD NAMES:
   A.   Applicability; Official Road Name List: It is hereby established in the
unincorporated areas of the county that the following rules and regulations for
the naming of roads shall apply. The board shall, by resolution, establish the
official road name list. Thereafter, all new roads shall be established in
accordance with the standards hereinafter set forth. It is anticipated that the
incorporated cities will cooperate with standards and approval processes
established for the sake of public safety and operation of the 911 system.
   B.   Standards For Determining And Approving Road Dedications: The following
standards shall be used in determining and approving road names:
      1.   Duplications: There shall be no duplication of road names by sound
or spelling in the county. Differentiation shall not be by the addition of
suffixes, such as road, lane, etc.
      2.   Submittal Of Names For Future Road Dedications: Names for future
road dedications shall be submitted to the Valley County Planning and Zoning
Administrator or their designee for approval as requested by the person or
agency proposing the road dedication, subject to all provisions of this
chapter.
         a.   The proposed road name shall be "saved" for a period of two (2)
years before another person or agency can assume the name, unless withdrawn by
the applicant.
         b.   The proposed road name shall be sent for comment to the Assessor
and the 911 dispatch supervisor for consideration and comment.
      3.   Alignment: A proposed road shall be considered in general alignment
with an existing road if it is no farther than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from centerline to centerline. Where a proposed road is in the same alignment
as an existing road and is a continuation of that road, the name of the
existing road shall be maintained with the appropriate designation.
      4.   Connection With Two Differently Named Roads: Where a proposed road
or lane connects two (2) differently named roads located on the same alignment,
the planning and zoning administrator shall designate the name, giving
consideration to the length, collector status, period of usage and number of
residents affected.
      5.   Cul-De-Sac:
         a.   Less Than One Hundred Feet: A cul-de-sac (court or place) which
has an overall length of one hundred feet (100') or less (as measured from the
centerline of the principal road to the point of radius or centroid of the cul-
de-sac) shall carry the same name and the same designation of the road from
which it emerges. When a proposed court or place, which has an overall length
of one hundred feet (100') or less, is in alignment with a road, it shall carry
the same name of the roadway from which it emerges and the appropriate
designation.
         b.   More Than One Hundred Feet: A cul-de-sac (court or place) which
has an overall length of more than one hundred feet (100') (as measured from
the centerline of the principal road to the point of radius) shall carry a new
name, and must be named in accordance with the provisions herein.
      6.   Aligns With Existing Road: A proposed road which aligns with an
existing road shall carry the correct road designation (road, drive, avenue or
way), even though the existing road designation may be incorrect.
      7.   L Shaped Road: Both portions of an "L" shaped road shall carry the
same name if either leg is one hundred feet (100') or less in length; all
others shall carry two (2) names.
      8.   Obvious Change In Direction: If the Planning and Zoning
Administrator determines that a road makes a very obvious change in direction,
a new road name shall be assigned except as herein provided. Whenever this
situation occurs, the change of the road name shall occur at the intersection
rather than the point where the direction changes.
      9.   Limited To Ten Letters: In general, road names shall not be over ten
(10) letters in length including spaces, unless otherwise approved by the
board. All road names shall conform to this limitation except where existing
names are to be continued due to alignments.
      10.   Lack Of Compliance: Any lack of compliance for the initial maps and
road names adopted shall be permitted.
   C.   Suffixes: The following suffixes shall be used in designating road
names:
      1.   Avenue: A road generally running in a straight line, which provides
vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of
which has been accepted by the board.
      2.   Boulevard: A road which is a broad thoroughfare and provides
vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of
which has been accepted by the board and which is separated by a raised median
strip, usually landscaped.
      3.   Circle: A road which returns back to the road from which it
originates.
      4.   Court: A dead end cul-de-sac connecting to a road at one end only,
runs generally north or south, which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian
access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been accepted by the
board.
      5.   Drive: A road which is generally meandering one or more directions,
which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      6.   Lane: A road which runs generally east or west.
      7.   Parkway: A road which is generally meandering one or more
directions, which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent
properties, the dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      8.   Place: A dead end road connecting to a road at one end only, runs
generally east or west, which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      9.   Road:
         a.   Rural Areas: A designated road which extends through generally
rural areas, runs generally north or south, which provides vehicular and/or
pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been
accepted by the board.
         b.   Urban Areas: A road generally running in a straight line through
generally urban areas, which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      10.   Trail: A road which is generally meandering one or more directions,
which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      11.   Way: A road generally meandering in one or more directions, which
provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been accepted by the board.
      12.   Street Or Boulevard: The use of the term "Street" or "Boulevard"
shall be determined and approved by the board. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. 2011
Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-5: PRIVATE LANES:
   A.   Application For Private Road Names: Private roads shall be approved by
the board. Applications for private road names shall be made to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator or their designee. Road names must be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator. Officially accepted private roads shall be
listed on the official road name list with the accompanying designation "Pvt".
Private road names shall be in full compliance with this chapter.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance Of Signs: The Board shall install and
maintain private road signs within the public right of way and shall only
install signs for those private roads which intersect public roads. The
applicant will be charged a fee by the Board to manufacture and install said
signs. Required interior private road signs for mobile home courts, etc., shall
not be installed or maintained by the Board. In those cases, the applicant
shall obtain the road signs from private sources and shall be responsible for
their installation and maintenance. Private road signs shall conform to the
standards of subsection
5-4-7 E of this chapter.
   C.   Indication Of Private Road: All private roads shall have signs
indicating that it is a "private" road with "PVT" in two inch (2") letters
following the name in white letters on blue background. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990;
amd. 2011 Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-6: SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Proposed Road Names To Be Shown On Plats: Proposed subdivision road
names shall be shown on all final subdivision plats when submitted to the
county Planning and Zoning Commission for review. No final plat shall be
approved until the road names have been reviewed and approved by the Planning
and Zoning Administrator after being checked for possible duplications against
the official road name list. It is recommended road names be submitted with the
preliminary subdivision plat.
   B.   Half Roads: All half roads or partial roads shall be named in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Compliance Required Prior To Plat Approval: No plat shall be approved
by the board for recording until all provisions of this chapter have been met.
Approval of a final plat by the Planning and Zoning Administrator for filing
with the county recorder's office shall constitute acceptance of all road names
shown thereon.
   D.   Installation Of Road Name Signs: It shall be the responsibility of any
subdivider dedicating a new road to the board to finance the cost of installing
said road name signs at each and every designated location. Road name signs
shall conform to the county's sign specification requirements. The cost of the
signs shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator prior to
approval by the Board and the fee shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-
1990; amd. 2011 Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-7: CHANGES IN ROAD NAMES AND PUBLIC/PRIVATE DECLARATION:
   A.   Application: Where necessary or desirable, any person may make
application to the Planning and Zoning Administrator to change a road name, or
the Planning and Zoning Administrator may do so for reasons of duplication,
similar pronunciation or spelling or for other reasons relating to public
safety or convenience. The Board shall not change signs without compensation or
agreement from the applicant.
   B.   Changes Necessitated Due To Duplication: In the case of road name
changes necessitated due to duplication, similar pronunciation or spelling, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine the road name to be changed
and select the new name to be used. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
take into consideration the number of existing addresses on the roads in
question, the length of time each road has used the name in question, the date
of the original dedication of said road(s), each road's compliance with this
chapter and any other factor pertinent to resolving the similar pronunciation
or spelling. No road name(s) may be changed until the proposed names have been
checked against the official road name map and list.
   C.   Public Hearings: The board shall hold public hearings on this matter.
All property owners and residents having frontage on the affected road shall be
notified by mail under the following procedures:
      1.   The applicant shall submit a list of addresses of all dwellings
located on the affected road to the planning and zoning administrator or their
designee along with a fee as adopted by resolution.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designee shall
compare the submitted list to the land ownership records and mail notification
to all affected residents and property owners.
      3.   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall mail notification to
political subdivisions, other interested parties, and publish in the newspaper
a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
      4.   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall also place a sign on the
road at least one week prior to the hearing if it is reasonable to do so.
      5.   The board shall hold a public hearing on the road name change thirty
(30) to forty five (45) days after the receipt and acceptance of the road name
change application.
      6.   Failure of the planning and zoning administrator or his designee to
mail said notice to all residents and property owners in no way shall affect
the validity of such procedures; provided, that such failure shall have
occurred in good faith.
   D.   Manner Of Making Changes: All changes shall be made in such a manner as
to create the least possible inconvenience to residents and property owners in
the area.
      1.   No change shall become effective for at least fifteen (15) days
after official action by the board.
      2.   No change shall become effective until the road sign is changed or
installed.
      3.   All residents and property owners shall be mailed notification of
the board's final decision within seven (7) days of said action. Notice shall
state that the name change is not official until the sign is placed.
      4.   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make the change in the
Official Road Name List and on the Official Road Name Map when the change is
effective.
   E.   Location Of Signs: All road name signs shall be located in such a
manner as to be clearly visible to persons operating vehicles on the road. The
minimum letter size shall be four inches (4") in height and placed on a six
inch (6") x variable length blank. Existing names exceeding the ten (10) letter
length restriction shall use four inch (4") lettering, if deemed necessary by
the board. All signs shall be reflectorized or illuminated in addition to
having contrasting colors. All dedicated road signs shall be green, all private
road signs shall be blue, all lettering shall be white. All road name signs
shall have the names lettered on both sides and shall be positioned so that the
name is visible from both directions of the road. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd.
2011 Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-8: ROAD ADDRESS NUMBERING:
   A.   Conformance To Grid System Required; Standards For Developing Road Grid
System: All road address numbers shall conform to the grid system shown on the
official rural addressing system map kept on file at the office of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator or their designee. The general standards to be used in
developing a road address grid system are as follows:
      1.   Grid System Established: Sixteen (16) grid blocks shall be assigned
to each section and approximately three hundred thirty feet (330') between grid
lines shall be standard when establishing the grid system.
      2.   Standard Of Numbers Per Grid: A standard of approximately one
hundred (100) numbers per grid is hereby established.
      3.   Grid Systems Extended: The grid systems for Donnelly and Cascade
shall be extended to appropriate limits in order to eliminate duplication or
confusion of numbers on roads that extend into the county from the cities. The
grid system established for McCall shall be extended to the area of city impact
boundary or further if needed to avoid duplication or confusion.
      4.   Milepost System:
         a.   The milepost system shall be used for the remainder of the
county. Individuals whose residence or business is adjacent to State Highway 55
will be numbered from the milepost marker established by the state to the
nearest hundredth mile.
         b.   Point of reference for public roads and private roads will be the
beginning point of the road. The address for individuals located on these roads
will be to the nearest hundredth mile.
         c.   When individual lots in subdivisions are too small to address on
the mile marker system in hundredths of a mile, a smaller base unit may be used
in order to provide continuity in numbering the neighborhood.
   B.   Assignment Of Address Numbers:
      1.   Assigned By Planning And Zoning Administrator: All address numbers
located within the unincorporated and city impact areas of the county shall be
assigned by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designee. No other
person or organization, public or private, shall assign any address number to
any residence, business, industry or other use. (Addresses located inside the
city limits of Cascade, Donnelly, and McCall shall be issued by the appropriate
city designee.)
      2.   Guide In Assigning Numbers: The following shall be used as a guide
in assigning such address numbers by the planning and zoning administrator or
his designee:
         a.   Only one number shall be assigned to each business, dwelling unit
or other use.
         b.   Numbers shall be assigned to vacant lots within platted
subdivisions and shall be assigned in such a manner that adequate numbers are
reserved for possible future development or resubdivisions of such land.
      c.   All addresses shall be assigned on the road upon which the driveway
enters. When vehicular access is used from a point other than the road
frontage, the number shall be placed so as to be visible from the fronting side
of the building. Typically, the entrance to the property determines frontage.
      d.   All addresses located on the north and east sides of roads shall be
even numbers. All addresses on the south and west sides of roads shall be odd
numbers. These requirements may be varied in the case of meandering roads. When
a road has been determined to be running in predominately one direction, the
number shall not be changed if there is slight change in the road direction.
   C.   Placement On New And Existing Buildings: Approved numbers or addresses
shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be
plainly visible and legible from the road fronting the property. Said numbers
shall contrast with their background, be visible in the daytime and nighttime
from the road, and be at least three and one-half inches (31/2") in height or
as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Where the building is not
visible from the road, an additional address number shall be placed in a
location near the driveway that is plainly visible and legible from the road.
   D.   County One Unincorporated District: The county shall consist of one
unincorporated district with preference to existing roads, etc., for the areas
surrounding three (3) cities, i.e., Cascade, Donnelly, and McCall.
      1.   The unincorporated area shall have an initial point where all
addresses begin. That point shall be zero.
      2.   Each initial point will be the point where north, south, east and
west designations are established for that addressing system.
   E.   Existing Nonconforming Numbers: Existing address numbers (in 1990) not
in conformance with the official rural addressing map may be changed by the
board, giving official written notice at least ninety (90) days in advance of
the effective date of such change to property owners and those local agencies
affected by such changes. If the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines
an address number is not in conformance the address may be changed by notifying
the property owner, utilities, assessor's office, and other interested parties.
An effective date shall be part of the notification. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990;
amd. 2011 Code; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019; Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
5-4-9: VARIANCES; APPEALS:
   A.   Variances: The standards and requirements of these regulations may be
modified or varied by the board where the enforcement of the rules will result
in extraordinary individual hardship provided the public interest is served.
The applicant must specifically state the extraordinary hardship caused by the
regulations and prove said variance will not cause an adverse effect to the
health, safety and welfare of the community. In granting any such variance or
modification, the board may impose any conditions necessary in order to secure
substantial compliance with the general principles of this chapter.
   B.   Appeals:
      1. Right To Appeal: Appeals may be filed by any person(s), firm or
corporation from a decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their
designee to the board within fifteen (15) days after a decision has been made.
      2. Notice Of Appeal: The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall
be filed in triplicate. One copy of the appeal shall be filed with the board,
one copy with the county clerk and one copy with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      3. Specification Of Interpretative Errors Required: All appeals shall
specifically state where the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their
designee has erred in the interpretation of the regulations. Failure to specify
interpretative errors may be grounds for dismissal of the appeal by the board.
      4. Failure To Comply With Requirements Of Appeal: The failure of the
person(s) appealing to comply with the requirements for appeal shall be grounds
for dismissal of the appeal. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. 2011 Code; amd. Ord.
20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-10: FEES:
   A.   Fees Enumerated: Fees shall be required by the applicant or appellant
and are established by section
1-4-5 of this code.
   B.   Approved Appeal, Fee Refunded: In such cases where appeals are
approved, the appeal fee will be refunded. (Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 13-
2, 6-24-2013; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
5-4-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violations:
      1.   Erect Or Install Nonconforming Road Name Sign: No person shall erect
or install a road name sign which does not comply with this chapter.
      2.   Remove, Alter Or Deface: No person shall remove, alter, change or
otherwise deface a road name sign which exists in accordance with the official
rural addressing system map(s) and this chapter.
      3.   Failure To Continuously Display: Failure to continuously display the
approved number or address on a residence or business shall be a violation of
this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: Each violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor,
and for each day that it continues, each violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Each violation shall be punishable as provided in Idaho Code 18-113.
(Ord. 90-2, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 20-01, 11-25-2019)
CHAPTER 5
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Restrictions
5-5-3: Closed Public Roadways
5-5-4: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   OPERATOR: Each person who operates or is in physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER: Every person holding record title to a snowmobile and entitled to the
use or possession thereof, other than a lienholder or other person having a
security interest only.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any other
body or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, and regardless of the
degree of formal organization.
   PUBLIC ROADWAY: All portions of any road or street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for travel or parking of motor vehicles, which is controlled by
an authority other than the state highway department, and shall include county
roads. This definition does not attempt to identify controlling agency, imply
jurisdiction, or validate public use of non-public roads.
   SNOWMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle under two thousand ( 2,000) pounds’
unladen gross weight, designed primarily for travel on snow or ice or over
natural terrain, which may be steered by tracks, skis, or runners, and which is
not otherwise registered or licensed under laws of the state of Idaho.
   WHEELED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which travels on wheels, except fat-tired
bicycles. . (Ord. 85-1, 12-21-1984, eff. 1-9-1985; amd. Ord. 21-02, - -2020)
5-5-2: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   All Areas: The following restrictions apply to all areas of the county
including groomed trails and roadways. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive or operate any snowmobile:
      1.   Disruptive Manner: In a disruptive manner, or to harass, chase or
annoy any wild game animals or birds or domestic animals.
      2.   Lights: Without a lighted headlight and taillight, and/or strobe.
      3.   Carrying Passengers Or Weights: While carrying passengers or weights
in excess of the capacity recommended by the manufacturers thereof.
      4.   Valid Registration: Without current valid registration with the
current certificate of number and current registration sticker adhered to the
snowmobile or user in a visible location.
      5.   Braking Device: Without an adequate braking device which may be
operated by either hand or foot.
      6.   Muffler: Without an adequate muffler that limits noise to a maximum
of 94 db, except when used in conjunction with public racing events.
      7.   Without Regard To Property: Without regard for property, plant
growth, small trees, or treetops protruding through the snow, fences, etc.
   B.    Groomed Trails, Snowmobile Parking Lots, And Public Roadways: The
following restrictions apply to all groomed trails, snowmobile parking lots,
and public roadways. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate
any over the snow vehicle and/or park appurtenant vehicles in the following
manner:
      1.   Speed: In excess of the posted speed or forty-five (45) miles per
hour, whichever is less.
      2.   Single File: Other than single file on the extreme right hand side
of the roadway.
      3.   Tracked Vehicles: Tracked vehicles over 2,000 lbs. may be permitted
by the Board of County Commissioners on an annual basis for home owners,
renters, or employees of businesses beyond groomed trail heads.
      4.   Wheeled Vehicles and Trailers: Leaving wheeled vehicles or trailers
parked in a place or manner which will impede snow removal equipment or impede
the flow of orderly traffic, except in designated areas. Vehicles may be towed.
      5.   Overnight Parking: Parking of wheeled vehicles and trailers
overnight, or between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., is only allowed in
designated areas. Vehicles may be towed.
      6.   Exemption for Special Events: There shall be an exemption for
special events as it pertains to use of the parking lots. The special event
coordinator will work with the Parks and Recreation Director to manage parking
for the special event.
      7.   Guidelines may be established for individual parking lots and
enforced in accordance with this title.
      8.   Rental companies are encouraged to provide transportation for
customers to trailheads and parking lots so as not to overburden parking lots.
   C.   Public Roadways: The following restrictions apply to public roadways
where travel by wheeled vehicle or over the snow vehicles may be expected:
      1.   Towing: Towing any thing or person without a rigid towbar.
      2.   Wheeled Vehicles And Trailers: Leaving wheeled vehicles or trailers
parked in a place or manner which will impede snow removal equipment or impede
the flow of orderly traffic. (Ord. 85-1, 12-21-1984, eff. 1-9-1985; amd. Ord.
85-3, 11-25-1985, eff. 11-25-1985; Ord. 21-02, - -2020)
5-5-3: CLOSED PUBLIC ROADWAYS:
   A.   Operation Of Snowmobiles: When a public roadway has been declared
closed to operation of snowmobiles by order of the Board of County
Commissioners, such roadway shall be clearly marked as closed by appropriate
signs erected at the beginning and end of such closed roadway or portion
thereof.
   B.   Travel By Wheeled Vehicles: When a public roadway is closed to travel
by wheeled vehicles (groomed trails, etc.), by order of the Board of County
Commissioners, such roadway shall be clearly marked as closed by appropriate
signs erected at the beginning and end of such closed roadway or portion
thereof.
   C.   The following roads and trails shall be closed to travel by wheeled
vehicles and all other users except those that are allowed by IC 67-7101 and IC
67-7112, such as snowmobiles and fat-tired bicycles with required permits, from
first grooming, which is when there is approximately 18" of snow, until such
time as deemed safe for travel by the Valley County Road Superintendent or
April 30, whichever comes first. The closures shall begin at the trailheads of
Warren Wagon RD, No Business RD, High Valley RD (626), Clear Creek RD, East
Side Drive from Warren Wagon Rd to the IDL Brush Creek/Twah Creek RD (.4
miles), and “Green Gate” unless mitigation plans are approved by the Board of
County Commissioners. These roads are open for recreational access only during
the specified dates. At this time Anderson Creek RD is exempt from this
closure, but may not be in the future, as determined by the Board of County
Commissioners in a public hearing process.
   D.   If a wheeled vehicle gets stuck on a groomed trail or closed road the
operator is responsible for the removal of the vehicle to an open road and
costs of the removal and repair of the groomed trail, as follows:
      1.   Shall contact law enforcement by dialing 911. The Sheriff’s office
shall contact the Valley County Parks and Recreation Director who shall
determine if a tow company shall be engaged or if a snow groomer can be used.
      2.   The operator/owner shall sign a “Release of Liability” prior to
removal of the wheeled vehicle. The Valley County Parks and Recreation Director
or Sheriff shall provide the form.
      3.   Groomer operators are permitted to move vehicles out of the
travelled way to the nearest safe location.
      4.   Cost of removal of the vehicle and repair of the groomed trail shall
be an hourly rate of $200.00/hour, with a mobilization fee of $200.00. (Ord.
85-1, 12-21-1984, eff. 1-9-1985; amd. Ord. 21-02, - -2020)
5-5-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of
an “infraction” as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-111 and 18-113A.
Violations shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Vehicles may be towed at operator or owner’s expense.(Ord. 85-1, 12-21-
1984, eff. 1-9-1985; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 21-02, - -2020)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Air Compression Brakes
5-6-1: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
   A.   Use Of Air Compression Brakes Prohibited: The use of air compression
brakes (also known as “jake brakes”) by vehicles or trucks, as defined in Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 1, within Valley County from milepost 95 to milepost 99
(Smith’s Ferry); and, from approximately Milepost 136.8 at Elk Haven LN to the
southern boundary of the City of McCall, is hereby prohibited and shall be
unlawful, except under emergency circumstances where the use of air compression
brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or property.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be deemed guilty of an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Failure to satisfy judgment as ordered by the court
pursuant to this section shall be deemed contempt of court punishable as a
misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-1801. (Ord. 12-2, 6-18-2012; amd.
Ord. 21-04, 1-19-2021)
CHAPTER 7
RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
5-7-1: Approach Permit Required To Access Onto County Right Of Way
5-7-2: Right Of Way Permit
5-7-3: Penalties
5-7-1: APPROACH PERMIT REQUIRED TO ACCESS ONTO COUNTY RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   An approach permit in county right of way shall be required for all
driveways that access onto a public right of way.
   B.   The permit shall be issued by the road department within ten (10) days
of receipt.
   C.   The permit shall be issued prior to any work in the right of way.
   D.   The permit fee will be adopted by resolution.
   E.   The permit shall be required prior to issuance of building permits.
   F.   An example of the permit is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and is subject to change. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
5-7-2: RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT:
   A.   A right of way permit shall be issued for any work done in the Valley
County right of way.
   B.   Work could include, but not be limited to, road construction, utility
installation, boring for utilities, snow removal, etc.
   C.   Financial guarantees will be required.
   D.   Fees may be required and/or reimbursement of engineer fees.
   E.   All fees will be adopted by resolution.
   F.   An example of the permit is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and is subject to change. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; amd. Ord. 21-02, - -2020)
5-7-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties shall be as follows:
      1.   Each violation of this chapter, permit or variance shall be
considered a separate violation and each day of a violation shall be a separate
violation.
      2.   Each person, whether acting as the principal or agent, violating
this chapter or its regulations shall be responsible for the violations
criminally as set forth below.
      3.   Each violation of this chapter, permit or variance shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, punishable in
accordance with provisions of Idaho Code section 18-113.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Civil penalties shall be as follows:
      1.   Each violation of this chapter, permit or variance shall be
considered a separate violation and each day of a violation shall be a separate
violation.
      2.   Each person, whether acting as the principal or agent, violating
this chapter or its regulations shall be responsible for the violations civilly
as set forth in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Each violation of this chapter, permit or variance shall be
punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per day or per violation whichever is greater. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
CHAPTER 8
SINGLETRACK SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Short Title, Purpose And Applicability
5-8-2: Definitions
5-8-3: Where Permitted
5-8-4: Permitting Process
5-8-1: SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be known as the Valley County Singletrack Sidewalk Ordinance
and is adopted for the purpose of providing uniform singletrack sidewalks,
which also include and are commonly referred to as pathways or trailways. This
chapter shall apply to all right of ways under the jurisdiction of the Valley
County Board of County Commissioners in the unincorporated areas of Valley
County. (Ord. 20-04, 2-3-2020)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
 
PARTNER       May include Valley County Pathways, Central Idaho Mountain Bike Association,
ORGANIZATION: a Home Owner’s Association, Recreation District, club, or other non-profit.
SINGLETRACK   Narrow, multi-user, non-motorized (unless uniquely permitted), natural
SIDEWALK:     surface trails. Also referred to as pathways or trailways. (Ord. 20-04, 2-3-
              2020)
 
5-8-3: WHERE PERMITTED:
Singletrack sidewalks will be allowed in public right of ways that are under
the jurisdiction of the Valley County Board of Commissioners (Board) upon
establishment of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Board and Partner
Organization. (Ord. 20-04, 2-3-2020)
5-8-4: PERMITTING PROCESS:
   A.   Application: Partner Organization submits an application to the Valley
County Road Department. The application will contain the following information:
      1.   Map showing the section of roadway. The map shall be accompanied by
an aerial that shows the travelled way, the location of the pathway, property
lines, drainage features, driveways, mailboxes, bridges, culverts, etc.
      2.   Construction Plan. The construction plan shall describe the
timeline, construction materials, width of singletrack sidewalk, signage, and
engineering if needed so as not to create a hindrance to their operability of
the roadway drainage, traffic safety, or other concerns. The plan should
include a sample cross section for reference (see
Drawing 5-8, as follows).
      3.   Design Guidelines:
         a.   Trails will generally be 24 to 48 inches in width.
         b.   Should meander within the right-of-way around drainage, and
obstacles, etc.
         c.   Shall not inhibit roadway drainage or obstruct operability of the
road.
         d.   Constructed of a permeable natural surface but can be paved where
appropriate.
      4.   Maintenance Plan shall be documented in a Memorandum of
Understanding that lists the partnerships, signage when appropriate, and
seasonality. It shall clearly identify the role and responsibility of any
partner organizations responsible for trail maintenance and/or construction. It
shall include agreement that work shall comply with all local, state and
federal laws. It shall Include a severability clause due to unsafe conditions.
The MOU shall be considered the permit with approved signatures of all parties.
The MOU shall be kept at the Valley County Road Department and in the Valley
County Clerk’s records.
      5.   General liability insurance certificate assuring $1,000,000 coverage
for the duration of the construction and maintenance and continuing coverage
for the operation by any partner organization.
      6.   Certification that there will be no financial impact to tax payers,
unless expressly called for through a current or future recreation district or
other dedicated funding mechanism, and certifies there are no maintenance
issues that cannot be readily addressed.
      7.   Engineering may be required on a case by case basis for trails
crossing culverts, bridges or other areas determined by the Road Dept., or
requiring more than basic grading and reshaping of the top soil.
      8.   Allowed uses for each segment (application) shall be designated in
regards to E-bikes, powered wheelchairs, etc. based on widths and safety of
each trail segment.
      9.   The fee for processing of the application will be set by resolution.
   B.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined
by the Valley County Road Department, the Board shall hold a public hearing in
order to consider impacts and possible design considerations as identified by
adjoining property owners.
      1.   Notice shall be posted in the Star News at least 15 days prior to
the hearing, agendas shall be posted in each Post Office, utility companies
shall be noticed at least 15 days prior to the hearing, and public notice signs
shall be placed along the affected section of roadway (at a minimum at each end
of the singletrack sidewalk).
      2.   The hearing shall be set by the Board and the notice shall be done
by Valley County Planning and Zoning staff.
      3.   Upon approval by the Board, a MOU shall be signed in accordance with
5-8-4-A.4. (Ord. 20-04, 2-3-2020)
(Drawing 5-8) Sample cross section for reference:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1013.png]
TITLE 6
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES, REGULATIONS AND PERMITS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Short Title
6-1-2: Scope; Exemptions
6-1-3: Definitions
6-1-4: Code Adoption
6-1-5: Copies Of Codes On File
6-1-6: Chapter Amendments
6-1-7: References To City, City Council And Mayor
6-1-8: Amendments To Adopted Codes
6-1-9: Permit Requirements
6-1-10: Administration And Enforcement
6-1-11: Inspection
6-1-12: Limitation Of Responsibility
6-1-13: Board Of Appeals
6-1-14: Injunction Upon Affidavit Setting Out Nonconformity
6-1-15: Violations; Penalties
6-1-16: Civil Action
6-1-17: Severability
6-1-18: Appendix; Idaho Amendments To International Building And Energy Codes
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the VALLEY COUNTY BUILDING CODE. (Ord. 11-2, 4-
11-2011)
6-1-2: SCOPE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and
construction within the unincorporated areas of Valley County, except as
otherwise herein provided.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   Cities: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply within the
city of Cascade, the city of Donnelly, the city of McCall, and the impact area
for the city of McCall.
      2.   Chemical Processing; Mineral Extraction: Structures used primarily
for industrial chemical process purposes and for mineral extraction and mineral
processing purposes shall be exempt from this chapter, except for erection and
fabrication of new structures that provide space for human occupancy and
equipment as required therein to condition the building for personal comfort
and safety. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
      3.   Temporary Facilities:
         a.   Temporary facilities, as defined in section
 6-1-3 of this chapter, shall be exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-
2011; amd. 2011 Code)
         b.   Recreational vehicles, such as motor homes and travel trailers,
that are parked on property on their wheels, not set on a foundation, and
licensed for over the road travel, whether connected to utilities or not, and
whether under a structure or not, are temporary facilities for purposes of this
chapter.
      4.   Farm Outbuildings:
         a.   Farm outbuildings on a “farm” as defined herein shall be exempt
from this chapter, except as provided in subsection
6-1-8A of this chapter. Buildings for the purpose of human habitation, which
are located on said farm are not exempt from this chapter. The following
pertains specifically to farm outbuilding definitions and limitations:
            (1)   Designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay,
grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products and includes sheds,
barns, corrals or fences. This does not include storage building for personal
items not used for production on the farm.
            (2)   Cannot be converted into structures for other uses without
first obtaining a building permit that has gone through plan review for the new
type of occupancy and has gone through the same review criteria.
            (3)   Must obtain a siting permit so as to assure setbacks are met
and not being erected in violation of the floodplain overlay in Title 9 and/or
Title 11. Must pay a fee in accordance with subsection
6-1-8A of this chapter.
         b.   “Farm” shall mean a tract of land in excess of five (5) acres
wholly or in part classed in any of the land use categories 1 through 7 for
appraisal and taxing purposes by the Valley County assessor.
      5.   Address Numbers: Requirements of section 319.1, 2009 international
residential code, requiring address numbers be four inches (4") in height shall
be deleted and local ordinance 2-90, requiring address numbers be three and
one-half inches (31/2") in height shall be enforced 1 .
      6.   Tree Houses And Other Natural Structures: Tree houses, tree forts or
treesheds for use by children that will not be slept in and are under thirty
(30) sq. ft. shall be exempt from this code. No building permit will be issued
for structures for human habitation or storage that incorporate natural
vegetation such as trees, boulders, streams, straw, mud etc. This does not
include masonry that is part of the engineered structure. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-
2011; amd. Ord. 21-06, 5-17-2021; Ord. 2022-01, 1-3-2022, eff. 1-13-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  5-4-8C of this code.
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning:
   BUILDING: A combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, which
comprises a structure affording facilities or shelter for any use or occupancy,
and shall include a part or parts thereof and all equipment therein normally a
part of the structure.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person so designated by the board of county
commissioners.
   BUILDING SITE: Any lot, tract, parcel, or subdivision of land, either public
or private, upon which a building is placed or is to be placed.
   CLOSED CONSTRUCTION: Any building component, assembly or system manufactured
in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be
inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage
or destruction.
   COMMERCIAL COACH: A factory assembled structure equipped with the necessary
service connections and made so as to be readily movable, and a unit on its own
running gear and originally designed to be used either as a dwelling unit or
other use without a permanent foundation.
   CONSTRUCTION: The erection, fabrication, reconstruction, demolition,
alteration, conversion, repair of a building, or the installation of equipment
therein normally a part of the structure.
   ENGINEERING DESIGN: As used in section R301.1.3 of the 2009 international
residential code, shall mean plans bearing the seal of a state of Idaho
licensed architect or engineer and/or calculations or specifications which
verify compliance with the international codes.
   HUMAN HABITATION: A space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, storage or utility space and similar
areas are not considered space for human habitation.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Valley County.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition in Idaho Code section 39-4105. Snow loads
for manufactured homes are one hundred twenty (120) to one hundred fifty (150)
pounds per square foot live load depending on location of placement. If snow
loading is not met by manufacturer, a ramada (snow roof cover) may be placed
over the manufactured home to meet snow load requirements. A letter is required
for snow maintenance in RV or trailer parks before a manufactured home is
placed. This letter shall be provided before issuance of the permit.
   MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a
manufactured home, which is constructed according to standards contained in the
international building code, as adopted, or any amendments thereto, which is of
closed construction and is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or
assembled at a place other than the building site.
   PERSON: A natural person, corporation, partnership, trust, society, club,
association, or other organization.
   ROOF STRUCTURES: A system that includes the roof, soffits, eaves, fasciae,
and vents.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: All wires, cables, equipment, apparatus or
other installations necessary to furnish service, by which there is
accomplished or may be accomplished, the sending or receiving of information,
data, message writing signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds, by aid
of such wires, cables, equipment, apparatus or other installations, but shall
not include the habitable structure in which such telecommunications facilities
are housed.
   TEMPORARY FACILITY: A structure designed and constructed to service actual
construction projects and which is completely removed upon completion of the
project. This structure shall not be a place of employment or human habitation,
and does not include those temporary structures used for the protection of the
public around and in conjunction with construction work.
   TINY HOUSE: A dwelling which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in
floor area excluding lofts.
   TREE HOUSE, TREE FORT or TREESHED: A platform or building constructed
around, next to or among the trunk or branches of one (1) or more mature trees
while above ground. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 13-3, 6-24-
2013; Ord. 18-01, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 2022-01, 1-3-2022, eff. 1-13-
2022)
6-1-4: CODE ADOPTION:
   A.   Adoption: The approved editions of the following nationally recognized
codes, and referenced statutes, as adopted by the State of Idaho and the Idaho
Building Code Board, are hereby adopted:
      1.   International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the
International Code Council.
      2.   International Residential Code, parts I through IV and IX, including
appendices G, J, and L, 2012; and, appendix Q - Tiny Houses, 2017 published by
the International Code Council.
      3.   International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 with 2012 amendments
for residential portion, a copyrighted work owned by the International Code
Council, Inc. (Ord. 18-01, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
      4.   Idaho Code title 44, chapter 22 and section 44-2501 et seq.,
relating to manufactured homes.
      5.   Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997, published
by the International Conference of Building Officials.
      6.   American Standard Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities
Accessible to, and Usable by, the Physically Handicapped, ANSI A117.1-1992 (R
1971), published by the American National Standards Institute.
      7.   University of Idaho publication "Ground and Roof Snow Loads for
Idaho", 1986.
      8.   Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and Moving Walks, ANSI A17.1-
1996, and ANSI A17.1b-1973, published by the American National Standards
Institute. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
      9.   International Fire Code, 2015, published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., adopted by the Idaho Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 18-01, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
      10.   "Technical Guidance Manual for Individual and Subsurface Sewage
Disposal", published by the State of Idaho Department of Health and Welfare,
dated May 6, 1993, only as it relates to the construction of privy buildings.
      11.   Idaho Code title 54, chapter 52, relating to contractors
registration.
   B.   Successive Versions Adopted: The adopted versions of the foregoing
codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they
are adopted or approved by the Idaho Building Code Board and the State of
Idaho, effective on the date any such codes are made effective by the Idaho
Building Code Board and the State of Idaho. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-5: COPIES OF CODES ON FILE:
Not less than one copy of each of the codes enumerated in section
 6-1-4 of this chapter shall be available for use and examination by the public
in the office of the building official. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-6: CHAPTER AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this chapter shall be in accordance with Idaho Code section 39-
4116. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-7: REFERENCES TO CITY, CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR:
Whenever the word "City" is referred to and used in the adopted codes, it shall
be deemed to read "County", and whenever "Mayor" or "City Council" may be
referred to, the same shall be deemed to read "Board of County Commissioners".
(Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-8: AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES:
The following amendments shall be made to the 2015 International Building Code,
the 2012 International Residential Code, and/or all other documents adopted
herein: (Ord. 18-01, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
   A.   Fees - the following fees shall be adopted by resolution of the Board
of County Commissioners.
      1.   There will be a charge for inspections outside of normal business
hours on a per hour basis (minimum charge, 2 hours).
      2.   Reinspection fees for multiple visits (same inspection) on a per
hour basis.
      3.   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated such as
courtesy or other miscellaneous fees shall be the same as a reinspection fee.
      4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions
to plan would be an additional charge on a per hour.
      5.   Use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both, will be assessed fees based on actual costs or a percentage of per fee
along with administrative and overhead costs.
      6.   An application for a permit for construction of an agricultural
structure shall be filed with a fixed fee per structure, but no structural
review or inspection of construction will be required. Permits shall be
approved by planning and zoning in accordance with section
9-1-10, “Definitions”, of this code.
      7.   An application for a permit for construction of an outbuilding and
one-story detached accessory buildings used as a toolshed, storage building, or
similar use that does not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in floor area,
the rafter span is not wider than twenty feet (20'), and does not provide for
human occupancy shall be filed with a fixed fee per structure, but no
structural review or inspection of construction will be required. This includes
any structure over three (3') feet in height; the 2018 IRC Section R105.2.1
will not apply.
      8.   An application for a permit to locate an existing building regulated
by the international residential code, including manufactured homes, and
commercial coaches, on a new site within this jurisdiction shall be filed with
a set fee per structure, and with two (2) copies of a site plan and foundation
plan. Inspection of construction will be required, and foundation footings and
walls shall be inspected. An additional fee shall be charged for a permanent
perimeter foundation. Structural plans are required for modular buildings.
      9.   A Plan Review Fee shall be charged based upon a percentage of the
building permit fee. The fee will be waived for agricultural and general
purpose utility structures listed in
6-1-8.A.7 (above), or as determined
   B.   Plans And Specifications:
      1.   Footings: Bottom of footing shall extend to at least a depth of
twenty four inches (24") below finished grade. Bedrock may be less and poor
soils may require a deeper footing depth.
      2.   Concrete Footings: Concrete footings shall have at least two (2)
reinforcing bars of one-half inch (½") diameter placed at not more than four
feet (4') on center properly anchored (tied) in the footing and at least two
(2) reinforcing bars of one-half inch (½") diameter placed continuously
longitudinally at the center of the wall thickness, one within two (2) to six
inches (6") of the top of the wall and one within two (2) to six inches (6") of
the bottom of the wall. The bars may be deformed to avoid utility lines and
vents. Walls in excess of four feet (4') high shall be reinforced in accordance
with provisions of the IRC and IBC.
   C.   Snow Loads and Seismic Calculations: Section 1607 of the international
building code and international residential code shall be amended by adding the
following as determined by the Building Official and Board of County
Commissioners based upon the procedure provided in the 1986 University Of Idaho
snow load study publication “Ground And Roof Snow Loads For Idaho”, and the
Valley County snow load zone map:
   The design snow load for Valley County shall be designated as one hundred
twenty (120) to one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square foot depending on
location of structure, including manufactured homes. For the Pistol Creek and
Trails End areas, the designated snow load shall be sixty (60) pound per square
foot live load.
   Manufactured homes snow loads are addressed in the definition of
“manufactured home” in section
6-1-3 of this chapter.
   Seismic calculations shall be thirty five percent (35%) of the roof snow
load.
   Commercial, public use, assembly, and similar buildings or occupancies shall
be designed for the “basic design snow load” and the plans shall bear the stamp
of an Idaho licensed architect or engineer.
   Single family dwellings, garages, utility, and similar buildings regulated
by the IBC and IRC shall be designed for not less than the minimum normal
design snow load.
   Exceptions: The building official may require a different snow load in
certain locations of Valley County known to experience heavier snowfalls.
   D.   Other General Permits with fees that will be set by the Board of County
Commissioners:
      1.   Fence Permit Required: A building permit for fences over six (6')
feet in height shall be required. Engineering may be required by the Valley
County Building Official. The fence shall comply with setbacks in accordance
with Title 9 of the Valley County Code. The 2018 IRC Section R105.2.2 will not
apply.
      2.   Demolition Permits: A demolition permit is required to remove
existing structures.
      3.   Woodstove Inserts: A Woodstove Insert permit is required.4) Solar
Panels: Solar panels placed on existing structures must obtain a new building
permit that will go through plan review and inspections. Ground-mounted solar
panels must comply with Title 9 of the Valley County Code.
   E.   Privy Buildings: The building official may issue permits for privy
buildings upon application when the proposed building and site meet the
requirements of the Central District Health and Valley County Planning and
Zoning Commission. Construction shall be in accordance with “privy policy”,
prepared by Valley County and the “Technical Guidance Manual For Individual And
Subsurface Sewage Disposal”, as adopted in subsection
6-1-4A10 of this chapter. The minimum permit fee will be set by resolution.
   F.   Building And Energy Code: Idaho amendments to the international
building and energy codes, effective January 1, 2011; see appendix, section
6-1-18 of this chapter.
   G.   Materials For Roof Structures:
   Class B or higher is required for all roofs requiring construction plan
submittals. Exception: All wood shake shingles must be rated class A.
   The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total roof area is replaced within any one year period,
the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied
in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing
structure, shall be a fire retardant roof covering that is at least class B.
Exception: Wood shake shingles must rate class A.
   Eaves, soffits and fasciae should be protected by materials approved for a
minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction. Roof and attic vents
should resist the intrusion of flame and embers into the attic.
   H.   Refunds: Refunds for building permits fees that have not been started
may be approved by the Board of County Commissioners. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011;
amd. Ord. 13-3, 6-24-2013; Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; Ord. 21-06, 5-17-2021)
6-1-9: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-
partnership, association or corporation to do, or cause, or allow to be done,
after the effective date hereof, whether acting as principal, agent or
employee, any construction, improvement, extension, alteration or demolition of
any building, residence or structure, coming under the purview of this chapter,
in Valley County, without first procuring a permit authorizing such work to be
done. A violation fee may be required by the Building Official as set by
resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
   B.   Evidence Of Approved Sewer System: Prior to issuance of a building
permit for a building proposed to be used for human habitation, the building
official shall require evidence of approval of the sanitary sewer system by the
Central District Health or sewer district.
   C.   Compliance With Zoning And Site Development Regulations: No building
permit shall be issued or authorized unless the work or project is in
compliance with zoning and/or site development ordinances of the county,
provided such zoning and/or site development is not in conflict with the codes
herein enumerated. A building permit will be required for placement of any
structure over three (3') feet in height.
   D.   Energizing Electrical And Other Utility Services; Gas Check:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect
or energize any electrical installation or any other utility service to any
building or structure coming under the provisions of this chapter unless the
necessary permit covering such installation has been issued.
      2.   The building official will not approve a final inspection or issue a
certificate of occupancy for any building containing a liquefied petroleum gas
fixture or appliance without first receiving evidence that a gas check has been
completed and approved by a qualified inspector. The gas check will include
observation of a pressure test and an inspection of all gas piping, valves,
controls, and appurtenances required by applicable codes for a safe, complete
and workable installation. Qualified inspectors are those who are licensed
plumbers with the state of Idaho or are certified installers by a certification
program recognized in the industry and by the building official.
      3.   The gas check certification is the sole responsibility of the
property owner or his agent including providing evidence of the approval to the
building official.
   E.   Approach Permit:
      1.   An approach permit shall be required from the road department prior
to the issuance of building permits for any structures on lots that have not
previously had buildings constructed and require access onto a public right of
way.
      2.   Driveways should not exceed eight percent (8%) grade and have a
minimum of a fifty foot (50') plus/minus four percent (±4%) runout. If this is
not achievable on lots platted prior to August 28, 2013, then the road
superintendent will work with the applicant on a safe approach. If a safe
approach cannot be constructed, the applicant may need to obtain an easement to
a public or private road across other property. On lots platted after August
28, 2013, the developer shall assure that all lots can achieve this standard or
apply for a variance as part of the conditional use permit/preliminary platting
process.
   F.   Expiration, Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Each permit issued under this chapter shall expire if the work or
building authorized by the permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days from the permit date, or if the work or building authorized by the
permit once commenced is thereafter suspended or abandoned for a period of
three hundred sixty five (365) days. Suspended or abandoned work, for which the
original permit has expired, shall be recommenced only after the issuance of a
new permit therefor.
      2.   A building permit, issued by mistake, issued on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or issued in violation of any statute,
regulation, or provision of this code may be suspended or revoked by written
notice to the permittee.
      3.   The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one
extension of time for one year. After that one year extension another extension
can only be granted by the Board of County Commissioners. The extensions shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   G.   FAA Form 7460-1 Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration Within
Vicinity of Airports:
      1.   All building permits within approximately three (3) miles of the
Cascade, Donnelly, and McCall airport runways will complete the Notice Criteria
Tool - Federal Aviation Administration.
      2.   If the Notice Criteria Tool identifies that an FAA Form 7460-
1 Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration is not required, print the form
and submit the copy with the building permit.
      3.   If the Notice Criteria Tool identifies that an FAA Form 7460-
1 Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration is required, you must file with
the FAA. However, any structure that will be shielded by existing structures of
a permanent and substantial nature or by natural terrain or topographic
features of equal or greater height, or will be located in the congested area
of a city, town, or settlement where the shielded structure will not adversely
affect safety in air navigation need not apply, as determined by the Valley
County Building Official or their designee.
      4.   Valley County Building Department can assist with determinations and
contact information. Valley County has developed a tool to determine latitude,
longitude, and elevation, which can be found on the Valley County Website, and
is named FAA Criteria Data Finder in the Building Department section.
   H.   Shipping Containers are allowed with a placement permit and must meet
setbacks. However, they shall be painted or have siding that is a color that
blends with the natural terrain or other structures on the property. The
structure shall be ready for inspection within two months of placement.
Shipping Containers are also referred to as a CONEX box and defined as a large,
reusable steel box designed to protect goods. There shall be no commercial
advertising or signage on the side of a container.
(Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; amd. Ord. 21-06, 5-17-2021; Ord. 2023-01, 7-10-2023)
6-1-10: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Valley County Board of Commissioners shall establish a building department
and employ a building official and such persons to administrate and implement
the application and inspection functions required by the international building
code, and the international residential code, along with local and state
agencies. The building department shall collect the building permit fee and
issue the building permits after approval of the complete application by the
building official. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011; amd. Ord. 21-06, 5-17-2021)
6-1-11: INSPECTION:
   A.   Building Official/Inspector: It shall be the duty of the building
department to inspect the construction of all buildings and structures covered
by this chapter for compliance with the design plans and for conformity to the
codes.
   B.   Notify Building Department; Times For Inspection: It shall be the duty
of a permit holder to notify the building department that the building or site
is ready for inspection. The type of inspection and the time shall be
stipulated in the notification. The stipulated time shall be at least twenty
four (24) hours from the time of notification. The building official/inspector
will normally make the inspection prior to the time stipulated, but if no
inspection is made within twenty four (24) hours after the stipulated time,
work will be allowed to proceed for footing and foundation work only. If no
inspection is made within forty eight (48) hours after the stipulated time,
work will be allowed to proceed for frame inspections only. The time
limitations herein are exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
   C.   Waive Inspections: The building official may waive any inspection in
writing. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-12: LIMITATION OF RESPONSIBILITY:
Neither an approval nor a permit granted shall constitute permission or
authority, or be interpreted as a waiver for violation of any statute,
ordinance or regulation. Neither the county nor its officers or employees shall
assume liability for structural or construction defects through the
administration or enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-13: BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   Board Established: The board of county commissioners establishes itself
as the board of appeals. The purpose, conduct, and function of this board shall
be as described in section 113 of the 2009 international building code. This
board will not act upon matters pertaining to electrical, plumbing, and
mechanical questions or any other matters reserved to the state, as provided by
Idaho Code title 39, chapter 41.
   B.   Hearings Before Board: Hearings before this board of appeals shall be
public and shall be conducted in a quasi-judicial manner operating within the
same time limits imposed upon the state board of appeals as per Idaho Code
sections 39-4107(3) and 39-4120, and employing the rules of evidence. Attorneys
may represent petitioners, but are not required. All proceedings shall be
recorded and said recordings shall be kept and made permanent.
   C.   Conflict Of Interest: If a member of the board should find that acting
on a particular hearing before said board would result in a conflict of
interest, such member must absent him/herself from said hearings. Said member
must abstain from making any comments or statements or doing any other thing
that would in any manner influence the other members of the board.
   D.   Findings: Findings by the board shall be explicit and shall state the
ruling and the reasons for said decision by delineating the findings of fact
and conclusions of law. Signed copies of the findings should be sent to all
parties to the action. The board shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appropriate enforcement official and agency, the appellant, and
the state director of labor and industrial services within ten (10) working
days of the close of the hearing. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
   E.   Appeals From Board Decisions:
      1.   Appeals from the local board of appeals herein established shall be
filed within ten (10) days after mailing of notice of a decision by the local
appeals board. The appeal will be filed and heard as empowered by Idaho Code
section 39-4120 (state board of appeals). Appeals shall be brought before the
said state board of appeals by persons affected by any code, rule, regulation
or decision pursuant to Idaho Code sections 39-4101 through 39-4129, provided
such appeals shall be heard only after the appellant has received a decision
from the local appeals board, if any, as provided for in Idaho Code section 39-
4120. Final decisions by the state board of appeals, other than code
interpretations, are reviewable upon appeal to the district court in the county
wherein the person praying for the appeal is a resident, or in Valley County
and shall be heard de novo, as provided by state law. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011;
amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   Appeals of board decisions shall be in such form and manner as
provided by the Idaho rules of civil procedure. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-14: INJUNCTION UPON AFFIDAVIT SETTING OUT NONCONFORMITY:
The county building department may obtain from a district court having
jurisdiction, a temporary injunction enjoining the construction of a building
or installation of manufactured buildings on a building site upon affidavit of
the department that such building does not conform to the building site or
requirements of this chapter or to the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this chapter or any other act of the state of Idaho relating to building
construction. The affidavit must set forth such violations in detail. The
injunction may be made permanent, in the discretion of the court. (Ord. 11-2,
4-11-2011)
6-1-15: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
or who violates any provision of the codes enumerated herein is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
   B.   Each Building/Day Separate Offense: A separate violation is deemed to
have occurred with respect to each building not in compliance with this
chapter. Each day such violation continues is considered a separate offense.
   C.   Failure To Obtain Permit: Whenever the building official determines
that work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, he shall, in addition to the procedures outlined in
section 114 of the adopted international building code, notify the property
owner in writing to inform him of the date of the inspection, the location of
the work, the nature of the violation, the remedy for the violation, and the
amount of the special investigation fee. The special investigation fee may be
one hundred dollars ($100.00), or the amount of the building permit fee,
whichever is greater. Failure to make application for the required building
permit or failure to pay the special investigation fee within ten (10) days
after receipt of said notice shall each constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-16: CIVIL ACTION:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available, any person in an individual
capacity, damaged as a result of a violation of this chapter, or the codes
enumerated herein or promulgated pursuant to this chapter, has a cause of
action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person who committed
the violation, and if such damaged person prevails, he shall be entitled to a
reasonable attorney fee to be determined by the court, together with court
cost. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter, or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter,
or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances, shall be held
invalid, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of such provision to
persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall
not be affected thereby. (Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
6-1-18: APPENDIX; IDAHO AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING AND ENERGY CODES 1
:
   A.   International Residential Code, 2009 Edition (IDAPA 07.03.01):
      R109.1.3: Delete IRC section R109.1.3 and replace with the following:
      Floodplain inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as
established by table R301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor, including
basement, the building official is authorized to require submission of
documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement,
required in section R322. (3-29-10)
      R302.1:   IRC table R302.1 Exterior Walls. Delete the figures contained
in the last column of the table under the heading "Minimum Fire Separation
Distance", and replace with the following:
         Minimum Fire Separation Distance
         Walls (fire-resistance rated): < 3 feet
         Walls (not fire-resistance rated): 3 feet
         Projections (fire-resistance rated): < 3 feet
         Projections (not fire-resistance rated): 3 feet
      R302.2: Delete the exception contained under IRC section R302.2,
Townhouses, and replace with the following:
         Exception: A common one-hour or two-hour fire- resistance rated wall
assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for
townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts
or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire
exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior
walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical
outlet boxes shall be in accordance with section R302.4.
      R313.1: Delete the exception contained under IRC section R313.1,
Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, and replace with the following:
         Exception: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be
required in townhouses where a two-hour fire-resistance rated wall is installed
between dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing
townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system
installed.
      R313.2: Delete IRC section R313.2.
      R322.1.10: Delete IRC section R322.1.10.
      R322.2.2: Delete IRC section R322.2.2 paragraph 2.2, and replace with the
following:
      The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch
(645 mm2) for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area, or the opening
shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that
the design and installation of the openings will provide for equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. (3-29-10)
   B.   Exception; Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: All single-family homes
and multiple-family dwellings up to two (2) units are exempted from the
provisions of the international fire code, the international building code and
the international residential code that require such dwellings to have
automatic fire sprinkler systems installed. Nothing prevents any person from
voluntarily installing an automatic fire sprinkler system in any residential
dwelling. (Idaho Code § 39-4116(3))
(Ord. 11-2, 4-11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. This section effective January 1, 2011.
CHAPTER 2
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
6-2-1: Short Title
6-2-2: Purpose
6-2-3: Applicability
6-2-4: Definitions
6-2-5: Performance Standards
6-2-6: Violations And Legal Actions
6-2-7: Figures
6-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VALLEY COUNTY LIGHTING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
6-2-2: PURPOSE:
The general purpose is to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare, the quality of life, and the ability to view the night sky, by
establishing regulations and a process for review of exterior lighting. This
chapter establishes standards for exterior lighting in order to accomplish the
following:
   A.   Provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians;
   B.   Protect against direct glare and excessive lighting;
   C.   Ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote
safety and security;
   D.   Prevent light trespass in all areas of the county;
   E.   Protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky;
   F.   Allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures;
   G.   Provide lighting guidelines;
   H.   Provide assistance to property owners and occupants in bringing
nonconforming lighting into conformance with this chapter; and
   I.   To work with other jurisdictions within the county to meet the purposes
of this chapter. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
6-2-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   New Lighting: All exterior lighting installed after the effective date
hereof shall conform to the standards established by this chapter.
   B.   Existing Lighting: All existing exterior lighting installed before the
effective date hereof shall be brought into conformance with this chapter
within the following time periods:
      1.   All existing exterior lighting located on a subject property that is
part of an application for design review approval, a conditional use permit,
subdivision approval, or a building permit is required to be brought into
conformance before issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final inspection or
final plat recordation.
      2.   All other existing exterior lighting on property used for commercial
purposes that is not in conformance shall be brought into conformance with this
chapter within thirty six (36) months from the date of adoption hereof.
Grandfathered signs are exempt from this requirement.
      3.   All existing exterior lighting on property used for residential,
institutional, public and semipublic uses are required to be brought into
conformance within thirty six (36) months from the date of adoption hereof.
(Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
6-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application:
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Valley County building official.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed,
located or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outdoors. Lights
that are indoors that are intended to light something outside are considered
exterior lighting for the purpose of this chapter. Exterior lighting does not
include emergency or warning lights on vehicles.
   GLARE: Stray, unshielded light striking the eye that may result in:
   A.   Nuisance or annoyance glare such as light shining into a window;
   B.   Discomfort glare such as bright light causing squinting of the eyes;
   C.   Disabling glare such as bright light reducing the ability of the eyes
to see into shadows; or
   D.   Reduction of visual performance.
   KELVIN: Temperature scale, in this context used to describe color of light
(see section
6-2-7, "Figures", of this chapter).
   LED: Light emitting diode.
   LIGHT COLOR: Color temperature specified in degrees Kelvin.
   LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not
limited to, discomfort to the eye or diminished vision due to glare, light
trespass, uplighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the eye, or any manmade
light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling on the property of another or the public right
of way when it is not required to do so.
   SKYGLOW: The overhead glow from light emitted sideways and upward. Skyglow
is caused by the reflection and scattering of light by dust, water vapor and
other particles suspended in the atmosphere. Skyglow reduces one's ability to
view the night sky. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004; amd. Ord. 17-02, 2-13-2017)
6-2-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: These regulations are intended to establish standards that
ensure minimal light pollution, reduce glare, increase energy conservation, and
maintain the quality of the county's physical and aesthetic character.
   B.   Applicability: These standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting
including, but not limited to, search, spot, or flood lights for:
      1.   Buildings and structures;
      2.   Recreational areas;
      3.   Parking lot lighting;
      4.   Landscape lighting;
      5.   Signage.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   All exterior lighting shall be designed, located and lamped in order
to prevent:
         a.   Overlighting or excessive lighting;
         b.   Energy waste;
         c.   Glare;
         d.   Light trespass;
         e.   Skyglow.
      2.   All nonessential exterior commercial and residential lighting is
encouraged to be turned off after business hours and/or when not in use. Lights
on a timer are encouraged. Sensor activated lights are encouraged to replace
existing lighting that is desired for security purposes.
      3.   Recreational facilities such as baseball, softball, soccer,
volleyball or football fields; driving ranges; outdoor arenas and
amphitheaters; ski trails; or other outdoor field recreation facilities are
exempt from height restrictions provided the lights are used only while the
field is in use.
      4.   All other outdoor lighting shall meet the following standards:
         a.   The height of any light fixture or illumination source shall not
exceed thirty feet (30').
         b.   All lighting or illumination units or sources shall be hooded or
shielded in a downward direction so they do not produce glare or cause light
trespass on any adjacent lot or real property as depicted in section
6-2-7 of this chapter.
         c.   Lights or illumination units shall not direct light, either
directly or through a reflecting device, upon any adjacent lot or real
property. Lighting should not illuminate the sky or reflect off adjacent water
bodies or produce glare or cause light trespass on any adjacent lot or real
property.
         d.   External lighting of the face of signs shall be placed above the
sign and shielded or below the sign and directed in a manner that the
illumination source shall not be visible from any adjacent lot or real
property. Sign lighting shall not reflect or glare beyond the face of the sign
and immediately below the sign. See title 9, chapter 7 of this code for further
regulation of signs.
         e.   All outdoor lights used for parking areas, walkways, and similar
uses mounted on poles eight feet (8') or greater in height shall be directed
downward. The light source shall be shielded so that it will not produce glare
or cause light trespass on any adjacent lot or real property.
         f.   Searchlights shall only be operated for special events or grand
openings for a maximum of one week. Searchlights shall not be operated on
residential or agricultural property.
         g.   The installation of mercury vapor lamps is hereby prohibited.
         h.   Flashing or intermittent lights, lights of changing degree of
intensity, or moving lights shall not be permitted. This subsection shall not
be construed so as to prohibit the flashing porch light signal used only while
emergency services are responding to a call for assistance at the property or
holiday lights.
         i.   Industrial and exterior lighting shall not be used in such a
manner that produces glare on public highways and neighboring property. Arc
welding, acetylene torch cutting, or similar processes shall be performed so as
not to be seen from any point beyond the property line. Exceptions will be made
for necessary repairs to equipment.
         j.   Sensor activated lights, provided:
            (1)   It is located in such a manner as to prevent glare and
lighting onto properties of others or into a public right of way;
            (2)   It is set to only go on when activated and to go off within
five (5) minutes after activation has ceased;
            (3)   It shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
         k.   Lighting of radio, communication, and navigation towers along
with power lines and power poles; provided the owner or occupant demonstrates
that the federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations can only be met
through the use of lighting.
         l.   All applications for a conditional use permit and/or a building
permit shall include an outdoor lighting plan for the entire site which
indicates how the above standards are to be met. The approved permit shall be a
part of the conditional use permit and/or the building permit.
         m.   Waterway navigational lights as required by coast guard
regulations and/or state regulations. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
         n.   Uplighting for flags, provided the flag is of a government and
the maximum lumen output is one thousand three hundred (1300) lumens. Flags are
encouraged to be taken down at sunset to avoid the need for lighting.
         o.   LED lighting color shall not exceed three thousand degrees Kelvin
(3000° K).
         p.   Streetlights shall be high pressure sodium, low pressure sodium,
LED, or metal halide, unless otherwise determined that another type is more
efficient. Lights must be shielded (see section
6-2-7 of this chapter).
         q.   Canopy lights, such as service station lighting shall be fully
recessed or fully shielded so as to ensure no light source is visible from or
causes glare on public rights of way or adjacent properties. (Ord. 17-02, 2-13-
2017)
   D.   Procedure:
      1.   Applications To Include Lighting Plan: All applications for
conditional use permits, planned unit developments, subdivision approvals,
applicable sign permits, or building permits shall include lighting plans
showing location, type, and height in order to verify that lighting conforms to
the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review By Planning And Zoning Administrator: The planning and zoning
administrator shall review any new exterior lighting plans on subject property
that is part of an application for conditional use permits, planned unit
developments, subdivision approvals, or applicable sign permits to determine
whether the exterior lighting complies with the standards of this chapter.
      3.   Review By Building Official: The building official shall review any
new exterior lighting or any existing exterior lighting on subject property
that is part of an application for a building permit to determine whether the
exterior lighting complies with the standards of this chapter.
      4.   Conformance Required: For all exterior lighting which must conform
to the requirements of this chapter, the building official or planning and
zoning administrator shall issue a decision whether the exterior lighting
complies with the standards of this chapter. An administrative variance may be
granted for exterior lighting used for bona fide agricultural use operations.
All such decisions may be appealed to the county planning and zoning commission
in accordance with the land use ordinance. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
6-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND LEGAL ACTIONS:
   A.   Notice Of Violations: If the building official or planning and zoning
administrator finds that any provision of this chapter is being violated, they
shall give notice by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of such violation to the owner and/or to the occupant of such
premises, demanding that the violation be abated within thirty (30) days of the
date of hand delivery or of the date of mailing of the notice.
   B.   Noncompliance; Actions And Proceedings: If the violation is not abated
within thirty (30) days, the building official may institute actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin, restrain or abate any
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004)
   C.   Penalty: The person in violation of this chapter shall be liable for a
civil penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 05-2, 11-8-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
6-2-7: FIGURES:
The following figures shall be applicable to this chapter:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1031.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1033.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-02, 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Short Title
6-3-2: Purpose
6-3-3: Applicability
6-3-4: Performance Standards And Process
6-3-1:  SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VALLEY COUNTY LIQUIFIED
PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) SYSTEMS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 19-09, 9-30-2019)
6-3-2:  PURPOSE:
The general purpose is to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the general public, by establishing regulations and a process for
implementing best LPG practices. This chapter establishes standards in order to
accomplish the following and shall apply to all new liquified petroleum gas
(LPG) installations, residential and commercial systems, and to existing
installations when LPG service is reconnected after service is interrupted.
   A.   Provide safe use of LPG products;
   B.   Protect against dangerous and improper installation of LPG systems;
   C.   Provide consistency in the construction industry;
   D.   Provide for construction in our local weather conditions;
   E.   Provide for a process that lessens the inattention of installers;
   F.   Provide for a process that protects against overlooking of safety
precautions; and
   G.   To work with other jurisdictions within the county to meet the purposes
of this chapter. (Ord. 19-09, 9-30-2019)
6-3-3:  APPLICABILITY:
This subsection shall apply to all new liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
installations, residential and commercial systems, and to existing
installations when LPG service is reconnected after service is interrupted.
(Ord. 19-09, 9-30-2019)
6-3-4:  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND PROCESS:
   A.    Propane providers shall install systems following NFPA 54 & 58,
including;
      1.   Two-stage regulator systems, or twin packing regulators underneath
the tank lid, shall be installed on all LPG installations, with twin packing
preferred.
      2.   The first stage regulator shall be installed under the hinged gauge
cover supplied with the tank.
         a.   The atmospheric pressure aperture of the regulator shall point
downward.
         b.   The first stage regulator shall be plumbed to the riser of the
yard piping with a flexible riser to allow flexibility should tank shifting
occur.
         c.   The riser from the yard piping shall be located not more than
twelve (12) inches from the walls of the tank.
      3.   The second stage regulator and riser pipe shall be installed on the
gable end of the building, in an approved location (flat roofs, bonnet roofs,
etc.).
         a.   The penetrating building nipple shall be schedule 80.
         b.   The outside hookup to the nipple shall also be schedule 80.
         c.   This riser shall be a flexible riser pipe and shall be securely
supported/braced to the wall approximately ten (10) inches below the regulator
to prevent bending of the pipe by lateral snow/ice loads.
      4. A protective cover, approved by the gas supplier and the fire
district, shall be installed over all second stage regulators/ or meters and
riser piping, and securely supported to the ground or diagonally to the
building wall.
      5. The riser pipes for the yard piping shall not be embedded in concrete.
Concrete placed around such riser shall be held back at least one inch (1")
from all sides of the pipe.
      6. Location of the centerline of LPG tanks shall be permanently marked
using a snow stake.
         a.   Such stake shall be of sufficient height to be visible through
anticipated maximum snow depth at the respective location.
         b. Installation and maintenance of the snow stake is the
responsibility of the LPG user.
      7. Propane appliances shall not be permitted in any new installation in
an attic or crawl space, effective May 1, 2020, unless a combustible gas
detection is built into a system that shuts down the supply of propane in the
event of a leak.
      8. A combustible gas detector shall be installed in the lowest livable
level of any building with an LPG appliance at the time of installation.
Maintenance of the combustible gas detector shall be the responsibility of the
LPG user.
      9. Propane tanks shall be kept clear of snow so that quick access can be
made to turn off the propane in emergencies. Keeping snow clear of the tank
shall be the responsibility of the LPG user.
   B.   Submittal to Fire District: The propane company shall submit an LPG
permit application and an LPG system plot plan to the appropriate fire district
in the following circumstances:
      1. After installation of a propane system; or
      2. If service is interrupted and a new tank is being set.
      The LPG plot plan shall include, but not be limited to, the tank
location, tank capacity in U.S. gallons, route of yard piping, location of the
riser pipe at the building, property boundaries, an outline of all existing/
proposed building on the lot and a depiction of the ridgeline of any building
to be supplied with LPG.
   C.   Submittal to Building Department: After installation by the propane
company for new construction and inspection by the appropriate fire district,
an approval shall be transmitted to the appropriate Building Department. The
Building Department will not issue a certificate of occupancy until receipt of
the inspection/approval is received. (Ord. 19-09, 9-30-2019)
TITLE 7
AREAS OF CITY IMPACT
CHAPTER 1
McCALL AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Area Of City Impact
7-1-2: Comprehensive Plan
7-1-3: McCall Planning And Zoning, Subdivision And Development And Building
Ordinances
7-1-4: Joint Planning And Zoning Commission
7-1-5: County Ordinances And Resolutions Concerning McCall Area Of City Impact
7-1-1: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to adopt, identify, and
describe the geographical area of city impact for the city of McCall, Idaho,
and a map of such area.
   B.   Identifying, Describing And Adopting Geographical Area: The following
described geographical area located in Valley County, Idaho, is hereby adopted
as the area of city impact for the city of McCall, Idaho:
      Beginning at the SW corner of Section 19, T18N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence East 3.25 miles to the SE corner of the SW1/2SW1/2 of Section 22,
T18N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence North 0.5 miles to the Farm to Market Road;
      Thence East 0.5 miles;
      Thence North 0.5 miles to a point which lies 1,320' West of the NE corner
of Section 22, T18N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence Northeasterly along Timber Ridge approximately 11,100' to a point
which lies 2,100' East of the NW corner of Section 11, T18N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence Northeasterly along Timber Ridge to a point on Lick Creek Road
2,000' West of the Section line in Section 2, T18N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence East along Lick Creek Road to the East side of Section 2, T18N,
R3E, B.M.;
      Thence North approximately 61/2 miles to the NE corner of Section 2,
T19N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence West 2 miles to the NW corner of Section 3, T19N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence South 3 miles to the SE corner of Section 16, T19N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence West 1 miles to the SW corner of Section 16, T19N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence South 1 mile to SW corner of Section 21, T19N, R3E, B.M.;
      Thence West to the Adams-Valley County line;
      Thence Southwesterly approximately 5 miles along the Adams-Valley line to
the South line of Section 12, T18N, R2E, B.M.;
      Thence East to the SE corner of Section 12, T18N, R2E, B.M.;
      Thence South 2 miles to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 77-3, 11-28-1977)
   C.   Map: A map showing the area of city impact described in subsection B of
this section identifying the area of city impact for the city of McCall, Idaho,
is by this reference made a part hereof, and said map may be provided by the
city of McCall. (Ord. 77-3, 11-28-1977; amd. 2011 Code)
7-1-2: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: To adopt a general comprehensive plan for the McCall area of
city impact pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65.
(Ord. 79-2, 9-28-1979)
   B.   Adoption And Amendment Of Plan:
      1.   Adoption:
         a.   The board of county commissioners hereby finds that the McCall
area comprehensive plan, as amended and approved by the board on June 22, 2000,
complies with the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6508.
         b.   The board of county commissioners hereby repeals any and all
existing comprehensive plans and land use designation maps applying to the
McCall area of city impact and adopts the McCall area comprehensive plan
attached to the resolution codified herein. (Res. 1-2001, 11-13-2000)
      2.   Amendment:
         a.   The McCall area comprehensive plan is amended to include
revisions to the goals and objectives, text of chapters 1 through 13, and the
future land use plan map. A copy of the amendments is attached as exhibit 1 to
the resolution codified herein, and by this reference incorporated herein.
         b.   The amendments made only apply within the existing McCall impact
area; the boundaries of the McCall impact area were not changed, and no
consideration was given to any area outside the existing McCall impact area.
(Res. 08-07, 1-28-2008)
   C.   Certified Copies: Not less than three (3) copies of the plan described
in subsection B of this section, duly certified by the clerk, are on file for
use and examination by the public in the office of the clerk of the board.
(Ord. 79-2, 9-18-1979)
7-1-3: McCALL PLANNING AND ZONING, SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING
ORDINANCES:
   A.   Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 67-6526(a)(1) and 67-2328, McCall city
code title 3 and title 9, its zoning ordinance as enacted by its ordinances 821
and 822, in turn as amended by its ordinances 831, 840, 841, 847, 848, 856,
857, 861, 864, 866, 875, 876, 880, 883, 885, 898, 899, 902, 907, 914, 922, 923,
and McCall city code title 2, its building code ordinance as enacted by its
ordinance 640, in turn as amended by its ordinances 701, 773, 775, 811, 884,
919, shall be applied to the city of McCall area of city impact, including the
zoning map adopted by such ordinances and referenced in such title 2, title 3,
and title 9.
   B.   Ordinances listed in subsection A of this section have subsequently
been amended by county ordinances as listed in section
7-1-5 of this code.
   C.   All final decisions, including legislative matters and quasi-judicial
matters, made in the McCall area of city impact are appealable to the Valley
County board of commissioners as the governing board, except building code/
inspection appeals will be heard by the City of McCall Board of Appeals. This
portion of the ordinance codified herein shall take precedence over any other
section of the adopted Valley County codes that may be in conflict with this
jurisdictional matter. Moreover, any specific power which is constitutionally
reserved to the county or city and which may be in contradiction with the
McCall city code or Valley County code shall remain reserved with the county or
city and shall be severable from the McCall or Valley County codes without
invalidating the same. (Ord. 16-03, 3-21-2016; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
7-1-4: JOINT PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Created: A McCall area planning and zoning commission (the commission)
is created for which the jurisdiction consists of matters relating to lands
within the city limits of the city of McCall and matters entrusted by the Idaho
Code to the planning and zoning commission of the city, referred to in the rest
of this chapter and title as the planning and zoning commission or the
commission. By agreement, the city of McCall council (the council) and the
board of Valley County commissioners (the board) assign to the McCall area
planning and zoning commission jurisdiction which consists of the matters
relating to lands outside the city limits of the city of McCall and within the
city of McCall area of city impact. The board is the governing authority in
legislative matters, in quasi-judicial, and administrative matters for the
impact area.
   B.   Term Of Office; Appointment; Vacancies: Commission shall consist of
seven (7) members: four (4) appointed by the mayor with the consent of the
council, and three (3) appointed by the board. Appointments shall be made
without respect to affiliation. All members shall be residents of the city or
the area of city impact for a period of at least two (2) years prior to
appointment. The members in office on March 16, 2006, shall continue in office
each for her or his unexpired term. Thereafter, their successors shall be
appointed for and shall hold office for a term of three (3) years. Each member
shall serve no more than two (2) full consecutive terms except where approved
by two-thirds (2/3) concurrence of the governing authority which appointed him
or her and duly adopted by motion and recorded in the minutes; filling the
remainder of an unexpired term with more than two and one-half (21/2) years
remaining will qualify as a full term. Members may be removed by a majority
vote of the governing authority which appointed them. The governing authority
may remove a member for unacceptable performance of their duties, including,
but not limited to, chronic absenteeism. In the event of the death,
resignation, or any other vacancy in the commission, the vacancy shall be
filled in accordance with this section.
   C.   Officers: The planning commission shall at its first meeting each
calendar year elect a chair and a vice chair who shall be members and shall
serve for a term of one year.
   D.   Compensation; Records; Minutes: Members of the commission shall receive
no compensation. The staff shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of
the commission and shall distribute copies of the minutes of the commission,
and other pertinent documents as a record of decisions or recommendations, to
the city manager and members of the council and to the Valley County board of
commissioners. The commission shall request that the administrator provide a
secretary who shall not be a member of the commission. The commission shall
prepare and keep current bylaws which outline the functioning, conduct of
meetings, organization, rules of order, voting and agenda preparation of the
commission.
   E.   Meetings: The commission shall hold at least one meeting each month on
a regular day and at a regular time fixed in its bylaws. Pending adoption of
such bylaws by resolution of the commission and approved by resolution of the
council and the board, the commission shall hold a meeting on the first Tuesday
of each month at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M., unless otherwise noticed and/
or there is no business to transact. The commission shall meet at such other
times and dates as may in its judgment be necessary.
   F.   Duties: The duties of the commission are to:
      1.   Meet jointly with the Valley County planning and zoning commission
for the purposes of recommending a comprehensive plan for the development of
the planning jurisdiction. Other duties are to plan for and recommend the
laying out, widening, extending and locating of streets, roads and highways for
the relief of traffic, for density of population and development of land within
the jurisdiction of the planning jurisdiction, for the future growth,
development and beautification of the planning jurisdiction in respect to its
public buildings, streets, parks, grounds and lands consistent with the future
growth and development of the planning jurisdiction, all in order to promote
the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants thereof, and to give
suggestions and advice to individuals concerning landscaping or location of
buildings, structures or works to be erected, constructed or altered by such
individuals. The commissions shall cooperate with other and like commissions
along the lines and purpose prescribed in Idaho Code sections 50-1101 through
50-1106.
      2.   Recommend amendments to the McCall comprehensive plan and this code,
and develop regulations and other related matters pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-6511.
      3.   Recommend the granting or denial of variances, conditional use
permits, subdivisions, planned unit developments, amendments to the zoning map,
vacation of streets, and other decisions authorized by McCall ordinances, which
recommendations shall only be made in the form of findings of fact and
conclusions of law, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6535, and only through
the procedures (including hearings) required by title 3, chapters 13 and 15 of
the McCall city code.
      4.   Review and make recommendations for the administration of this title
and title 9, "subdivision and development", of the McCall city code.
      5.   Carry out the duties delegated by the city manager, city council,
board of commissioners, applicable city code, applicable county code, and the
Idaho Code.
      6.   Propose, review and approve any amendments to this title or title 9
of the McCall city code and of this code before action by the council and/or
board.
      7.   Perform the duties as delineated in title 3, chapter 16, "design
review", of the McCall city code.
   G.   Cooperation Of Departments And Employees; Technical And Advisory
Committees: All departments and employees of the city and county shall
cooperate with the commission, and furnish to the commission maps, reports and
all available data necessary for the commission properly and adequately to
carry out its functions. The commission is also authorized to appoint such
technical and advisory committees as are necessary to carry out its work, and
to call upon the citizens of the community and the various civic organizations
for cooperation and assistance to the end that a coordinated program of
planning jurisdiction planning and zoning may be promoted.
   H.   Governing Board: Nothing in this title shall be construed as infringing
upon the authority previously granted to any existing commission or board,
provided that such commission or board shall coordinate their activities to the
end that an updated comprehensive plan for the planning jurisdiction may be
prepared. The governing board for the joint commission in the McCall area of
city impact is the Valley County board of commissioners for said area of
impact.
   I.   Expenditures: The joint commission shall have no authority to make
expenditures on behalf of the city or county nor to obligate the city or county
for the payment of any sum of money unless authorized by the council or board,
who shall specify the administrative method by which such funds shall be
expended.
   J.   Ratification Of Past Actions And Recommendations: The past actions and
recommendations of the McCall area of city impact joint planning and zoning
commission, since it was first seated pursuant to the agreement of September 2,
1980, and down to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein and this
code, are hereby ratified in accordance with the final action taken by the
governing board with respect to each, where governing board action was
required, and in accordance with the final action of such commission where no
further action by a governing board was required for finality. (Ord. 16-03, 3-
21-2016)
7-1-5: COUNTY ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS CONCERNING McCALL AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
The following ordinances concerning the McCall area of city impact have been
adopted by the county in relationship to ordinances adopted by the McCall city
council which amend the McCall city code. Only the title and subject of each
ordinance is included, not the entirety of the ordinance.
   ORDINANCE 06-2. An ordinance of Valley County authorizing the application to
the city of McCall area of city impact of McCall city code titles 3 and 9, as
amended and adopted respectively, by its ordinances 821 and 822; including its
zoning map; and providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC 3-27-2006)
   ORDINANCE 08-01. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, creating an ordinance
to be administered by the Valley County sheriff's office and to be known as
waterway ordinance for Big Payette Lake Watershed, establishing regulations for
use of said watershed in order to promote and protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of citizens of the county. (Approved by BOCC 2-11-2008,
instrument #386512)
   RESOLUTION 08-07. A resolution of the Valley County board of commissioners,
Idaho, amending McCall area comprehensive plan, providing for related matters,
and providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC 1-28-2008, instrument
#330800)
   ORDINANCE 10-2. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending subsections
3.9.04(D) and (H) of the McCall city code applied within the city of McCall
area of city impact, as adopted by ordinance 06-2; and to revise the procedure
for administering the authorization of street banners over Highway 55,
temporary event signs on utility and light poles, authorizing the McCall city
council to designate regulations by resolution, and providing an effective
date. (Approved by BOCC 7-6-2010, instrument #353342)
   ORDINANCE 10-3. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending title 3 of
the McCall city code applied within the city of McCall area of city impact, as
adopted by ordinance 06-2, to clarify the definitions of farm animals, zones
allowed, and conditions required to keep small farm animals. (Approved by BOCC
7-6-2010, instrument #353341)
   ORDINANCE 11-10. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending chapter 5 of
title 3 section 3.5.01 purpose and adding new sections 3.5.05 business park use
regulations, 3.5.06 business park zone general development standards, 3.5.07
public improvements, 3.5.08 hours of operation and noise restrictions, 3.5.9
planned unit development requirements, 3.5.10 vehicle and bicycle parking,
3.5.11 architectural, 3.5.12 landscaping, 3.5.13 fencing, 3.5.14 outdoor
lighting, and 3.5.15 sustainable construction standards; and amending chapter 1
of title 3 section 3.1.05 establishment of zoning districts; and amending
chapter 7 section 3.07.032 requirements for development (D), and amending
chapter 8 sections 3.8.05(A) temporary storage and merchandising facilities not
to become permanent, 3.8.06 parking provisions, driveways and loading areas (A)
and (D)2, 3.8.061 parking area development standards (A)1, 3.8.064(A)
driveways, 3.08.07(B) animals, 3.08.09 provision for trash storage, collection
and disposal, 3.08.10(G) fencing, 3.08.13(A)2, (B), (C), and (D), and amending
chapter 9 sections 3.09.02 definitions, 3.09.03(D)2, (E)3, sign standards by
zone, section 3.09.07(K) prohibited signs; and amending chapter 10 of title 3
section 3.10.01 purpose, 3.10.07(F) developer benefits, 3.10.08(I) development
standards, 3.10.08(C)2b, and amending chapter 16 of title 3 section 3.16.02
applicability, and amending chapter 3 of title 9 section 9.3.05(A) alleys, and
amending chapter 4 of title 9 section 9.4.05(C) and (E) other mobile home/
manufactured units, and amending chapter 6 of title 9 sections 9.6.02(A)3, (C)
and (T), and 9.6.05(D)6b, and chapter 7 of title 9 section 9.7.06(C)
environmental and aesthetics of the applied McCall city code within the city of
McCall area of impact, as adopted by ordinance no. 06-02, all of which
amendments provide for the creation of a new business park zone and/or account
for the new business park zone regulations. (Approved by BOCC 4-11-2011,
instrument #359661)
   ORDINANCE 12-3. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code sections 3.7.032(G) bike paths, 3.8.16(C) other requirements, 3.10.09(G)
(9) application procedure, 3.13.032(A)(3)(1) application for conditional use
permit, and 3.13.032(B)(2) application for conditional use permit to provide
for a new subsection number 5 and to renumber the existing subsections 5 and 6
to subsections 6 and 7 of title 3; to amend sections 9.1.05(B)(2) scope -
record of survey procedure, 9.2.07(C)(19)(20) final plat, and 9.2.06(A)
easements, 9.3.05(F) alleys, 9.3.07(B) pedestrian and bicycle pathways and
greenbelts, 9.6.02(A) improvement requirements, 9.6.03(4) driveways,
residential, and 9.6.10 construction drawings and as built information of title
9; and 2.2.040(C)(3) zoning and site development of title 2, to provide
references to the digital data submission standards policy. (Approved by BOCC
6-2-2012, instrument #369852)
   ORDINANCE 12-5. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the impact area section 3.7.032 scenic route zone requirements for
development - procedural rules to align the review procedure for scenic route
applications with the procedure for review of design review applications;
deleting existing subsection (I); and providing an effective date. (Approved by
BOCC 8-20-2012, instrument #371446)
   ORDINANCE 13-01. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code title 3 section 3.8.06 parking provisions, driveways and loading area,
section 3.8.061 parking and development standards and section 3.8.062 off
street parking requirements to reduce parking requirements for existing
buildings and new construction in central business district, community
commercial, industrial and business park zones and providing an effective date.
(Approved by BOCC 2-25-2013, instrument #377624)
   ORDINANCE 14-02. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapter 9 signs and in particular
sections 3.9.02 by changing the definitions for political signs and signs, and
adding a new definition for wayfinding sign; 3.9.03(A)(C)(D)(E) sign standards
for all zones to provide for certain signs in mixed use developments and
apartments, wayfinding signs, changeable signs, regulation of location and size
of signs in all zones; in 3.9.04 regulating the size of window signs; in 3.9.05
(B) to delete separate regulations for institution signs, and to better define
prohibited vehicle signs, and limiting the number of flags other than United
States, state or other nations and eliminating menu boards as a separate
regulated sign type; in 3.9.06(A)(1) amending the provisions for nonconforming
signs; in 3.9.07(F)(K) amending the exceptions from prohibited signs; in 3.9.08
(B) providing for halo lighted signs; in 3.9.081(F) to regulate neon signs; in
3.9.09(A)(3)(4) to clarify what additional permits are required besides sign
permits; and providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC 6-23-2014,
instrument #385540)
   ORDINANCE 14-03. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the impact area title 3 chapter 4 section 3.4.02 table permitted and
conditionally permitted uses within commercial zones to allow office uses on
ground floors of buildings and reducing the number of uses that first require a
conditional use permit; amending section 3.4.061 special parking standards in
central business district adding a new subsection (D) to exempt certain
properties from having to provide off street parking; and title 3 chapter 8
section 3.8.061(A)(1) surfacing to provide driveways must have improved
surfaces and section 3.8.16(B) sidewalk, curb and gutter and/or pathways to
provide for the waiver of certain improvements under limited circumstances; and
providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC 6-23-2014, instrument #385539)
   ORDINANCE 15-01. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapter 2 and chapter 3; amending
section 3.2.02 meanings of terms or words to include a definition of short term
rental and clarifying dwelling, rooming house and hotel or motel; amending
section 3.3.02 table residential use regulations to require a conditional use
permit for short term rentals with occupancy of twenty or more persons; and
providing an effective date of January 1, 2016. (Approved by BOCC 2-9-2015,
instrument #389797)
   ORDINANCE 15-02. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapters 3 and 16; amending section
3.3.02 table residential use regulations to remove the requirement that
accessory and two-family dwellings obtain a conditional use permit and
permitting accessory and two-family dwellings in all residential zones;
amending section 3.16.02 to require design review approval for residential
projects of two (2) or more units; and providing an effective date. (Approved
by BOCC 3-16-2015, instrument #390400)
   ORDINANCE 16-01. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapter 8; amending section 3.8.20
special standards for garages to reduce the street frontage width required for
exemption from this section; and providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC
2-22-2016, instrument #396743)
   ORDINANCE 16-02. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapter 14; amending section 3.14.03
applicability to clarify circumstances upon which existing lighting shall be
brought into conformance, and amending section 3.14.051 type of luminaires to
remove exemptions for certain luminaire types from the outdoor lighting
requirements; and providing an effective date. (Approved by BOCC 3-7-2016,
instrument #396965)
   (Ord. 16-03, 3-21-2016)
   ORDINANCE 17-01. An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho amending McCall city
code for the McCall impact area title 3 chapter 2; amending section 3.2.02
meanings of terms or words "restaurant, formula", providing for related
matters; and providing an effective date.
   (Ord. 17-01, 12-12-2016)
   ORDINANCE19-01: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending the following
chapters of title 3, planning and zoning, of the McCall impact area code for
the McCall impact area in the following particulars, to-wit: in chapter 5,
industrial and business park zones and standards, section 3.5.01, purpose, to
remove the allowance for residential use in an industrial and business park
zone; section 3.5.02, industrial zone use regulations, under table 3.5.02, to
add ‘craft beverage production with or without tasting room' as a permitted
use, to change the use of ‘dwelling unit' from C to A, and to remove the
requirement that residential uses are only permitted on upper floors; section
3.5.03, industrial zone general development standards, under table 3.5.03, to
change the size requirements for street, frontage, abutting residential
property, maximum coverage (percent) of structures, maximum height and maximum
building footprint, and removing the limitation of coverage for lots larger
than 50,000 square feet; section 3.5.04, specific standards for industrial
development in any zone, in subsection (A), to reduce the distance between
detached buildings from 14' to 10', in subsection (C), to require design review
for industrial development with a building footprint area of at least 10,000
square feet or a maximum building height exceeding 35 feet or a reduction in
the minimum setback distance; adding subsection (D), surfacing; in chapter 8,
general development standards, in subsection (D)2, removing industrial use from
the parking space requirements, AJ/1D in subsection (D)5, requiring the
approval of the public works director for pavement edges closer than 5' from
the right of way of a public street; in section 3.8.061, parking area
development standards, adding subsection (A)2 standards for parking lots,
loading areas, and driveways for industrial uses; and in chapter 16, design
review, section 3.16.02, applicability, requiring design review approval for
development within the city and the area of city impact for commercial,
business park, public or semipublic development, all development within DV, AF
or AP zones, industrial development with a building footprint area of at least
10,000 square feet or a maximum building height exceeding 35 feet or a
reduction in the minimum setback distance, for accessory dwelling units, multi-
family residential projects of 2 or more units, or single-family dwelling units
having a total area greater than 3,500 square feet. (April 22, 2019)
   ORDINANCE 19-04: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho repealing & reenacting
Valley County ordinances which incorporate chapter 8, flood control regulations
(overlay), of title 9, subdivision and development, of the McCall city code to
update the floodplain management regulations for the City of McCall area of
impact by enacting sections 9.08.02, definitions, 9.08.03, general provisions,
9.08.04, administration, 9-08-05, provisions for flood hazard reduction, and 9-
08-06, legal status provisions, and providing an effective date. (January 7,
2019)
   ORDINANCE 19-07: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho repealing chapter 11,
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, of title 3, planning and zoning,
of the McCall impact area code, & reenacting chapter 11, nonconforming use,
structure or development, of title 3, planning and zoning, of the McCall impact
area code, for the purpose of streamlining the process, facilitating
administration, clarifying the chapter so as to eliminate the administrative
determination, allowing additions under 25% to existing nonconforming
structures within the shoreline zone, promoting and allowing for energy
efficiency improvements, allowing for exceptions to the 10% repairs and
maintenance provisions for historically significant buildings, and allowing for
approval of style changes when restoring to a safe condition any nonconforming
structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the building inspector.
(June 24, 2009)
   ORDINANCE 20-02: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending, enacting,
or deleting the following sections of title 3, planning and zoning, of the
McCall impact area code, to-wit: section 3.2.02, meanings of terms or words, to
modify the definitions for accessory use, building, or structure, dwelling
unit, accessory, and dwelling, multi-family, to add definitions for bedroom,
dwelling unit, local housing, dwelling unit, seasonal, owner occupancy, McCall
area and short-term rental, and to delete definitions for community housing
unit, duplex, and dwelling, two family; section 3.3.02, residential use
regulations, to modify the allowed use for accessory structure4, <1,500 square
feet, to add allowed uses for dwelling unit, local housing and dwelling short
term rental, occupancy less than 20 persons, and to delete the allowed uses for
accessory structure > 1,500 square feet and dwelling, two family, and add
footnote 4, a reference to section 3.8.11; section 3.4.02, commercial use
regulations, to change the title of the section to permitted and conditionally
permitted uses within commercial zones, to add the allowed uses for dwelling
unit, local housing and dwelling unit, seasonal housing, and to delete item 2
under notes and renumber the remaining items under notes accordingly; section
3.4.04, commercial zone special development standards, subparagraph (D), uses,
to modify subparagraph (D), uses, to allow single family, multi-family, and
local housing as part of a mixed-use development, including commercial and/or
public uses and to provide the conditions therefor by modifying item 1 for
multi-story structures, by modifying item 2 for developments with commercial
and/or public use, by deleting item 3, and by modifying item 4 to renumber IT
item 3 and including a requirement for equivalent square footage in a CC zone;
section 3.6.02, public zone use regulations, to change the title of the section
to permitted and conditionally permitted uses within public zones, to add the
allowed use for dwelling, local housing; section 3.7.032, requirements for
development, subparagraph (C), structure height; section 3.8.11, accessory use,
buildings and structures, to delete subparagraph (A), to modify subparagraph
(B) by relettering IT subparagraph (A) to substitute approval by an
administrator in place of a commission, to delete subparagraph (C), and to add
a new subparagraph to be lettered (B), to limit the size of an accessory
structure; enacting section 3.8.11.01, entitled accessory dwelling units,
permitting accessory dwelling units and establishing the number, location,
density, basic requirements for habitation, health and safety code
requirements, size, parking, request for waivers of monthly water services
fees, and rental requirements; enacting section 3.8.21, entitled local housing
density bonus program, setting forth the purpose, applicability, general
provisions, and calculation of the density bonus; enacting section 3.8.22,
entitled seasonal dwelling units, permitting seasonal dwelling units for use by
employees of businesses or institutions within the McCall area and establishing
the conditions therefor; section 3.10.01, purpose, to add a subparagraph (E)
promoting local housing and a variety of housing types in quality development;
section 3.10.024, density bonus, to modify subparagraph (C) to delete the
maximum increase in density and substitute compliance with sections 3.08.21;
deleting section 3.13.036, rental of accessory dwelling units, in its entirety;
enacting new section 3.13.036, entitled additional conditional use permit
standards for dwelling, short-term rental with occupancy of 20 or more guests,
setting forth the standards for compliance, use, neighborhood impact and
application requirements; enacting section 3.13.09, permit standards for
dwelling, short-term rentals, providing for the permitting of dwelling and
short-term rentals; section 3.15.02, preliminary development plan review,
subparagraph (B), neighborhood meetings, to modify subparagraph (B),
neighborhood meetings, to provide for the submission of an application instead
of a plan and to establish timing, notification, and summary of the meeting
requirements; and section 9.4.06, permits and inspection, to modify
subparagraph (B), temporary use permits, by deleting paragraph 1, fees,
restrictions, and renumbering paragraph 2, emergency permits, as paragraph 1.
(December 16, 2019)
   ORDINANCE 20-03: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending title 3,
planning and zoning, of the McCall impact area code, to-wit: in chapter 6,
civic, airport and agricultural/forest zones, changing the title of the chapter
to public zones; in section 3.6.01, purpose, clarifying subsection (C), airport
(AP) zone to more clearly state the objectives of the adopted airport master
plan; in section 3.6.02, public zones use regulations, re-ordering and
clarifying subsections (A) - (C) regarding permitted and conditionally
permitted uses and making substantive changes to table 3.6.02 as follows:
adding aeronautical as a new use identified to be permitted in the AP zone;
eliminating dwelling, care-taker for an approved use as an allowed use through
a conditional use permit in the AP zone; adding dwelling unit, local housing as
a permitted use in the CV zone; permitting park, public as a use in the AP
zone; section 3.6.03, public zones general development standards, removing the
word "general" from the section title, re-ordering, clarifying and eliminating
extraneous information, adding new sections (B) through (H) which reference
special site design and fencing requirements of the FAA and making substantive
changes to table 3.6.03 as follows: adding the APP zone and different
requirements from the AP zone, identifying minimum property size as not
applicable in the AP and APP zones, adding minimum lease size as a new
standards for the AP and APP zones, deleting minimum street frontage from AP
and adding minimum street frontage for APP at 75', deleting minimum setbacks
for AP and APP, changing maximum site coverage for the AP at 100%, adding
standard of 10' to distance between structures for AP and APP zones, adding
landscape buffer as 20' in APP zone, and relocating note 4 to the new section
(C); deleting sections 3.6.031, approvals, 3.6.04, airport zoning, 3.6.041,
purpose, 3.6.042, short title, 3.6.043, definitions, 3.6.044, airport zones,
3.6.045, airport zone height limitations, 3.6.046, use restrictions, 3.6.047,
airport nonconforming uses, 3.6.048, permits, 3.6.049, enforcement, 3.6.0410,
appeals, decisions of commission, 3.6.0411, conflicting regulations, 3.6.0412,
appeals, decisions of airport manager, 3.6.0413, judicial review: in chapter 7,
special districts, enacting section 3.7.05, McCall municipal airport influence
overlay zones, 3.7.050, purpose, and 3.7.051, airport operation protection
zones, to create a new special district, defining its purpose and
distinguishing it from other zones: and in chapter 2, definitions, adding
definitions for "aeronautical," "airport elevation," "approach surface,"
"conical surface," "fair disclosure statement," "hazard to air navigation,"
"height, airport," "horizontal surface," "obstruction," "person," "primary
surface," "runway," "transitional surfaces," "utility runway," and redefining
"airport" to mean the McCall municipal airport; providing an effective date.
(December 16, 2019)
   ORDINANCE 20-07: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho repealing Title 2
Chapter 4 Historic Preservation and enacting new Title 3 Chapter 20 Historic
Preservation, and relocating definitions previously contained in Title 2
Chapter 4 to existing Title 3 Chapter 2 Section 02, with minor revisions
throughout for clarification, and for the purpose of clarifying applicability
throughout the area of McCall, amending the historic preservation commission
duties, adding a new section regulating demolition or removal of historic
structures, adding exemptions, designating applicable uniform codes, correcting
references in Title 3, Chapter 11, Section 07, directing the City Clerk, and
providing an effective date. (May 11, 2020)
   ORDINANCE 20-08: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending Title 2
Chapter 1 clarifying applicability throughout the McCall Area, clarifying the
applicability and exemptions to buildings and construction, defining
agricultural structures, building official, and structure, simplifying adopted
codes, additions to snow requirements, electrical wiring requirements, and
liquefied petroleum gas (lpg) system requirements, establishing maintenance
standards; amending Title 2 Chapter 2 related duties of the Building Official
and coordination with other permits, removing expiration of sewer service and
water connection permits, setting regulations for drainage, flood control,
utilities and street improvements, establishing when a certificate of occupancy
shall be issued, addressing permits issued by the review and approval process
contained in McCall City Code Title 3 (and approved by Valley County),
providing purpose, responsibility, contents and procedures of the planning
report; amending Title 2 Chapter 3 administration, designating building
official, establishing progress inspections, including Valley County
limitations of responsibility, establishing member terms and duties, directing
the City Clerk, and providing an effective date. (May 14, 2020)
   ORDINANCE 2020-09: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho enacting Chapter 19,
Wireless Communication Facilities, to Title 3, Planning And Zoning, of the
McCall City Code (and Valley County), to provide for the placement, design and
operation of wireless communication facilities consistent with the McCall area
comprehensive plan, promoting the sharing of facilities, the efficient use of
land, and assuring compatibility with adjacent and nearby land use. Amending,
enacting, or deleting the following sections of Title 3, Planning And Zoning,
of the McCall City Code as adopted by Valley County, to-wit: Section 3.2.02,
Meanings Of Terms Or Words, to add definitions for antenna, private; antenna,
public antenna;, wireless collocation; decorative pole; public right of way;
wireless telecommunication facility, major; wireless communication facility,
small scale; and Sections 3.3.02, 3.4.02, 3.5.02, 3.5.05, 3.6.02 Use
Regulations For Residential, Commercial, Industrial And Business Park And
Public Uses, to amend the category of tower or antenna structure, private to
antenna, private; to delete tower or antenna structure, commercial; and to add
antenna, public; small scale wireless communication facility; and major
wireless communication facility. (May 14, 2020)
   ORDINANCE 2021-11: An ordinance of Valley County, Idaho, amending Section
3.7.032, requirements for development, (I), Landscaping, of the McCall City
Code to amend the number of native shrubs from five to three each ten feet of
linear street frontage along the scenic route, their location and arrangement,
and to provide that the Administrator shall recommend resolution of conflicts
in the use of snow storage or utility easements. (September 13, 2021)
CHAPTER 2
CITY OF CASCADE IMPACT AREA BOUNDARY
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose And Intent
7-2-2: Geographic Area Of Impact
7-2-3: Changes In Area Of Impact Outermost Boundaries
7-2-4: Jurisdiction And Development Review
7-2-5: Application For Annexation Requirement
7-2-6: Comprehensive Plan
7-2-7: Zoning
7-2-8: Subdivision
7-2-9: Joint Review And Time Lines For Action
7-2-10: Public Improvement Standards
7-2-11: Building Codes, Permit Requirements
7-2-12: Approach Permits
7-2-13: Floodplain Ordinance
7-2-14: Public Street Maintenance
7-2-15: Amendments
7-2-16: Severability
7-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose for establishing this area of impact is to identify a logical urban
fringe area adjoining the city of Cascade, Idaho. The governing bodies of the
city of Cascade and Valley County recognize the importance of planning for
future growth in the area of impact and understand that the delivery of most
public services is, or will be, associated with the city of Cascade. The area
of impact is comprised of land that may reasonably be expected to be annexed
into the city of Cascade in the next five years and meets the criteria in IC
67-6526. The urban fringe area is experiencing growth and development pressures
that must be managed in order to provide for planned, orderly, and efficient
growth. Furthermore, it is the intent of this agreement to:
   A.   Set forth a formal mechanism for planning and growth management
regardless of jurisdictional boundaries.
   B.   Consider the interests of both the city of Cascade and Valley County in
planning and land use decision making.
   C.   Engage, involve, and consider the interests of those most impacted by
land use decisions, regardless of the jurisdiction in which they may reside.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-2: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF IMPACT:
   The officially adopted and agreed upon area of impact boundary is
established by Valley County and is set forth on the map titled "City Of
Cascade Impact Area". The Cascade impact area is defined as that unincorporated
landmass which lies contiguous to the city of Cascade, Idaho, having as its
closest boundary to the city, the limits of said city, as they now exist or as
they may be altered by future annexation of land to the city of Cascade, and
having as its outermost boundary a defined line positioned and described in
exhibit A, which exhibit is incorporated into this agreement by reference.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-3: CHANGES IN AREA OF IMPACT OUTERMOST BOUNDARIES:
   In the event the city of Cascade or Valley County desires to alter the
outermost boundaries of the city impact area, or to change the jurisdiction
over said area, it shall do so in accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-4: JURISDICTION AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
   All matters beyond the city limits of Cascade within the area of impact
concerning zoning and subdivisions shall be under the guidance of the Valley
County planning and zoning commission with the Valley County board of
commissioners having final permitting authority. Notice of all developments
shall be submitted to the city of Cascade for review and comment. Valley County
shall take into consideration all comments in relationship to the future land
use map so long as responses are received in a timely manner.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-5: APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION REQUIREMENT:
   When property located within the Cascade impact area is contiguous to the
city of Cascade and the owner or their agent desires to change the principal
land use, the owner must first apply for annexation into the city. A property
owner may not purposefully circumvent this requirement by creating a strip of
undeveloped land, as determined by the administrator of Valley County. If the
annexation is denied, then the owner may proceed with an application to Valley
County in accordance with this agreement.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-6: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   The Valley County comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within the Cascade impact area
as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. A specific section describing
the uses envisioned in the impact area will be included in the plan and
depicted on an attached future land use map.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-7: ZONING:
   The Valley County land use and development ordinance and subsequent
amendments thereto as officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within
the Cascade impact area as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. All
permits within the impact area including, but not necessarily limited to, zone
changes, variances, records of survey, conditional use permits, special use
permits, and planned unit developments, shall be reviewed by the Valley County
Planning and Zoning Commission with final approval authority resting with the
Valley County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-8: SUBDIVISION:
   The Valley County subdivision ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within the Cascade impact area
as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. Valley County shall modify
their subdivision regulations to accommodate different standards in accordance
with the city of Cascade upon request and review.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-9: JOINT REVIEW AND TIME LINES FOR ACTION:
   A.   Upon receipt of any development request, permit application or
discretionary action submitted to Valley County for developments within the
city of Cascade area of impact, the county shall deliver a copy of the
completed application and supporting documents to the city of Cascade at least
forty five (45) days prior to any county public hearing or public meeting.
   B.   The city of Cascade will then have the opportunity to review the
application and submit recommendations or opinions. These must be submitted in
writing to the Valley County planning and zoning commission on official city
letterhead at least seven (7) days prior to the county hearing or meeting date.
   C.   All official communications between the city and county pertaining to a
development proposal within the city of Cascade impact area shall be in
writing. If the city does not provide written comment on any particular
proposal, then the note, "No comment from the City of Cascade", will be entered
into the official public record for the affected project.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-10: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   All public improvements within the city of Cascade impact area should be
designed and constructed according to the city standards for future annexation
consideration when appropriate. Valley County should consider adopting city of
Cascade public improvement standards for use within the impact area if changes
or annexation are requested. City of Cascade water and sewer service may be
available subject to city of Cascade service extension policies and city code
requirements being met. All costs associated with upgrading or extending main
lines and/or connecting to city services will be paid by the landowner or
developers according to the city code and fee schedule.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-11: BUILDING CODES, PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   All building code administration within the Cascade impact area will be
conducted by Valley County outside of the present city limits.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-12: APPROACH PERMITS:
   Approach permits, when required, shall be obtained from the Valley County
road department or the Idaho transportation department prior to construction of
project improvements. Permit requirements must be completed prior to
recordation of a final plat or final occupancy of a structure.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-13: FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE:
   The floodplain ordinance adopted by Valley County shall apply within the
Cascade impact area and shall be administered by Valley County.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-14: PUBLIC STREET MAINTENANCE:
   Maintenance of public streets within the Cascade impact area shall be the
responsibility of Valley County unless otherwise stipulated by written
agreement between the county and city.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-15: AMENDMENTS:
   This agreement shall not be amended, supplanted or repealed except pursuant
to the Idaho Code 67-6526.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
7-2-16: SEVERABILITY:
   Should any section, clause, or provision of this agreement be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the
agreement as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be
invalid. The provisions of the agreement may be enforced by either the city of
Cascade or Valley County by virtue of legal action initiated to require
specific performance with the terms of this agreement.
(Ord. 10-05, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 4-28-2025)
CHAPTER 3
CITY OF DONNELLY IMPACT AREA BOUNDARY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose And Intent
7-3-2: Geographical Area Of City Impact
7-3-3: Changes In Area Of Impact Outermost Boundaries
7-3-4: Jurisdiction And Development Review
7-3-5: Application For Annexation Requirement
7-3-6: Comprehensive Plan
7-3-7: Zoning
7-3-8: Subdivision
7-3-9: Joint Review And Time Lines For Action
7-3-10:    Public Improvement Standards
7-3-11:    Building Codes, Permit Requirements
7-3-12:    Approach Permits
7-3-13:    Floodplain Ordinance
7-3-14:    Public Street Maintenance
7-3-15:    Amendments
7-3-16:    Severability
7-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   The purpose for establishing this area of impact is to identify a logical
urban fringe area adjoining the city of Donnelly, Idaho. The governing bodies
of the city of Donnelly and Valley County recognize the importance of planning
for future growth in the area of impact and understand that the delivery of
most public services is, or will be, associated with the city of Donnelly. The
area of impact is comprised of land that may reasonably be expected to be
annexed into the city of Donnelly in the next five years and meets the criteria
in IC 67-6526. The urban fringe area is experiencing growth and development
pressures that must be managed in order to provide for planned, orderly, and
efficient growth. Furthermore, it is the intent of this agreement to:
   A.   Set forth a formal mechanism for planning and growth management
regardless of jurisdictional boundaries.
   B.   Consider the interests of both the city of Donnelly and Valley County
in planning and land use decision making.
   C.   Engage, involve, and consider the interests of those most impacted by
land use decisions, regardless of the jurisdiction in which they may reside.
(Ord. 99-1, 10-26-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-2: GEOGRAPHICAL AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   The officially adopted and agreed upon area of impact boundary is
established by Valley County and is set forth on the map titled "City Of
Donnelly Impact Area". The Donnelly impact area is defined as that
unincorporated landmass which lies contiguous to the city of Donnelly, Idaho,
having as its closest boundary to the city, the limits of said city, as they
now exist or as they may be altered by future annexation of land to the city of
Donnelly, and having as its outermost boundary a defined line positioned and
described in exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 99-1, 10-26-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-3: CHANGES IN AREA OF IMPACT OUTERMOST BOUNDARIES:
   In the event the City of Donnelly or Valley County desires to alter the
outermost boundaries of the city impact area, or to change the jurisdiction
over said area, it shall do so in accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-4: JURISDICTION AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
   All matters beyond the city limits of Donnelly within the area of impact
concerning zoning and subdivisions shall be under the guidance of the Valley
County planning and zoning commission with the Valley County board of
commissioners having final permitting authority. Notice of all developments
shall be submitted to the City of Donnelly for review and comment. Valley
County shall take into consideration all comments in relationship to the future
land use map so long as responses are received in a timely manner.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-5: APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION REQUIREMENT:
   When property located within the Donnelly impact area is contiguous to the
City of Donnelly and the owner or their agent desires to change the principal
land use, the owner must first apply for annexation into the city. A property
owner may not purposefully circumvent this requirement by creating a strip of
undeveloped land, as determined by the administrator of Valley County. If the
annexation is denied, then the owner may proceed with an application to Valley
County in accordance with this agreement.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-6: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   The Valley County comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within the Donnelly impact area
as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. A specific section describing
the uses envisioned in the impact area will be included in the plan and
depicted on an attached future land use map.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-7: ZONING:
   The Valley County land use and development ordinance and subsequent
amendments thereto as officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within
the Donnelly impact area as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. All
permits within the impact area including, but not necessarily limited to, zone
changes, variances, records of survey, conditional use permits, special use
permits, and planned unit developments, shall be reviewed by the Valley County
Planning and Zoning Commission with final approval authority resting with the
Valley County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-8: SUBDIVISION:
   The Valley County subdivision ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by Valley County shall apply within the Donnelly impact area
as set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. Valley County shall modify
their subdivision regulations to accommodate different standards in accordance
with the City of Donnelly upon request and review.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-9: JOINT REVIEW AND TIME LINES FOR ACTION:
   A.   Upon receipt of any development request, permit application or
discretionary action submitted to Valley County for developments within the
city of Donnelly area of impact, the county shall deliver a copy of the
completed application and supporting documents to the city of Donnelly at least
forty five (45) days prior to any county public hearing or public meeting.
   B.   The City of Donnelly will then have the opportunity to review the
application and submit recommendations or opinions. These must be submitted in
writing to the Valley County planning and zoning commission on official city
letterhead at least seven (7) days prior to the county hearing or meeting date.
   C.   All official communications between the city and county pertaining to a
development proposal within the City of Donnelly impact area shall be in
writing. If the city does not provide written comment on any particular
proposal, then the note, “No comment from the City of Donnelly,” will be
entered into the official public record for the affected project.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-10: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   All public improvements within the city of Donnelly impact area should be
designed and constructed according to the city standards for future annexation
consideration when appropriate. Valley County should consider adopting city of
Donnelly public improvement standards for use within the impact area if changes
or annexation are requested. City of Donnelly water and sewer service may be
available subject to city of Donnelly service extension policies and city code
requirements being met. All costs associated with upgrading or extending main
lines and/or connecting to city services will be paid by the landowner or
developers according to the city code and fee schedule.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-11: BUILDING CODES, PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   All building code administration within the Donnelly impact area will be
conducted by Valley County outside of the present city limits.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-12: APPROACH PERMITS:
   Approach permits, when required, shall be obtained from the Valley County
road department or the Idaho transportation department prior to construction of
project improvements. Permit requirements must be completed prior to
recordation of a final plat or final occupancy of a structure.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-13: FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE:
   The floodplain ordinance adopted by Valley County shall apply within the
Donnelly impact area and shall be administered by Valley County.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-14: PUBLIC STREET MAINTENANCE:
   Maintenance of public streets within the Donnelly impact area shall be the
responsibility of Valley County unless otherwise stipulated by written
agreement between the county and city.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-15: AMENDMENTS:
   This agreement shall not be amended, supplanted or repealed except pursuant
to the Idaho Code 67-6526.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
7-3-16: SEVERABILITY:
   Should any section, clause, or provision of this agreement be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the
agreement as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be
invalid. The provisions of the agreement may be enforced by either the city of
Donnelly or Valley County by virtue of legal action initiated to require
specific performance with the terms of this agreement.
(Ord. 2025-05, 4-28-2025)
TITLE 8
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
AIRPORT ZONING
SECTION:
8-1-1: Short Title
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Zones
8-1-4: Height Limitations
8-1-5: Use Restrictions
8-1-6: Nonconforming Uses
8-1-7: Permits
8-1-8: Conflicting Regulations
8-1-9: Enforcement
8-1-10: Appeals
8-1-11: Penalty
8-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VALLEY COUNTY AIRPORT
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The official designated by the board of county commissioners
to administer this chapter.
   AIRPORT: The McCall Municipal Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation of the highest point on the
usable landing area.
   AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area and so designated.
   BOARD: The board of county commissioners of Valley County, Idaho.
   COMMISSION: The Valley County planning and zoning commission.
   HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or
taxiing of aircraft.
   NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, tree or natural growth or use
of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment thereto.
   RUNWAY: The paved surface of an airport landing strip.
   STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation to, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines.
   TREE: Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds' maximum gross weight
and less, excluding turbo jet powered aircraft.
   VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures, with no existing instrument procedure and no
instrument designation indicated on a federal aviation administration or
military service approved airport layout plan, or by any other FAA or military
planning document. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-3: ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the
noninstrument approach zone, transition zone, horizontal zone and conical zone.
Such areas and zones are shown on the McCall Municipal Airport zoning map
consisting of an airport vicinity map with topographic contours, one sheet,
prepared by Philip Marshall, civil engineer, and dated February 14, 1974, which
is attached to the ordinance codified herein, and made a part hereof. The
various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
   A.   Visual Approach Zone: A visual approach zone shall have a width of two
hundred fifty feet (250') at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond each
end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of one thousand two
hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') beyond
each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline
of the runway, and has a slope of twenty to one (20:1).
   B.   Transitional Zone: These zones extend outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of seven to one (7:1) from the sides of the primary zone and from the sides of
the approach zones.
   C.   Horizontal Zone: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above
the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
zone of each runway of each airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is five thousand feet (5,000')
for all runways designated as utility or visual. The radius of the arc
specified for each end of the runway will have the same arithmetical value.
   D.   Conical Zone: A zone extending outward and upward from the periphery of
the horizontal zone at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
   E.   Primary Zone: A zone longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary zone extends two
hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no
specially prepared hard surface, the primary zone ends at each end of the
runway. The elevation of any point on the primary zone coincides with the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary
zone is two hundred fifty feet (250') for utility runways having only visual
approaches.
   F.   Approach Zone: A zone longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary zone.
An approach zone is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type of
approach available or planned for that runway end.
      1.   The inner edge of the approach zone is the same width as the primary
zone and it expands uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet
(1,250') for that end of a utility runway with only visual approaches.
      2.   The approach zone for utility runways with a visual approach extends
for a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') at a slope of twenty
to one (20:1).
      3.   The outer width of an approach zone to an end of a runway will be
that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing
or planned for that runway. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-4: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be
erected, altered, or allowed to grow, or maintained in any surface created by
this chapter to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for
such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones
in question as follows:
   A.   Visual Approach Zone For Utility Runway: One foot (1') in height for
each twenty feet (20') in horizontal distance beginning at a point on and at
the centerline elevation of the end of the runway and extending to a point five
thousand feet (5,000') from the end of the runway.
   B.   Transitional Zone: These zones extend outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of seven to one (7:1) from the sides of the primary zone and from the sides of
the approach zones.
   C.   Horizontal Zone: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above
the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
zone of each runway of each airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is five thousand feet (5,000')
for all runways designated as utility or visual. The radius of the arc
specified for each end of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That
value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway when a five
thousand foot (5,000') arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two (2)
adjacent ten thousand foot (10,000') arcs. The five thousand foot (5,000') arc
shall be disregarded on the construction of the perimeter of the horizontal
zone.
   D.   Conical Zone: A zone extending outward and upward from the periphery of
the horizontal zone a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal distance
of four thousand feet (4,000').
   E.   Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure
to a height up to thirty feet (30') above the surface of the land.
Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more
restrictive limitation shall prevail. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to: a)
create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and
aircraft; b) make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of fliers using the airport; c) impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or d) otherwise endanger the
landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this chapter
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or
alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof and is
diligently prosecuted.
   B.   Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the
owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the director to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards.
Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of McCall Municipal Airport. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-7: PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exceptions:
      1.   Permit Required: Except as specifically provided in the following
subsections, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established
in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for
and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which
the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determinations is in the affirmative,
the permit shall be granted.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the ground, except, when
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
         b.   In the areas lying within the limits of the noninstrument
approach zones but at a distance of not less than five thousand feet (5,000')
from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height
limitation prescribed for such noninstrument approach zone.
         c.   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height
except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
transitional zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any
structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this
chapter except as set forth in section
8-1-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to
air navigation, than it was on the effective date hereof or any amendments
hereto, or that existed when the application for a permit was made. Except as
indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the administrator
determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more
than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   D.   Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, must obtain a
permit from the administrator authorizing such action. Such variances shall be
allowed where literal application or enforcement of this chapter would result
in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would
not be contrary to the public interest or create hazards to air flight. Any
special permits may be allowed subject to such reasonable conditions as the
administrator may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter,
including the condition that the owners of the structure or tree in question
permit the political subdivision of this state having an interest in the McCall
Municipal Airport to install, operate, and maintain, at its own expense, such
markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to fliers the presence of an
airport hazard. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-8: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
are, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees,
the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern or prevail. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-9: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the administrator to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the administrator upon a form furnished by him. Applications required
by this chapter to be submitted to the administrator shall be promptly
considered and granted or denied by him. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974)
8-1-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Decision Of Administrator: Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer
affected by any decision of the administrator may, within ten (10) days from
the date of such decision, appeal to the commission by filing such appeal with
the administrator in writing, setting forth the grounds therefor and such
administrator shall forthwith transmit such appeal together with all pertinent
documents, to the commission. The commission shall, within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such appeal and after ten (10) days' notice to all parties in
interest, hear such appeal and within ten (10) days thereafter shall render a
written decision thereon.
   B.   Decision Of Commission; Requirements: Appeals from the decision of the
commission may be taken to the board of county commissioners with the same
requirements as provided for appeals to the commission.
   C.   Manner Of Taking Appeal: Appeals from the decision of the board of
county commissioners shall be taken in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 74-4,
10-15-1974)
8-1-11: PENALTY:
Each violation of this chapter, or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 74-4, 10-15-1974; amd. 2011 Code)
TITLE 9
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
AUTHORITY; DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Authority
9-1-3: Enabling Legislation
9-1-4: Purpose
9-1-5: Scope
9-1-6: Separability
9-1-7: Applicability Of Title
9-1-8: Organization And Use Of Title
9-1-9: Related County Ordinances, Policies Or Standards
9-1-10: Definitions
9-1-1: TITLE:
The text of this title, together with the appropriate maps and appendices,
shall be known as the VALLEY COUNTY LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE,
hereinafter referred to as the "ordinance" or "LUDO". (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY:
Authorization for these land use regulations is contained in the Idaho planning
act of 1975, Idaho Code sections 67-6501 through 67-6538 with special emphasis
on section 67-6503 providing that "every city and county shall exercise the
power conferred by this chapter" with regard to the establishment of zoning
districts, Idaho Code section 67-6511; the issuance of special or conditional
use permits, Idaho Code section 67-6512; the regulation of land subdivision
development, Idaho Code sections 67-6513 through 67-6514 and also Idaho Code
sections 50-1301 through 50-1334; the regulations of planned unit developments,
Idaho Code section 67-6515; the adoption of design standards and building
criteria, Idaho Code section 67-6518; and the regulation of land use according
to other provisions of Idaho Code chapter 65. Further, the county declares its
intent to comply with Idaho Code sections 67-6508 and 67-6509 by the
establishment of this title based upon a comprehensive plan. The standards and
policies of this title, which were originally adopted on November 8, 1982,
reviewed and adopted by the Valley County planning and zoning commission on
February 20, 1992; adopted by the Valley County board of commissioners on April
13, 1992, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6509, have been adopted in
accordance with the comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the board on
May 31, 1978, and as amended on June 21, 2001, and revised January 27, 2003,
and again on April 10, 2006, with the attitudes of the general public of the
county as expressed in land use planning workshops conducted prior to the
writing and codification of this title. The Valley County planning and zoning
commission has approved and submitted this title. The board of commissioners
has reviewed this title and found that its review and update does promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the county as follows:
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   A.   By protecting the property rights and enhancing the property values.
   B.   By ensuring that adequate public facilities and services are provided
to the people in a timely manner and at reasonable cost.
   C.   By ensuring that the economy of the state and localities is protected
and enhanced.
   D.   By ensuring that the important environmental features of the state and
localities are protected and enhanced.
   E.   By encouraging the protection of prime agricultural, forestry, and
mining lands for production of food, fiber and minerals.
   F.   By encouraging urban and urban type development within incorporated
cities, impact areas and other designated areas.
   G.   By avoiding undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land
in rural areas.
   H.   By ensuring that the development on land is commensurate with physical
characteristics of the land.
   I.   By protecting life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters.
   J.   By protecting fish, wildlife, and recreation resources.
   K.   By avoiding undue water and air pollution.
   L.   By providing for affordable housing for county residents and workers.
   M.   By providing corridors for pathways and alternative transportation.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-3: ENABLING LEGISLATION:
   A.   Authority: The authority for the provisions of this title, including
any and all rules, regulations, powers, procedures, and processes established
thereunder, is provided for under Idaho Code title 67, referred to as the
"Local Planning Act Of 1975". Further authority is derived from Idaho Code
section 67-6526 concerning the establishment of areas of city impact.
   B.   Change, Amendment Or Repeal: In complying with the above stated
enabling legislation, any change, amendment, or repeal in the aforementioned
legislation shall have effect on the provisions of this title requiring
alteration, amendment, or repeal of those provisions necessary to bring this
title, and all of its parts, into conformance with the laws of the state of
Idaho. Further, should the Idaho state legislature, at any future time, enact
and pass other legislation, the same being signed into law, having an impact on
this title or any of its parts, said legislation shall require alteration,
amendment, or repeal of those provisions necessary to comply with the laws of
the state of Idaho. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-4: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this title is to provide a unified regulatory
system for land use in the county dependent upon the concentration of
development. It is designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county.
   B.   Intent: The intent of this title is, as well, to protect both property
rights and property values, minimize the adverse impact of development; control
the sequence and timing of development; assure that development is maintained
properly, requiring for on site and off site public facilities or services;
discouraging urban sprawl; requiring strict standards for commercial and
residential development, including provisions for affordable housing; and
encouraging efficient use of land while maintaining the open space and rural
feel of the county by encouraging cluster development where appropriate. This
title is further intended to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare by regulating activities and development in hazardous areas.
   C.   Standards: Standards of this title additionally intend to encourage
well planned development; to improve land records and resource data; to
safeguard the interests of the public, adjacent property owners, developers,
and purchasers; and, to assure equitable handling of all proposals by providing
uniform procedures and standards. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-5: SCOPE:
   A.   Applicability: Regulations of this title shall apply to all real
property, structures or fixtures attached thereto in the county outside of any
incorporated city or any areas of city impact for which the county has
relinquished authority or replaced with city ordinances.
   B.   Compliance: The United States Of America, the state of Idaho, Valley
County and all their respective agencies, boards, departments, institutions,
and local special purpose districts shall comply with this title unless
otherwise excepted by law.
   C.   Interpretation And Application: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this title shall be regarded as the minimum
requirements for the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare.
   D.   Use Or Development: No use or development of land is permitted which is
in violation of the laws of the county, state of Idaho, or the United States Of
America.
   E.   Restrictions Covering Same Subject Matter: Whenever a provision of this
title and another provision of this title, or any provision of any city, state,
federal, or county regulation, resolution, law, rule, or contract contain
restrictions covering the same subject matter, the more restrictive
requirements or higher standards shall govern.
   F.   Conflicting Provisions: If any provision of this title shall be in
conflict with any other provision, section or chapter of any other ordinance
after said publication, the provisions of this title shall supersede and
prevail.
   G.   Severability: If any one or more of the sections, subsections or any
other parts of this title are, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this title and the same shall remain in full force and effect.
   H.   Amendment: If any amendment to this title is, for any reason, held to
be unconstitutional or invalid, then the language of the ordinance prior to
such decision shall remain in full force and effect.
   I.   Certification And Publication: The clerk of the board of county
commissioners shall certify to adoption of this title and cause the same to be
published according to law.
   J.   Effective Date: This title is to be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval, and publication according to law. (Ord. 10-06, 8-
23-2010)
9-1-6: SEPARABILITY:
Where a court of competent jurisdiction holds any word, phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or other part of this title invalid, such shall
affect only that part so held invalid. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-7: APPLICABILITY OF TITLE:
This title, in all of its parts, shall apply to the use, development, and
subdivision of land after the effective date hereof, and shall not be
retroactive on any use or subdivision of land undertaken prior to the effective
date hereof. Building and use permits shall be available on all lots and
parcels created prior to final passage hereof insofar as said lots and parcels
were created in conformance with the ordinances then in effect and, insomuch as
the creation of those lots and parcels in no way violates the provisions of
Idaho Code sections 50-1301 through 50-1334 and other changes to Idaho Code
title 50, having reference to platting and recordation requirements and
procedures or other laws or regulations. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-
5, 6-6-2011)
9-1-8: ORGANIZATION AND USE OF TITLE:
   A.   Concepts: All lands or area of city impact, except as may be altered
under Idaho Code sections 67-6525 and 67-6526 in the unincorporated areas of
the county, are hereby classed into one multiple use district. The purpose of
one land use classification is to grant landowners maximum flexibility in using
and developing their properties. This concept is unlike traditional zoning
where general categories of land use are separated geographically from each
other in order to reduce the occurrence of incompatible uses on adjoining
properties. The multiple use concept depends on other methods to ensure
compatibility. In the county, where existing agricultural and open land uses
that protect, retain or enhance the natural beauty and open space
characteristics have been established as the desired standard for neighborhood
development, it is not necessary to review and evaluate those proposed changes
in use which continue similar practices, character and level of activity and
are inherently compatible with the agrarian heritage. However, agricultural
uses which change the character of the existing neighborhood development,
either by practice, intensity or structure, shall be reviewed as a conditional
use. It is also necessary to classify some other land uses as conditional so
they can be reviewed and evaluated individually by the commission and commented
upon by neighboring landowners as to their compatibility with existing uses.
This title is organized to first define and set standards and procedures for
those uses which are considered inherently compatible or "permitted" uses.
Secondly, to define and set standards and procedures for those uses which are
considered "conditional". Finally, this title defines and sets standards and
procedures for special areas, sign standards, cell towers, planned unit
developments, and provides guidelines for administration and enforcement.
   B.   Questions In Posing Land Use Change: In using this title, any person
proposing a land use change will need to know the answer to the following
questions:
      1.   Is the land use proposed a permitted use or a conditional use?
      2.   Is the land use proposed within a special area?
      3.   What standards and procedures will apply to the proposed use?    
   C.   Multiple-Use District:
      1.   Permitted Uses: "Permitted uses" within the multiple use district
are defined in chapter 4 of this title. Standards and procedures for permitted
uses are also contained in chapter 4 of this title. There may be additional
standards affecting the proposed use in chapter 6, "Special Areas", of this
title.
      2.   Conditional Uses:
         a.   "Conditional uses" within the multiple use district are defined
in chapter 5 of this title. There may be additional standards affecting the
proposed use in chapter 6, "Special Areas", of this title; chapter 8, "Wireless
Telecommunications Towers And Antennas", of this title; or chapter 9, "Planned
Unit Developments", of this title.
         b.   "Conditional uses" within the multiple use district are defined
in chapter 5 of this title. Standards and procedures for conditional uses are
also contained in chapter 5 of this title. There may be additional standards
affecting the proposed use in chapter 6 of this title; chapter 8 of this title,
or chapter 9 of this title.
   D.   Guide To Land Use Classification: Table 3-A, section
 9-3-1 of this title, is a guide to land use classifications and their status
as permitted or conditional uses. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-9: RELATED COUNTY ORDINANCES, POLICIES OR STANDARDS:
The following are related documents containing policies, standards, or
regulations, which, together with this title, will control land uses in the
county: (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
   A.   "Valley County Building Ordinance 11-2", as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   B.   "Valley County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance".
   C.   "Valley County Idaho Residential Energy Standards Ordinance".
   D.   "Subdivision Regulations For Valley County, Idaho", adopted April 29,
1970, as amended.
   E.   "Minimum Standards And Criteria For Approval Of Development And
Operation Of Mobile Home Subdivisions And Parks, Travel Trailer Courts And
Parks", adopted May 12, 1971.
   F.   "Construction Specifications And Standards For Roads And Streets In
Valley County, Idaho". (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-1-10: DEFINITIONS:
Except as defined hereafter, any terms not defined herein shall be given the
meanings ordinarily applied to such words as used in zoning terminology:
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building subordinate to the use of the principal
building on the same lot.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): Secondary living unit on a single-family lot.
An ADU contains its own kitchen, sleeping area, and bathroom facilities. ADUs
can be attached or detached from the primary residential unit. ADUs are
subordinate in size, location, and appearance to the primary dwelling unit.
ADUs are commonly referred to as mother-in-law apartments, ECHO homes (elder
cottage housing opportunities), guest cottages, caretaker cottages, garden
cottages, carriage houses, or rental units.
   ACT: The local planning act of 1975 as hereinafter amended set forth in
Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65.
   ADJACENT LANDOWNERS: Any person who has legal ownership of property, as
filed in the office of the Valley County recorder, within three hundred feet
(300') of the boundaries of the parcel or use for which a permit application
has been filed. Landowners adjacent to proposed land use changes would be
notified in accordance with subsection
9-5H-6B of this title.
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEES: The fees charged any applicant for any permit for all
reasonable administrative and other costs heretofore or hereafter incurred
directly or indirectly by the county in processing the application and
monitoring the construction, maintenance, and completion of all or part of the
permit.
   ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of this title (see definition of Staff).
   AFFECTED PERSON: Any person having an interest in real property which may be
adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit, variance, or other
action of the staff, commission, or board in regard to provisions of this
title.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING: See definition of Community Housing.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: Any building to be used for agricultural purposes,
placed on agricultural land of five (5) acres or more, categorized as
agricultural by the Valley County assessor's office, and which is not intended
for human habitation (including pump houses, barns, toolsheds, storage
buildings, etc.) or as determined to be a bona fide agricultural use by the
Valley County planning and zoning commissioners.
   AGRICULTURAL USES: Farming; dairying; pasturage; cultivation; tillage;
horticulture; floriculture; silviculture; viticulture; vermiculture; and
animal, poultry, and fish husbandry as the principal land use and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce. Agricultural uses
shall not include commercial riding stables, racetracks, slaughterhouses,
plants, factories, works for the reduction of animal matter, or commercial
poultry, kennels, or feedlots.
   AIRPORT: A public facility used for the accommodation, servicing, landing,
and take off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT VICINITIES: An area of land as defined by the FAA and in chapter 6
of this title surrounding an airport.
   AIRSTRIP: A private facility used for the accommodation, servicing, landing,
and take off of aircraft.
   APARTMENT: A multi-family residential complex; all units are owned by a
single person, group of people, or corporation, and rented or leased to
individuals.
   APPLICANT: Any owner of land or an authorized representative; or an
individual or group who has a legal or equitable interest in the land; and, who
files an application for a permit, variance, or appeal in accordance with the
requirements of this title.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: A. The exercise of judgment and care under the
circumstances then prevailing, which men of prudence and discretion exercise in
the management of their own affairs.
   B.   Best management practices for water quality and the improvement thereof
is the state of the art practices in engineering, planning, or administration
to prevent or reduce runoff pollutants 1 .
   BOARD: The Valley County board of county commissioners.
   BOND: A contract between the applicant and the county in which the applicant
guarantees that he will perform certain requirements of any permit under this
title. The contract shall require the applicant to secure performance of the
contract by surety, cash, collateral, or other consideration sufficient to
assure either performance or reclamation of any act or acts authorized by the
permit. This contract includes, but is not limited to, performance,
reclamation, contractors, material man indemnification or other bond assuring
the performance of applicant under any permit and the payment of all labor and
material in the performance of any work provided to or for the benefit of the
applicant under any permit. Any bond would require an A+ Bests rating. In the
discretion of the board, the principals of such a bond may be required to
include the real parties in interest such as officers, directors, shareholders
or partners.
   BUILDING: Any permanent structure over three feet (3') in height built for
the shelter or enclosure of persons, livestock, materials, equipment, etc.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Valley County building official.
   BUSINESS: Any retail or wholesale store, professional office, or similar
kind of commercial establishment.
   CAFO (CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION OR CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING
OPERATIONS): See definition in Idaho Code section 67-6529C. All CAFOs are
subject to Idaho Code section 67-6529.
   CENTRAL SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY: Any plant, lagoon, or system, other than
an approved individual modified septic tank, drain field, or pit privy, for
receiving, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   CHURCH BUILDINGS OR CAMPGROUNDS: Any structure or property which is directly
used for exempt purposes and is owned by any church which is qualified as an
organization exempt from income tax or operated by a body or organization of
religious believers for the purpose of practicing their faith.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision or other development planned and
constructed so as to group structures or lots into relatively concentrated and
contiguous areas while providing a unified network of open space, wooded area,
recreational or agricultural land.
   COMMERCIAL: Any use, which involves the sale of products or services, or
receipt of money, goods, or services in trade for the benefit of the use.
   COMMISSION: The Valley County planning and zoning commission.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE: Common use by all property owners within the subdivision
including permanent viewsheds, golf courses, conservation easements, or other
like uses that also meet the definition of Open Space.
   COMMON OWNERSHIP: The joint and simultaneous ownership of a piece of
property by the owners of separate parcels or units within a development.
   COMMUNITY HOUSING: Housing which is restricted as to occupancy, sale price,
and/or rental rates and which is intended for purchase, rental, and occupancy
by persons and families who are or were employed within Valley County, Adams
County, and/or their municipalities.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A compilation of goals, objectives, maps, and other data
guiding the physical, social, and economic development, both public and
private, of the county and its environs as defined in the local planning act of
1975, and adopted by resolution of the Valley County commission or as hereafter
amended.
   CONDITIONAL USE: Any use as defined by this title which, because of its
potential incompatibility with adjacent or traditional uses, is subject to
review by the commission and public comment at a public hearing to best ensure
compatible land uses.
   CONDOMINIUM: A development in which individual dwelling units are platted
and owned or are intended to be owned in severalty, while the land and at least
the structural components and exterior surfaces of the buildings are owned in
common by the owners of the dwelling units.
   COUNTY ENGINEER: A registered professional engineer in the state of Idaho
appointed by the board who is responsible for the administration of engineering
matters of the county including public works facilities as ordered by the
board.
   COUNTY SURVEYOR: The registered professional land surveyor in the state of
Idaho appointed by the board to check plats, and make surveys, maps, and plats
as ordered by the board.
   CROP CULTIVATION: Any act designed to improve and prepare the land or loosen
or dig soil around growing plants for agricultural purposes.
   CROP HARVESTING: Any act done for the gathering of crops of any kind.
   DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated only when accepted by the board as public
dedication, either by the passage of a county ordinance or by entry of a
resolution of approval in the official minute book of the meetings of the
board.
   DEED RESTRICTION: A recorded document running with the land, which may,
among other uses, regulate the conditions under which a community housing unit
may be sold, occupied, or otherwise utilized.
   DENSITY: Number of residential lots or dwelling units per acre of land.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any grading, vegetation removal, construction activity, or any
other activity which changes the existing character or use of the land or has
any impact on adjoining properties.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A contract between the applicant and the county to
assure performance of the applicant on any permit and for the payment of any
impact fees, bonds, reimbursement fees, or other duties and obligations of the
applicant related to the permit.
   DITCH: A long narrow excavation dug in the earth for drainage or irrigation.
   DIVISION OF LAND: The segregation of one or more parcels of land from a
larger tract held in single or undivided ownership by transferring, or
contracting to transfer, title to or possession of a portion of the tract, or
by properly recording a deed or subdivision plat establishing the identity of
the segregated parcels.
   DWELLING UNIT: The descriptive unit of measure for determining residential
use and density. It may be a single building or part thereof which provides for
the full living facilities of one or more persons. Includes:
   A.   Single-family detached dwelling.
   B.   Single-family attached or clustered multi-unit component such as a
duplex or condominium.
   C.   Mobile home, travel trailer, recreational vehicle or preconstructed
modular unit on any sort of foundation, which meets the above criteria.
   D.   Recreational Vehicle that is placed on any sort of foundation, if the
wheels have been removed, and is not licensed for over the road travel; and,
which meets the above criteria. If on a foundation or wheels have been removed,
a license for over the road travel does not relieve the RV from meeting the
definition of Dwelling Unit.
   E.   Three Recreation Vehicles equate to one dwelling unit for density
calculations.
   DWELLING UNIT EQUIVALENT: A single building or part thereof that provides
for partial living facilities but excludes cooking and laundry facilities
within the individual living spaces. Includes:
   A.   One-half (1/2) dwelling unit where food preparation and dining
facilities are not provided on site as part of the development, and laundry
facilities are provided as a service only.
   B.   One-third (1/3) dwelling unit equivalent where food preparation, dining
and laundry services as well as meeting and other public spaces are included on
site as part of the development.
The above shall not exclude a microwave oven, coffeemaker and/or small,
undercounter refrigerator such as is provided in a hotel/motel application that
is not intended for long term continuous stay.
   EASEMENT: A right to the use of land, other than as a tenant, for a specific
purpose by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land.
   ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
   EQUITABLE INTEREST: An interest in land or the structures appurtenant
thereto through a deed, contract of sale, or an option to buy.
   EVIDENCE: Any map, table, chart, contract, document, video or audio
recording or testimony prepared or certified by a qualified person to attest to
a specific claim or condition, which evidence must be relevant and competent
and must support the position maintained before the commission.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed,
located or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outdoors. Lights
that are indoors that are intended to light something outside are considered
exterior lighting for the purpose of this title. Exterior lighting does not
include emergency or warning lights on vehicles.
   FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a rooming house,
club, or hotel.
   FEEDLOT: The operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard where
consigned livestock are fed concentrated feeds, particularly for the purpose of
fattening for market (see definition of CAFO [Concentrated Animal Feeding
Operation Or Confined Animal Feeding Operations]).
   FEES, IMPACT: The fees authorized by the state of Idaho statutes for those
services provided by the county or other local taxing agencies which would
otherwise be funded by tax revenues. The fees shall be reasonably related to,
but shall not exceed, the actual cost of the service rendered. The fees shall
be in cash or other consideration that may be negotiated with an applicant.
   FEES, REIMBURSEMENT: Any applicant for any permit involving a planned unit
development which is residential or multiuse, subdivision, cluster development,
condominium, or any other proposed change in use which significantly alters the
characteristics of the existing use shall be required to pay a reimbursement
fee to the county for all reasonable administrative and other costs heretofore
or hereafter incurred directly or indirectly by the county in processing the
application and monitoring the construction, maintenance, and completion of all
or part of the permit. These fees may be adopted by resolution.
   FINAL PLAT: A map for recording of real estate interests with the county
recorder prepared by a registered professional land surveyor and conforming to
the requirements of the subdivision regulations, adopted April 29, 1970, as
amended.
   FLOODPLAIN: An area of land adjacent to a stream which is subject to special
flood hazards defined in county ordinance 90-3 adopted August 27, 1990 2 .
   FRACTIONAL OWNERSHIP OR TIMESHARES: The right to exclusive use of a unit
which rotates among participants in a program on a fixed or floating time
schedule over a period of years; or operation of a reservation or time use
system among co-owners of a unit, regardless of whether or not any co-owner may
later opt out of the system and regardless of whether the reservation or time
use system is recorded or unrecorded, fixed or floating. Unit must have over
five (5) owners or participants to be considered as a fractional ownership or
timeshare. Relatives shall be considered one owner.
   GENERAL SUBMISSION: All maps, reports, certifications, agreements, or other
information drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this
title, to permit evaluation of the concept and feasibility of the development.
This submission applies to all permit applications. General submission includes
preliminary plat and site plan submissions.
   GLARE: Stray, unshielded light striking the eye that may result in:
   A.   Nuisance or annoyance glare such as light shining into a window;
   B.   Discomfort glare such as bright light causing squinting of the eyes;
   C.   Disabling glare such as bright light reducing the ability of the eyes
to see into shadows; or
   D.   Reduction of visual performance.
   GRADIENT: Refers to an incline from the horizontal plane which may be
expressed as "percent slope" or "slope ratio"; a fifteen percent (15%) slope is
equal to a fifteen foot (15') rise within a one hundred foot (100') horizontal
distance.
   HALFWAY HOUSE OR HOME: Any building used for the purpose of housing persons
under the custody of any county or the Idaho state board of corrections as a
prisoner for the violation of a criminal offense for the purpose of
rehabilitation or reintegration into society.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY: Hospitals, psychiatric hospitals, tuberculosis
hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities, kidney
disease treatment centers, including freestanding hemodialysis units,
ambulatory surgical facilities, birthing centers, community health centers,
health maintenance organizations (HMO), independent laboratories, migrant
health centers, public health clinics and freestanding emergency care centers.
   HEIGHT, BUILDING: The maximum distance, measured vertically at any location
within the building footprint, from the lower existing or finished grade level
to a point above that grade level equal to the highest roof or parapet surface
of a flat roof or to a point halfway between the eaves and ridge or peak of a
gable, gambrel, hip, or shed roof.
   HELIPAD: Any private property used for a helicopter to land or take off.
   HIGH WATER LINE: The line along a stream or other body of water, including
reservoirs and canals, below which the water denudes the land of vegetation, or
the normal high water level established by engineering design for reservoirs.
   HOSPITAL: An institution which is primarily engaged in providing to
inpatients, by or under the supervision of physicians, diagnostic services, and
therapeutic services for medical diagnosis, treatment, and care of injured,
disabled, or sick persons, or rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of
injured, disabled, or sick persons including hospitals owned and operated by
the United States government or its agents or the state or its agents.
   HOUSING AUTHORITY: See definition of Valley/Adams Regional Housing
Authority.
   IMPACT FEES: See definition of Fees, Impact.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Street pavements, paths, bikeways, sedimentation control
facilities, revegetation, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water systems, sanitary
and storm systems, gas lines, electric and telephone lines and appurtenances,
street signs, lights, irrigation canals, landscaping, lot corner monuments, and
other such items as may be required for compliance with the regulations of this
title.
   INDUSTRY, EXTRACTIVE: When mineral deposits and other natural resources are
taken out of the ground for use in the business of selling such deposits, or
for use in another business, or for use by any department or division of
federal, state, county, or municipal government.
   INDUSTRY, HEAVY: Any manufacturing, processing, or testing of goods and
materials, including the production of power, where the byproducts of such use
include noise, smoke, odor, glare, gas, vibration, dust, light, or traffic
which may have a detrimental effect on neighboring property.
   INDUSTRY, LIGHT: Warehousing, wholesaling, manufacturing and/or processing
of goods and materials which do not emit offensive odor, dust, smoke, glare,
gas, light, noise, or vibration which cannot be confined to the site itself.
   KENNEL: An enclosure for the commercial or private boarding or breeding of
more than three (3) dogs.
   LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not
limited to, discomfort to the eye or diminished vision due to glare, light
trespass, uplighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the eye, or any manmade
light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling on the property of another or the public right
of way when it is not required to do so.
   LIVESTOCK HUSBANDRY: The raising of livestock except for feedlots,
commercial poultry operations or kennels.
   LOT: A parcel of land shown as an individual unit on the most recent
subdivision plat in the county records.
   LOT COVERAGE: That portion of a lot that is occupied by the principal
building and its accessory buildings, including overhangs, along with any
structures requiring a building permit, and other outbuildings.
   LUMBER MILL: The site, equipment, and buildings necessary to saw, plane, or
mill tree logs into posts, poles, building logs, lumber, dimensional lumber or
similar products.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: See the Valley County building code.
   MITIGATION: Exactions to counteract impacts on the ability of political
subdivisions of the state, including school districts, to deliver services
without compromising quality of service delivery to current residents or
imposing substantial additional costs upon current residents to accommodate the
proposed use.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land which has been planned and improved, or
which is let, rented, or used for the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes
for nontransient dwelling use.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A parcel of land subdivided into lots, each lot
individually owned or intended for sale, and utilized as the site for placement
of a single mobile home and its facilities.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE: See definition of Residence, Multi- Family.
   NONCONFORMING USE: Any structure or use of land, which is inconsistent or
not in compliance with the provisions of this title or an amendment hereto,
which was in existence on the effective date hereof.
   OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a parcel of land, building, structure, or
part thereof is used or intended to be used.
   OPEN SPACE: A portion of real property devoid of buildings and other
physical improvements, except where accessory to the provision of passive or
active recreation, or fish and wildlife habitat improvements, or any natural
break which serves one of the following functions:
   A.   Provides relief from monotonous building arrangements.
   B.   Conserves or preserves natural, historic and other amenities with
social or cultural value.
   C.   Maintains the natural water table level or preserves wetlands.
   D.   Roads, parking areas, and unusable strips of land shall not be
considered in open space calculations. Open space must be an amenity to the
planned unit development. Amenities may include, but are not limited to: parks,
play yards, playgrounds, beaches, waterways, ski hills, tennis courts, swimming
pools, natural vegetation, gardens, wooded areas, developed recreation areas,
ponds over one acre in size, etc.
   E.   Open space should be contiguous to open space in other developments
when possible.
   ORIGINAL PARCEL: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record on file in
the office of the Valley County recorder, a tax parcel that existed at the time
of adoption of the subdivision regulations on April 29, 1970, or each one-
sixteenth (1/16) of a section held in one ownership and of record at the
effective date hereof.
   OVERLAY, SPECIAL AREAS: Areas of land as defined by chapter 6 of this title
as special overlay subdistricts, meaning that special standards and
restrictions apply in addition to those generally required.
   OWNER: The legal person or persons owning the fee estate or purchasing same
under a real estate contract.
   PARCEL: Any unsubdivided land recorded as the property of one individual, or
more than one individual, if considered as one interest, but not otherwise
defined as a lot.
   PATHWAY: Any sidewalk, route, lane, path, corridor, open space, or trail
designated to move people by nonmotorized means for transportation or
recreation. Nonmotorized does not include snowmobiles, unless otherwise
prohibited.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Land use regulations which control the "effect"
rather than the "use" by regulating appearance, design, construction and
operation of both on site and off site improvements or activities.
   PERMIT: An official document or certificate authorizing performance of a
specified activity.
   PERMITTED USE: Any use as defined by this title which is not subject to
review by the commission nor which requires a public hearing.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: See the definition of a PUD in chapter 9 of this
title.
   PLAT: A plan of certain described land prepared in accordance with
subdivision or other regulations as an instrument for recording real estate
interests with the county recorder.
   POULTRY: Domestic fowl including, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys,
ducks, geese, or other fowl intended for household use or family consumption.
   PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A prescribed vehicular access serving a single private
property or residence from either a private or public road.
   PRIVATE ROAD: Any access road located on private property or a road so
designated on the subdivision plat and by a recorded declaration that is
maintained by a property owners' association or corporation in accordance with
the specifications of the subdivision ordinance.
   PUBLIC ROAD: Any access road located within a right of way dedicated to
public use, constructed to county standards, and approved and accepted by the
county commissioners in accordance with the subdivision ordinance, or any
access road used by the general public for road purposes and maintained at
public expense for a period of five (5) years or more.
RS 2477 RIGHTS OF WAY: The rights to cross property to go to and from another
parcel. The right of way may be a specific grant of land or an "easement",
which is a right to pass across another's land. The easement is itself a real
property interest, which has historically been described as a highway and/or an
RS 2477. The legal definition of "highway" means not only the often traveled
and sometime maintained roads, but also other kinds of public ways including
carriageways, bridleways, footways, trails, bridges, and even railroads,
canals, ferries, and rivers.
   RECREATION BUSINESS: Recreation or athletic activities or facilities open to
the general public where fees are charged or dues are required for the use of
the facility.
   RECREATION, LOW DENSITY: Any recreational site which does not have permanent
structures or utilities.
   RECREATION, PRIVATE USES: Noncommercial recreation activities or facilities
owned privately or by a nonprofit organization intended for the use and
enjoyment of the owner or owners.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. See Idaho Code
39-4201(2).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMPGROUND: A parcel of land under one ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of two (2) or three (3)
transient recreational vehicles for dwelling purposes, including placement on
parcels where single family residential uses have also been established. It is
specifically for the recreational use of the parcel by friends and family of
the property. An administrative permit in accordance with VCC Title
9-4-8 Recreational Vehicle Campground is required. This does not include
multiple family groups that are camping on holiday type of weekends.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A parcel of land under one ownership which has
been planned and improved or which is let, rented or used for the placement of
two (2) or more transient recreational vehicles for dwelling purposes. This
does not include the recreational use of the parcel by friends and family of
the property so long as an administrative permit in accordance with VCC Title
9-4-8 Recreational Vehicle Campground has been issued.
   REFERRAL AGENCY: Any governing body, department, agency, or authorized
representative who has jurisdiction over, or a concern about, the use of a
parcel of land for which a particular development or activity is being
proposed.
   REIMBURSEMENT FEES: See definition of Fees, Reimbursement.
   RESIDENCE, MULTI-FAMILY: Any building designed to provide complete living
facilities for more than one family, or containing more than one separate
dwelling unit for sale, rent or lease, or any lot or parcel containing more
than one dwelling unit.
   RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building constructed on a permanent
foundation designed to provide complete living facilities for one family and
constituting one dwelling unit.
   RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS: A business owned and operated by the occupant of a
residence, located on the same lot or parcel as the residence, which retains
the residential character. Restrictions will be applied to ensure the
residential character is retained. Restrictions may include:
   A.   Limit on the number of employees working on the premises to a maximum
of two;
   B.   Limit on working hours from 8:00 am to 7:00 pm, Monday through
Saturday;
   C.   Operational requirements to lessen impacts on nearby properties, such
as requiring doors and windows to be closed to lessen noise is required;
   D.   Limit on heavy truck traffic to one visit per day;
   E.   Limit on traffic volume to two vehicles per day;
   F.   Limit on the total square feet in any structure or on the percentage of
the total property that can be devoted to business use is less than 50%;
   G.   Limit or prohibition of outdoor storage or display unless screened; and
   H.   Limit on size or bulk of buildings to be the same as a single family
residential type of use.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A platted subdivision with more than one lot.
   RESPITE CARE CENTER: Any facility designated to provide twenty four (24)
hour respite care for more than three (3) physically or mentally disabled or
handicapped individuals, but not as a continuous living arrangement.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: A private legal restriction on the use of land
contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded.
Restrictive covenants are enforceable by the county if used during the
conditional use permit process to show compliance with required standards in
this title, the subdivision regulations, or any other Valley County ordinance.
Valley County will not be an enforcer of covenants unless there is a violation
of any of the adopted ordinances. If portions of the CCRs that were used to
show compliance with the LUDO were changed, those changes must be approved by
staff.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public
street, private street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, trails,
pathways, or for another special use.
   RUNWAY: Any existing or planned, paved surface or turf covered area of an
airport which is specifically designed and used or planned to be used for the
landing and/or taking off of an aircraft.
   SCHOOL BUILDINGS: Any buildings used by an educational institution or
organization, including public, private, or parochial academic schools
accredited or licensed by the state department of education.
   SETBACK: The required distance between every structure and all lot lines on
the lot on which structures are located, the required clear distance between
structures, or the required distance between structures and features such as
water bodies. Setbacks are measured from the eaves or furthest protuberance.
   SHALL: Mandatory.
   SHELTER HOME: A building or any facility, however named, operated on either
a profit or nonprofit basis, for the purpose of providing a home with necessary
supervision and facilities for three (3) or more persons not related to the
owner who are unable to care for themselves.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL OR VACATION RENTAL: Any individually or collectively owned
single-family house or dwelling unit or any unit or group of units in a
condominium, cooperative or timeshare, or owner-occupied residential home that
is offered for a fee and for thirty (30) days or less. Short-term rental or
vacation rental does not include a unit that is used for any retail,
restaurant, banquet space, event center, hotel/motel type lodging, or another
similar use.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL MARKETPLACE: A person that provides a platform through
which a lodging operator, or the authorized agent of the lodging operator,
offers a short-term rental or vacation rental to an occupant.
   SITE PLAN: An engineering or architectural drawing of existing and planned
conditions to facilitate review and approval of an application before the
commission and to guide construction of improvements.
   SITE STANDARDS: Land use regulations which control the location, density, or
arrangement of structures, utilities, and other site improvements on a parcel
of land.
   SKYGLOW: The overhead glow from light emitted sideways and upwards. Skyglow
is caused by the reflection and scattering of light by dust, water vapor and
other particles suspended in the atmosphere. Skyglow reduces one's ability to
view the night sky.
   SLOPE: Refers to an incline from the horizontal plane which may be expressed
as "percent slope", "slope ratio" or "gradient", a fifteen percent (15%) slope
is equal to a fifteen foot (15') rise within a one hundred foot (100')
horizontal distance.
   SPECIAL AREAS: Land areas defined by chapter 6 of this title and elsewhere
in these definitions or mapped on the county's land use maps as special overlay
subdistricts, meaning that special regulations apply in addition to those
generally required.
   STAFF: Personnel employed by the county to administer this title.
   STORAGE: The safekeeping of personal property in any structure.
   STREET OR ROAD: Any private or publicly dedicated way which provides a
principal means of access to abutting property. The terms "street" and "road"
are interchangeable throughout this title.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work, artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   SUBDIVIDER: An individual, firm, or group who undertakes the subdividing of
a lot, tract, or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
building development, and including dedication of streets or lot lines.
   SURVEYOR: A professional land surveyor registered in the state of Idaho.
   TEMPORARY USE: Any use not more than thirty (30) days in duration and
related to a specific project or occasion.
   TRACT: Any unsubdivided land recorded as the property of one individual, or
more than one individual, if considered as one interest, but not otherwise
defined as a lot.
   UNDUE HARDSHIP: Special conditions as a result of the geographic
characteristics of the site depriving the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed
by other property owners under the same terms of this title, but not merely a
matter of convenience or profit.
   UTILITIES: All water supply, drainage, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone,
telegraph, television and other communications lines and related features.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief from certain provisions of this title when,
because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
condition of the property, compliance would result in undue hardship upon the
owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or inability to receive
greater profit.
   WETLANDS: Those areas that are within the definition of wetlands as defined
by the environmental protection agency and within the jurisdiction of the corps
of engineers.
   WIND TURBINE, COMMERCIAL: A wind energy conversion system which converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind driven turbine generator
when the total height exceeds one hundred fifty feet (150') or the nameplate
capacity exceeds one hundred (100) kilowatts. Such wind turbine includes the
turbine, blade, tower, base and pad transformer, if any.
   WIND TURBINE, HOBBYIST: A wind energy conversion system which converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind driven turbine generator when
the total height is less than fifty feet (50') and a prop diameter of twelve
feet (12') or less.
   WIND TURBINE, PERSONAL: A wind energy conversion system which converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind driven turbine generator when
the total height is between fifty feet (50') and one hundred fifty feet (150')
and the nameplate is less than one hundred (100) kilowatts.
   WINTER OPACITY: Refers to the amount of wall space, or whatever feature is
being screened, that will remain visible from adjoining properties through a
mass of tree and shrub branches during the winter season.
   WOOD PROCESSING PLANT: The site, equipment, and buildings necessary to
convert wood into chips or fibers, or fibers into byproducts such as paper,
plywood and particleboard, or to extract byproducts from wood fibers. The
manufacturing process that converts wood fibers into pellets for solid fuel
heating shall not be considered a wood processing plant. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011; Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; Ord. 20-05, - -2020; Ord.
20-06, - -2020; Ord. 20-10, - -2020; Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See: "Handbook Of Valley County Stormwater Best Management Practices".
2 1. See title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-2-1: County Planning And Zoning Commission
9-2-2: Staff And Staff Duties
9-2-3: Enforcement; General Statement
9-2-4: Compliance By Issuers Of Permits
9-2-5: County Enforcement And Authority
9-2-6: Civil Enforcement
9-2-7: Investigations
9-2-8: Penalties
9-2-1: COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Membership:
      1.   Appointment: The commission shall consist of five (5) voting
members, each appointed by the chairman of the board of county commissioners
and confirmed by the majority vote of the board. An appointed member shall have
resided in the county for five (5) years prior to the appointment. The board
shall ensure that the interests of the entire county are broadly represented on
the commission, and shall select the members without respect to political
affiliation. The board should select members from throughout the county, i.e.,
two (2) members from the southern portion of the county and two (2) members
from the northern portion of the county, with one member from either, so as to
provide a better geographical representation. Each member must remain a
resident of the county during his service on the commission. Not more than two
(2) of the members may reside within an incorporated city in the county. Each
city council shall have opportunity to submit nominations to the board for
potential members from that city.
      2.   Term: Each member will serve for a term of three (3) years.
      3.   Vacancies: Unexpired terms shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointments.
      4.   Removal; Renewal: Members may be removed for cause, or have their
term renewed, by a majority vote of the board.
   B.   Conflict Of Interest; Ex Parte Contact:
      1.   Conflict Of Interest: A member or employee of the commission shall
not participate, without unanimous consent of the remaining commissioners, in
any proceeding or action when the member or employee (or his employer, business
partner, associate, or any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity
within the second degree) has economic interest in the procedure or action. Any
actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be disclosed at or before
any meeting at which the action is being heard, discussed openly, and a waiver
of potential conflict voted upon by the remaining commissioners.
      2.   Ex Parte Contact: Any action of the commission in applying the
general rules or policies to specific individuals or sites is quasi-judicial,
which creates a higher standard of expected conduct. Whenever quasi-judicial
issues are presented, both the proponents and opponents are entitled to know of
any information presented by the other side. Therefore, the decision must be
based only upon the evidence and testimony presented at the formal public
hearing. If any information has been presented to a member ex parte, that
information should be placed on the record at the hearing.
   C.   Organization: The commission shall elect a chairman and create any
additional offices it may deem necessary. The commission may establish
subcommittees, advisory committees, or neighborhood groups to advise and assist
in carrying out the responsibilities under this chapter. The commission shall
enact a set of bylaws to guide its operation as required in Idaho Code section
67-6504.
   D.   Meetings, Records, And Voting: At least one regular meeting shall be
held each month for not less than nine (9) months a year; additional special or
workshop meetings may be scheduled as necessary. All meetings and records shall
be open to the public. A record of meetings, hearing, resolutions, studies,
findings, permits, and actions taken shall be maintained. All members shall
have voting rights; a majority of the members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
   E.   Expenditures: With approval of the board, the commission may receive
and expend funds, goods, and services from the federal, state, or local
government agencies, or from civic and private sources, make expenditures
within the amounts appropriated by the board, and hire or appoint nonvoting
technical advisors.
   F.   Responsibilities And Duties: The commission shall hold public meetings,
hearing, surveys, etc., to obtain input to the planning process. The commission
may also conduct informational meetings to consult with public officials and
agencies, civic or professional organizations, etc. As a result of such
meetings, the commission may submit recommendations to the board concerning the
planning process. Further, the commission shall:
      1.   Review and approve or deny applications for all conditional uses and
variances and hold public hearings.
      2.   Initiate amendments to this title and the comprehensive plan.
      3.   Periodically review all privately proposed amendments to this title
and the comprehensive plan, and make recommendations to the board.
      4.   Hear and decide alleged violations of the provisions herein.
      5.   Fulfill the responsibilities and duties of the commission described
in the subdivision regulations for the county, specifically sections
10-2-1 and
10-2-2 of this code. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-2: STAFF AND STAFF DUTIES:
The board shall appoint qualified personnel to administer this title. The staff
duties include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Advise interested citizens of title provisions.
   B.   Inform the news media regarding land use and development matters of
public interest, particularly the time and place of public hearings.
   C.   Prepare the agenda for the meetings of the commission.
   D.   Aid applicants in the preparation of required forms and permit
applications, help classify uses, review preapplication materials, and explain
proper procedures.
   E.   Certify compliance with the regulations of this title for all use
permits.
   F.   Analyze the compatibility of all conditional uses.
   G.   Mail necessary submissions to referral agencies and analyze their
comments and recommendations.
   H.   Interpret boundaries of special areas.
   I.   Receive, file, and transmit to the commission or board all
applications, petitions, transcripts, and other communications on which they
must act. Advise the commission and the board of pertinent provisions of this
title regarding development proposals.
   J.   Maintain permanent and current records of all applications,
reclassifications, variances, and conditional use permits, etc., and of the
hearings and actions thereon.
   K.   Inspect and make recommendations upon all filed plats.
   L.   Investigate violations of this title, and notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation.
   M.   Be a liaison between the commission and the board. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
9-2-3: ENFORCEMENT; GENERAL STATEMENT:
The enforcement of this title shall apply equally to each person and property
in similar circumstances. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-4: COMPLIANCE BY ISSUERS OF PERMITS:
All departments, officials, and public employees of the county vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits, shall conform to the conditions of this
title, and shall issue no permit, certificate, or license for the use of lands,
buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title and such
permit, certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this
title shall be null and void. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-5: COUNTY ENFORCEMENT AND AUTHORITY:
Whenever it appears to any person, including, but not limited to, the building
inspector, planning and zoning staff, commission members, the board, the county
prosecuting attorney or county sheriff that any person is about to engage in
act or practice violating any provisions of this title, the person shall orally
or in writing notify the administrator or his office. The administrator, with
the assistance of staff, the county sheriff and the county prosecuting
attorney, shall cause an investigation to be made upon the oral or written
request concerning an alleged violation of this title, permit, or other county
ordinance relating hereto, as the administrator deems advisable under the
circumstances.
   A.   Authority: The administrator or staff shall have the authority to:
      1.   Conduct a program of continuing surveillance and regular or periodic
inspection of the potential or actual violation.
      2.   Enter, at all reasonable times, upon any private or public property
for the purpose of inspecting or investigating to ascertain violations of this
title, permit, or ordinances relating hereto.
   B.   Violation: If an investigation discloses that there is a reasonable
basis for believing that a violation exists, the administrator or staff shall
follow the following procedure:
      1.   Issue and serve upon the person alleged to have violated this title
a written notice of violation. This notice shall specify the provision of this
title, variance or permit which has been violated; the extent and manner in
which the ordinance, variance or permit has been violated and the procedure for
the person to contest the allegation. The written notice shall be sent by
certified mail to the person's home mailing address and/or business address, or
personally served upon the person. A copy of this notice shall also be
delivered to the county prosecuting attorney.
      2.   If a hearing is requested by the person, in writing, within seven
(7) days of the service of the notice, then the administrator shall schedule a
settlement conference with said person within seven (7) days from the time that
the administrator has been served with said request for a settlement
conference. If no response is received, the violation will be sent to the
Valley County prosecuting attorney who shall act on the matter within forty
five (45) days.
      3.   If the allegations of the violation, as described in the notice,
cannot be resolved in the above mentioned settlement conference with the
administrator, the matter shall be submitted for review before the commission
at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. If the matter can be resolved,
then the agreement shall be ratified or rejected by the commission.
      4.   If the agreement reached by the administrator in the settlement
conference is rejected by the commission, then a hearing on the notice shall be
held at the next regularly scheduled hearing of the commission.
      5.   The conduct of the hearing on the notice shall be as set forth in
section
9-5H-11 of this title.
      6.   The administrator shall render the commission's decision, in
writing, within seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.
      7.   After the decision of the commission, any party may have the right
to appeal the decision to the board.
      8.   The board shall have the right to hear the appeal from the
commission in the same manner as set forth in section
9-5H-12 of this title.
   C.   Civil Penalty: If such preventive or corrective measure is not taken in
accordance with the settlement agreement, commission's decision, or order of
the board, then the person in violation of said agreement, commission's
decision or order of the board shall be liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day beginning with the time fixed
for the taking of the preventive or corrective measure set forth in the
agreement, commission's decision or order of the board.
   D.   Circumstance Of Violation Constitutes Emergency: If the circumstances
of the violation of this title, permit or variance constitute an emergency
creating conditions of immediate danger to the public health, the administrator
shall immediately notify the commission, the board, and the county prosecuting
attorney. The board may institute a civil action for immediate injunction to
seek any relief deemed appropriate under the circumstances as well as a civil
penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day.
   E.   Considerations In Imposition Of Civil Penalty: The board shall consider
in any imposition of a civil penalty the following factors:
      1.   The nature of the violation.
      2.   Whether the violation was disclosed to the administrator or staff
prior to its detection.
      3.   Whether the violation was corrected without administrator or staff
action.
      4.   The cost of enforcing and investigating the violation.
      5.   Whether the violation was an isolated occurrence or a multiple
offense.
      6.   Whether there is an undue risk of future violations during the
remaining construction phase of the permit.
      7.   A fine under the circumstances would serve as a deterrent to this
person or other persons similarly situated.
      8.   Whether there were grounds tending to excuse or justify the
violation.
      9.   Whether the person was cooperative and willing to correct the
violation.
   F.   Waiver Of Formal Proceedings: At any stage of the proceedings, any
person to whom a notice has been served may waive the formal proceedings and
enter into a settlement agreement with approval of the board.
   G.   Additional Remedies: Nothing in this title or this section shall
preclude the board from any other legal or equitable remedy available. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-6: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint stating the cause and basis thereof. The
administrator shall follow the procedure set forth in section
9-2-5 of this chapter. Nothing in this title shall preclude the board from
instituting any cause of action against any person nor for any relief legally
or equitably available under the circumstances. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-7: INVESTIGATIONS:
The property involved in an application for any permit or any property subject
to the provisions of this title is subject to inspection by the administrator
or his staff at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting or
investigating violations of this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-2-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties shall be as follows:
      1.   Each violation of this title, permit or variance shall be considered
a separate violation and each day of a violation shall be a separate violation.
      2.   Each person, whether acting as the principal or agent, violating
this title or its regulations shall be responsible for the violations
criminally as set forth below.
      3.   Each violation of this title, permit or variance shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, punishable in
accordance with provisions of Idaho Code section 18-113.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Civil penalties shall be as follows:
      1.   Each violation of this title, permit or variance shall be considered
a separate violation and each day of a violation shall be a separate violation.
      2.   Each person, whether acting as the principal or agent, violating
this title or its regulations shall be responsible for the violations civilly
as set forth in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Each violation of this title, permit or variance shall be punishable
by a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day or
per violation whichever is greater.
   C.   Alternative Penalties: Alternative penalties to civil or criminal
penalties may include the following:
      1.   Recordation of a “Notice of Land Use and Development Code Violation”
with the Valley County Recorder’s office. This recordation will remain in place
until the violation is cured.
      2.   Recordation of other violation notices with the Valley County
Recorder’s office, such as a “Notice of Noncompliance or Dangerous Building”.
      3.   If a violation is on-going or continuous further land use or
building approvals on the property may be withheld. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010;
amd. Ord. 20-12, 7-6-2020)
CHAPTER 3
LAND USE CLASSIFICATION; PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Table 3-A, Land Use Classifications
9-3-1: TABLE 3-A, LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
TABLE 3-A
LAND USE CLASSIFICATION PERMITTED AND CONTROLLED USES
Use Description Permitted Use Conditional Use
Use Description                                   Permitted Use Conditional Use
1. Agricultural Uses: Agricultural uses which
protect, retain, or enhance the natural beauty
and open space characteristics or which continue
in similar practices, character, and level of
activity for neighborhood development.
 a. Crop cultivation and harvesting              X
 b. Land conservation or clearing                X
 c. Livestock husbandry except commercial        X
  feedlot (CAFO), poultry, or kennels
 d. Plant husbandry                              X
 e. Storage of equipment and products            X
 f. Warehousing of equipment and products        X
 g. Accessory structures to permitted uses:      X
  barn, shed, etc.
 h. Irrigation, drainage, and water management   X
  or storage facilities
2. Residential Uses:
 a. Single-family residence                      X
 b. Mobile home for single-family residence      X
 c. Subdivision for single-family residence                    X
 d. Subdivision for single-family mobile home                  X
  residence
 e. Mobile home or recreational vehicle                        X
 f. Condominium, townhouse, or other multi-                    X
  family residence
 g. Subdivision for multi-family residence                     X
 h. Planned unit development                                   X
 i. Accessory dwelling units                     X
 j. Multiple residence on one parcel                           X
 k. Fractional ownership/timeshare                             X
3. Civic Or Community Service Uses:
 a. Church buildings                                           X
 b. Church campgrounds                                         X
 c. School buildings, public or private                        X
 d. Hospitals, respite care centers, healthcare                X
  facilities, or inpatient treatment facility
 e. Shelter care, halfway homes, and other                     X
  similar rehabilitation facilities
 f. Fraternal or benevolent society buildings                  X
 g. Governmental administration buildings                      X
 h. Equipment or materials storage yards                       X
 i. Public utility distribution or collection    X
  lines
 j. Public utility supply, transfer, or relay                  X
  facilities including administration
  k. Fairgrounds, campgrounds, and similar
 outdoor recreation centers or facilities owned                X
  or operated by a public agency
 l. Retirement homes or centers (rate as                       X
  residential multi-family)
 m. Cemeteries, public or private                              X
 n. Sanitary landfill for solid waste disposal                 X
 o. Central sewage treatment facilities                        X
 p. Fire station                                 X
 q. Jail or penal institution                                  X
 r. Parks                                        X
 s. Museums                                                    X
 t. Wireless telecommunications towers and                     X
  antennas
 u. Airport/helipad/aircraft landing area                      X
 v. Helicopter landing area, emergency only      X
4. Private Recreation Uses:
 a. Country club                                               X
 b. Riding stable or academy                                   X
 c. Dude ranch and facilities                                  X
 d. Golf course or driving range and facilities                X
 e. Campgrounds and facilities (includes tent                  X
  camps)
 f. Racetrack or rodeo arena                                   X
 g. Athletic field                                             X
 h. Wilderness survival or camping training                    X
  centers and facilities
 i. Boat docks for single-family residence       X
 j. Boat docks or marina for community use                     X
 k. Rifle, archer, trap, or skeet range                        X
 l. Airstrip/helipad/aircraft landing area                     X
5. Commercial Uses:
 a. Neighborhood business:
  (1) Grocery store                                           X
  (2) Department store (single only)                          X
  (3) Drugstore                                               X
  (4) Restaurant (inside seating only)                        X
  (5) Laundromat or cleaners                                  X
  (6) Repair business                                         X
    (7) Other convenience type businesses which
  serve daily needs in a local vicinity                       X
    (excluding any business which exclusively
    serves liquor)
 b. Residential business                         X
 c. Service business:
  (1) Gasoline and service station                            X
  (2) Restaurant (inside and outside seating or              X
    service)
  (3) Motel, hotel, apartments, resort, bed and               X
    breakfast, or lodge
  (4) Other service businesses                                X
 d. Area business:
  (1) Auto sales, service, storage and rental                 X
  (2) Bank or financial institution                           X
  (3) Building materials, retail or wholesale                 X
  (4) Drive-in restaurant                                     X
  (5) Furniture and/or appliance shop                         X
  (6) Shopping center (2 or more separate                     X
    stores)
  (7) Office building                                         X
  (8) Mini-warehouse storage                                  X
  (9) Veterinary clinic                                       X
  (10) Auto wrecking yard                                     X
  (11) Salvage yard or storage                                X
  (12) Commercial agricultural business, i.e.,                X
    feedlots, CAFOs, kennels, or poultry
    (13) Any agricultural use which changes the
  character of existing neighborhood                          X
    development by practice, intensity or
    structure
    (14) Indoor theaters, gymnasiums, recreation
  centers, swimming pools, bowling alleys,                    X
    skating rinks, and similar activities housed
    in one or more buildings
 e. Recreation business:
  (1) Riding stable or academy                                X
  (2) Dude ranch and facilities                               X
  (3) Golf course or driving range and                        X
    facilities
  (4) Campgrounds and facilities (includes tent               X
    camps)
  (5) Racetrack or rodeo arena                                X
  (6) Ski area, lodge and related facilities                  X
  (7) Wilderness survival or camping training                 X
    centers and facilities
  (8) Boat docks or marina                                    X
  (9) Outdoor theater, drive-in                               X
  (10) Rifle, archery, trap, or skeet range                   X
  (11) Miniature golf course or amusement park                X
  (12) Airstrip/helipad/aircraft landing area                 X
6. Industrial Uses:
 a. Light industry:
  (1) Professional, administrative, or general                X
    business office
  (2) Experimental or testing laboratories                    X
    (3) Any enclosed manufacturing, packing, or
  warehousing facility, except meatpacking                    X
    plants
 b. Heavy industry:
  (1) Asphalt or concrete batch plant                         X
  (2) Chemical manufacturing plant                            X
  (3) Food processing plant                                   X
  (4) Slaughterhouse or meatpacking                           X
  (5) Lumber mill                                             X
  (6) Wood processing plant                                   X
  (7) Other facilities housing processing and                 X
    fabrication operations
  (8) Rock processing plant including screening               X
    and crushing
 c. Extractive industry uses:
  (1) Mineral extraction regulated by state or  X              
    federal agencies
  (2) Gravel and other building or landscape                  X
    materials
  (3) Geothermal energy development for public                X
    use
  (4) Mineral extractions not regulated by                    X
    state or federal agencies
  (5) Oil and gas operations                    X
7. Alternative Energy Uses:
 a. Solar panels - attached (part of design of   X
  structure)
 b. Solar panels - detached from primary                       X
  structure and >8 feet in area
 c. Geothermal plants                                          X
 d. Geothermal use for individual residential    X
  use
 e. Wind turbines                                              X
 f. Nuclear plants                                             X
 g. Hydroelectric plants                                       X
 h. Cloud seeding                                              X
8. Temporary Uses:
 a. Roadside stand                               X
 b. Christmas tree lot for retail sale           X
 c. Construction trailer, field office, and      X
  other similar uses for approved uses
 
Note: The above listing is intended to serve as an aid to identify permitted
and conditional uses. More detailed information about a specific use and the
standards and procedures related thereto may be found in chapters 4, "Permitted
Uses"; 5, "Conditional Uses"; 6, "Special Areas"; 8, "Wireless
Telecommunications Towers And Antennas"; 9, "Planned Unit Developments", and
12, "Oil And Gas Operations", of this title.
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
CHAPTER 4
PERMITTED USES
SECTION:
9-4-1: General Provisions
9-4-2: Policy
9-4-3: Standards
9-4-3-1: Lot Area
9-4-3-2: Setbacks
9-4-3-3: Buildings
9-4-3-4: Site Improvements
9-4-3-5: Impact Report
9-4-4: Procedures
9-4-5: Limitation To Certain Permitted Uses
9-4-6: Variances
9-4-7: Accessory Dwelling Units
9-4-8: Table 4-A, Standards For Permitted Uses
9-4-9: Recreational Vehicle Campground
9-4-10: Short-Term Rentals
9-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Review Not Required: This chapter contains standards and procedures for
those uses which are likely to be compatible with existing land uses in the
multiple use district of the county and, therefore, review by the commission
and public is not necessary.
   B.   Review Required: Permitted uses are listed in section
 9-3-1, table 3-A of this title, and in section
9-4-8, table 4-A of this chapter. If land use is proposed which is not provided
for within section
9-3-1, table 3-A of this title, its status as a permitted or conditional use
shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission based upon its
similarity and dissimilarity to uses that are listed, particularly with respect
to its visual attributes, its demand for public services and facilities, and
its external impacts or imposition upon adjacent properties (the latter
determined with regard to the permitted uses on that adjacent property). (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-2: POLICY:
   A.   The comprehensive plan states that "planning be instituted to preserve
the open characteristics and scenic beauty of the county", and an objective
stated therein is to "preserve agricultural land for farming and allow nonfarm
development in rural areas only when it does not interfere with the productive
and profitable level of agriculture".
   B.   This section is intended to fulfill those goals and objectives of the
comprehensive plan by:
      1.   Defining those uses which are agricultural in nature or inherently
compatible therewith.
      2.   Recognizing those uses as the standard by which other uses are
compared for compatibility.
      3.   Protecting those areas from encroachment by noncompatible uses.
      4.   Allowing those uses to be pursued without unnecessary regulation.
      5.   Providing certain standards and procedures which are intended to
upgrade or enhance the permitted use.
   C.   The interpretation of the standards and procedures herein shall be to
encourage the expansion and improvement of permitted uses. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
9-4-3: STANDARDS:
9-4-3-1: LOT AREA:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size And Configuration: The minimum lot size and
configuration for all permitted uses shall be at least sufficient to
accommodate water supply facilities, sewer disposal facilities, replacement
sewage disposal facilities, buildings, parking areas, streets or driveways,
open areas, accessory structures, and setbacks as required by provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Single-Family Residence: However, in no case, shall a single- family
residence be located on a lot split from a platted lot or on a parcel of land
divided from an original parcel without platting that is less than one acre in
area where individual sewage disposal and individual water supply system are
proposed. Where either a central water supply system or a central sewage
collection and disposal system, or both, is available, such lots or parcels
shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. The
minimum areas stated in this section do not apply to original parcels. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-3-2: SETBACKS:
   A.   Buildings Exceeding Three Feet In Height: The setbacks for all
buildings exceeding three feet (3') in height shall be in accordance with
section
 9-4-8, table 4-A of this chapter.
   B.   Setback From Highway 55: All buildings shall be set back one hundred
feet (100') from the right of way line of Highway 55 unless a more restrictive
setback is required within other sections of this title.
   C.   High Water Lines And Ditches: All residential buildings shall be set
back at least thirty feet (30') from high water lines and ditches. All other
buildings shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from high water
lines and ditches.
   D.   Front Yard: Front yard shall be determined by the structure
establishing the principal use on the property and the access street or road.
   E.   Encroachment By Other Structures: No other structures may encroach on
the yards determined for the structure establishing the principal use.
   F.   Measurement: Setbacks shall be measured horizontally, perpendicular to
the property line, to the nearest corner or projections or overhang.
   G.   Adjustment Of Front Or Rear Yard Setbacks: The minimum front or rear
yard setbacks may be adjusted to allow a proposed principal use building to
conform with the average setback of existing similar buildings on adjoining
properties within the same block; however, no setback may be less than seven
and one-half feet (7.5').
   H.   Lots Having Common Boundary Line With BLM Property Surrounding Cascade
Reservoir: Minimum rear yard setbacks for those lots having a common boundary
line with bureau of reclamation property surrounding Cascade Reservoir are
seven and one-half feet (7.5'), but may not be less than that provided for in
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-3-3: BUILDINGS:
   A.   Subject To County Building Code: All buildings or structures to be set
on a permanent foundation and exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet in
roof area are subject to the provisions of the building codes per title 6,
chapter 1 of this code.
   B.   Building Permits Required: Building permits are required and may be
obtained from the county building department. Building heights, shapes, floor
areas, and construction materials in permitted uses shall be unlimited by this
title, except for the provisions of the building codes per title 6, chapter 1
of this code, and section
 9-4-8, table 4-A of this chapter. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-
2011)
9-4-3-4: SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Required Site Improvements: No site improvements beyond those required
by the provisions of section
9-4-8, table 4-A of this chapter, title 6, chapter 1 of this code, or other
regulations are required for a permitted use, except that all land surfaces not
used for roads, buildings, and parking shall be covered either by natural
vegetation, other natural and undisturbed open space, or landscaping. The
minimum street frontage requirement shown in section
9-4-8, table 4-A of this chapter, does not apply to original parcels. (Ord. 10-
06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   B.   Wells: Construction of wells for individual water supply or irrigation
is regulated by the department of water resources. The location of wells for
individual water supply may be limited by the Central district health
department.
   C.   Individual Sewer Systems: Construction and location of individual sewer
systems is regulated by the Idaho department of health and welfare and enforced
locally by the Central district health department. Lot areas greater than the
minimum required herein may be required to assure proper installations. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
   D.   Driveway Approaches: Driveway approaches to any access road shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with title 6, chapter 1 of this code and
the "Construction Specifications And Standards For Roads And Streets In Valley
County, Idaho". (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   E.   Ranch Ponds Or Water Retention Areas: Construction of ranch ponds or
water retention areas, that are over five feet (5') in depth and greater in
area than one thousand (1,000) square feet, will require an excavation permit.
Excavation permits can be issued by the administrator and will include the
following information: start date, completion date within up to six (6) months,
property description, size of pond, use of pond, plans for mitigating fugitive
dust, revegetation plan to return the area surrounding the pond to natural
conditions, intentions for stockpiling or removing excess material, and list of
other permits obtained. The administrator may determine that a conditional use
permit is required for an extractive industrial use. If neither a conditional
use permit nor excavation permit is required, the dirt must, at a minimum, be
spread or bermed and reseeded.
   F.   Best Management Practices: Best management practices should be used for
surface water management for permanent management and during construction to
control or prevent the erosion, mass movement, siltation, sedimentation, and
blowing of dirt and debris caused by grading, excavation, open cuts, side
slopes, and other site preparation and development. Water should be retained on
site or directed to drainage easements, natural drainages, or rights of way.
Water should not be directed onto adjoining properties.
   G.   Conditional Use Permit Required: A conditional use permit is required
prior to obtaining a building permit for more than one dwelling unit on a lot
or parcel including, but not limited to, guesthouses, rental units, and multi-
family dwellings, unless specifically approved by this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-
23-2010)
9-4-3-5:   IMPACT REPORT:
No impact report is required for a permitted use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-4: PROCEDURES:
Permitted uses not requiring a building permit may be pursued and enjoyed at
the pleasure of the property owner. Building permits may be obtained upon
application and compliance with title 6, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 10-06,
8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-4-5: LIMITATION TO CERTAIN PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Commercial kennels and poultry production for nonfamily and
nonhousehold are conditional uses 1 .
   B.   Feeding, salting, or watering cattle within a public road right of way
is prohibited. A feedlot for the purpose of preparing consigned animals for
market is a conditional use 2 . (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
   9-5-4 of this title under commercial uses, area business.
2 2. See section
   9-5-4 of this title under commercial uses, area business.
9-4-6: VARIANCES:
Variances with respect to lot size, setbacks, parking space, height of
buildings or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a
structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, and other land use
requirements may be granted by the commission and board. Procedures and
conditions for obtaining a variance are contained in section
 9-5H-10 of this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-7: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units (ADUs), as defined in section
9-1-10 of this title, shall be a permitted use in all zones within the county
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Water And Sewer: The ADU must meet all requirements of Idaho Central
District Health with respect to the provision of individual potable water and
sewage disposal facilities, or have a permit from an approved central sewage
treatment facility. Issuance of a permit for the ADU must not adversely impact
others within the neighborhood from obtaining a permit for septic, sewer, or
well if the neighbor has not constructed their first residence on their
neighboring lot.
   B.   Square Footage: The square footage of the ADU may not exceed the lesser
of one thousand (1,000) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the square
footage of the primary structure, excluding open storage areas, garages, and
carports.
   C.   Setback Requirements: The ADU may be attached to the primary structure,
the garage, or be freestanding, and shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as the primary structure.
   D.   Parking Space: The ADU must be provided with at least one parking
space. Parking will not be allowed in a public right-of-way or in the required
setbacks.
   E.   Design Elements: The ADU must utilize design elements of the primary
structure in order to maintain consistency and clearly signify its subordinate
relationship to the primary structure. These elements may include roof pitch,
siding, structure shape and placement, etc. The exterior appearance of the
structure must be compatible with the primary structure. The administrator
shall determine whether this condition has been satisfied. The property owner
shall be responsible to provide adequate information with the building permit
submittal to determine if design elements satisfy requirements.
   F.   Use As Bed And Breakfast: The ADU cannot be used as a commercial or bed
and breakfast use without a conditional use permit. Sleeping quarters only are
not considered ADUs.
   G.   Use As Long-term Rental Property: If used as a permitted residential
rental property, an ADU must be rented for a minimum of more than thirty (30)
days (not as a weekly or daily rental).
   H.   Use as a Short-term Rental Property: If the ADU changes from a long
term rental to a short term rental or constructed with the intent of being a
short-term rental property of thirty (30) days or less then a conditional use
permit will be required and must be in compliance with the rules of the state
tax commission under Chapter 36, Title 63, Idaho Code.
   I.   Occupation By Owner Required: ADUs are permitted only when one of the
primary structures on the property is owner-occupied. Owner-occupied structure
does not need to be the primary residence. Ownership cannot be fractional or
timeshare ownerships.
   J.   Notice To Adjacent Property Owners; Objections: The administrator shall
notify property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property
boundaries.
      1.   Objections to the application must be written and received by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator within ten (10) working days. Objections must
give specific grounds and facts upon which the objection is based. If the
Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that objections are sufficient to
warrant a conditional use permit, the applicant shall be notified promptly that
a conditional use permit is required.
      2.   If there are no objections within ten (10) working days, the
accessory dwelling unit will be issued an administrative permit and be a
permitted use. Fees for ADU permits may be adopted by Resolution of the Board
of County Commissioners.
   K.   The ADU permit will be a condition of the building permit. (Ord. 10-06,
8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 20-05, - -2020)
9-4-8:    TABLE 4-A, STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES:
TABLE 4-A
STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED USES
            Building Setbacks (feet)          Maximum
                                     Minimum  Percent Minimum  Maximum  Minimum
Use         Front Side S. Str. Rear  Lot Area Lot     Street   Building Parking
Description                          Acres    Cover   Frontage Height   Spaces
                                               Building Setbacks
                                               (feet)                       Maximum Minimum  Maximum  Minimum
                                                                    Minimum Percent Street   Building Parking
Use Description                                Front Side S.   Rear Lot     Lot     Frontage Height   Spaces
                                                          Str.      Area    Cover
                                                                    Acres
Agricultural Uses:                              
    Accessory structures                   20    15   20   20   5               165      60
    Crop cultivation and harvesting                             5
    Irrigation, drainage and water management                   5
    Land conservation or clearing                               5
    Livestock husbandry                    20    15   20   20   5                        60
    Plant husbandry                        20    15   20   20   5                        60
    Storage of equipment and products                           5
    Warehousing of equipment and products  20    15   20   20   5                        60
Civic Or Community Service:
                                                                                                      1/250
    Fraternal or government administration 50    30   50   50   var.    45      100      45       square
buildings                                                                                             foot floor
                                                                                                      area
                                                                                                      1/250
    Public utilities                       50    30   50   50   var.    45      100      45       square
                                                                                                      foot floor
                                                                                                      area
    Public recreation                      50    30   50   50   5       20      165      45       1/unit or
                                                                                                      4 occup.
                                                                                                      1/
                                                                                                      4
    Religious, educational and rehabilitati50    30   50   50   var.    45      100      45       auditorium
                                                                                                      seats; 2/
                                                                                                      classroom;
                                                                                                      1/bed
Commercial Uses:
    Residential business                   30    10   30   30   1       35      30       35       2
Industrial Uses:
    Light industry                         50    30   50   50           35      165      45       1/employee
Private Recreational Uses (table 3-A, items 4a
- 4l, in section                               50    30   50   50                            45
9-3-1 of this title)
Residential Uses                               20    7.5  20   20   var.    35      30       35
Temporary Uses                                 30    10   30   30
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-4-9: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMPGROUND:
Purpose: This ordinance is being adopted to promote compatible uses in
neighborhoods by limiting the number of RV’s while still acknowledging private
property rights.
Recreational Vehicle Campgrounds (RVC), as defined in section
9-1-10 of this title, shall be a permitted use in all zones within the county
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Standards for Recreation Vehicle Campground:
      1.   Number of Units: One RV unit is allowed without a permit. Two or
three units that are kept on-site for more than an occasional weekend will
require an administrative permit with a fee as adopted by resolution. More than
three units will require a conditional use permit.
      2.   Water, Sewer, and Garbage:
         a.   The RVC must meet all requirements of the Idaho Central District
Health (CDH) with respect to the provision of individual potable water and
sewage disposal facilities, portable holding tanks, or have a permit from an
approved central sewage treatment facility.
         b.   The RVC must meet all requirements of CDH for the disposal of
gray water.
         c.   The RVC must meet all requirements of CDH for porta potties. They
will not be allowed if a sewer system is available and the porta potty cannot
be located in an area that will adversely affect neighbors.
         d.   The RVC must contract for garbage pickup with the local provider
and submit proof of service with the application or agree to haul the garbage
to the Valley County Materials Recovery Facility or to their primary residence
outside Valley County.
      3.   Setback Requirements: The RV and any other structures over three (3)
feet in height shall be subject to single family residential setback
requirements, including porta potties.
      4.   Parking Space: Parking of vehicles shall not be in a road right-of-
way or in a setback area.
      5.   Use As a Rental Property: If any of the property is used as a rental
unit or rental property, a conditional use permit shall be required and will be
considered an RV Park.
      6.   Occupation By Owner Required: RVCs are permitted only when one of
the RV units on the property is owner-occupied, which includes immediate family
members. Ownership cannot be fractional or timeshare ownerships.
      7.   Lighting: Must comply with Valley County Lighting Ordinance (VCC 6-
2)
      8.   Camp Fire Management: All campfires must be in a safe and well-
maintained fire pit. All fire must be attended at all times and fully
extinguished when not. A fire extinguisher and/or water hose along with a
shovel must be accessible.
      9.   Lot Coverage: All structures, parking lots, fire pits, and
impervious areas cannot cover more than 35% of the lot.
   B.   RVC Administrative Permit Process:
      1.   Application package shall be submitted to the Valley County Planning
and Zoning Administrator with the appropriate fee as adopted by resolution.
      2.   Application package shall include the following:
         a.   Completed Valley County application form.
         b.   Site plan showing location of RV, structures, parking, lighting,
fire pits, etc.
         c.   Central District Health approval for a septic system, will serve
from sewer district, or agreement that only self-contained units will be used
and dumped at approved sites.
         d.   Fire protection plan.
         e.   Garbage pick-up agreement.
         f.   Contact number.
   C.   Notice To Adjacent Property Owners; Objections: The administrator shall
notify property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property
boundaries and active Home Owner Associations.
      1.   Objections to the application must be written and received by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator within ten (10) working days. Objections must
give specific grounds and facts upon which the objection is based. If the
Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that objections are sufficient to
warrant a conditional use permit, the applicant shall be notified promptly that
a conditional use permit is required.
      2.   If there are no objections within ten (10) working days, the RVC
will be issued an administrative permit and be a permitted use. Fees for RVC
permits may be adopted by Resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
   D.   Shall be enforced in accordance with VCC 9-2. (Ord. 20-06, - -2020)
9-4-10: SHORT-TERM RENTALS:
Purpose: This ordinance shall be called the “Short-term Rental Ordinance”. The
purpose of the Short-term Rental Ordinance is to implement reasonable
regulations to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare in order
to protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods in Valley County, Idaho,
as allowed by IC 67-6539.
Short-term Rental (STR), as defined in section
9-1-10 of this title, shall obtain an administrative permit and shall be a
permitted use in all zones within the county subject to the following
conditions and standards listed in this section (VCC
9-4-10). At no time shall an existing STR be considered a “grandfathered” use.
   A.   STR Conditions and Standards:
      1.   Number of Units: One STR unit is allowed on a parcel with an
administrative permit, along with a fee as adopted by resolution that meets the
requirements described in this section. More than one STR or more than one
residential use on a parcel will require a conditional use permit in accordance
with chapter 5 of this title (VCC 9-5).
      2.   Water, Sewer, and Garbage:
         a.   The STR must meet all requirements of Idaho Central District
Health (CDH) with respect to the provision of individual potable water
(approved water system) and sewage disposal facilities or have a permit from an
approved central sewage treatment facility.
            (1)   The number of occupants cannot exceed the allowable limits of
the septic system as approved by Central District Health.
            (2)   An Accessory Use Authorization or septic permit from Central
District Health identifying the maximum occupancy of the STR based on the size
of the septic system shall be required. Maximum occupancy shall not be
exceeded.
         b.   The STR cannot be serviced by porta potties for any portion of
the approval including overflow in the number of occupants.
         c.   The STR must contract for garbage pickup with the local provider,
unless in a multi-family complex or have provided for other arrangements as
stated in the application package in (2-f).
      3.   Parking: Parking of vehicles shall not be in a road right-of-way or
in a setback area. The parking areas must be clearly defined so that there is
not haphazard parking over landscaped areas.
      4.   The STR may be used for residential purposes only. It cannot be used
as a wedding venue, corporate retreat, seminars, team-building events, or other
use that requires a conditional use permit in Table 1A.
      5.    On-site Lighting: Must comply with Valley County Lighting Ordinance
(VCC 6-2)
      6.   Camp Fire Management: All campfires must be in an approved fire pit
as determined by the Fire Department. A fire extinguisher and/or water hose
must be accessible. Fire pits shall comply with all setbacks. Consideration
should be given to smoke impacting neighbors.
      7.   Safety Monitors and Information: Each STR shall have smoke
detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, liquified petroleum detector, etc. for
the occupancy type on the property.
      8.   Outdoor amplified sound, other than household speakers, shall not be
allowed at any time.
      9.   Occupancy: There shall be no associated RV’s or tents used to
supplement the maximum occupancy. It will be limited to legal bedrooms with
proper egress windows or Central District Health limitations. At no time shall
occupancy exceed 4 people/bedroom up to a maximum of 12 people unless a
conditional use permit is obtained.
      10.   Lot Coverage: All structures, parking lots, fire pits, parking
areas, and impervious areas cannot cover more than 35% of the lot, unless in a
multi-family complex.
      11.   Outbuildings are allowed, but shall not be used for sleeping or any
human habitation.
      12.   Posting of Rules On-site: Rules covering regulations within this
section and emergency contact numbers shall be posted on-site, including an
emergency exit plan.
   B.   STR Administrative Permit Process:
      1.   Application package shall be submitted to the Valley County Planning
and Zoning Administrator with the appropriate fee as adopted by resolution.
      2.   Application package shall include the following:
         a.   Completed Valley County application form.
         b.   Site plan showing structures, parking, lighting, fire pits, etc.
         c.   Operation Plan that includes Compliance with Tax Requirements:
Shall submit with the application proof of compliance with payment of sales tax
through the STR marketplace or provide the Employee Identification Number for
the self-managed STR. Sales tax paid will need to be in accordance with Idaho
State Code, Chapter 36, Title 63.
         d.   Central District Health approval showing maximum occupancy.
         e.   Local Contact Phone Number and E-mail Address (if possible).
         f.   Rules that will be posted on-site including fire exist plan.
         g.   Garbage pick-up agreement.
         h.   Declaration as to whether this is a part-time STR or a full-time
STR. If part-time, number of months it will be used as a rental.
      3.   Notice To Adjacent Property Owners: The administrator shall notify
property owners within three hundred feet (300') and/or active home owner’s
association upon issuance of the administrative permit.
      4.   Property manager or owner shall file an annual report with the fee
as adopted by resolution, as follows:
         a.   Due date (renewal date) is the date of the issuance of the permit
each year.
         b.   Shall show compliance with all requirements of original permit.
         c.   State intent for the current upcoming year.
         d.   List any changes that were made to operations and/or facilities.
If changes are made to the structure, use, number of occupants, etc., a new
permit will be required with the updated information.
         e.   Shall be revoked if not submitted within 30 days of the renewal
date.
      5.   Staff can inspect the interior and exterior of the STR if neighbor
complaints are received or there is reason to believe the structure has been
modified to accommodate a greater occupancy than allowed.
   C.   Failure to obtain an Administrative Permit for an STR or violation of
the Administrative Permit shall be cause for revocation of the permit and shall
be subject to the following:
      1.   Infraction citation that will be issued by the Valley County
Sheriff.
      2.   If after 3 infraction citations violations continue to occur then
enforcement and penalties in accordance with VCC
9-2-5 through VCC
9-2-8.
      3.   Costs of enforcement may be applied. (Ord. 20-10, - -2020)
CHAPTER 5
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
9-5-1: General Provisions
9-5-2: Policy
9-5-3: Standards
9-5-4: Table 5-A, Standards For Conditional Uses; Figures
9-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Standards And Procedures: This chapter contains standards and
procedures for those uses which may be incompatible with permitted uses in the
multiple use district of the county and, therefore, are subject to review and
evaluation by the commission and the public. Conditional uses may be allowed
only after proper application, review, approval, and mitigation of impacts
through conformance with the conditions of approval.
   B.   Conditional Uses Enumerated: Conditional uses are listed in section
9-3-1, table 3-A of this title, and in section
9-5-4, table 5-A of this chapter. If a land use is proposed which is not
provided for within section
9-3-1, table 3-A of this title its status as a permitted or a conditional use
shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission based upon its
similarity and dissimilarity to uses that are listed, particularly with respect
to its visual attributes, its demand for public services and facilities, and
its external impacts or imposition upon adjacent properties (the latter
determined with regard to the permitted uses on that adjacent property. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5-2: POLICY:
   A.   The comprehensive plan states in part that the rural atmosphere of the
valleys be protected, that recreation should be encouraged, and that the
economic value of privately owned land be increased.
   B.   This chapter is intended to fulfill those goals and objectives by:
      1.   Defining those uses which are not inherently compatible with the
“permitted uses” defined in chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   Limiting the impact of conditional uses through standards and
procedures.
      3.   Allowing conditional uses in areas and to standards that will
increase the value of privately owned property without undue adverse impact on
the environment, adjoining properties, or governmental services and where
consistent with the county comprehensive plan. In order to achieve these goals,
the maintenance of agricultural uses and low density development will be more
acceptable located on the valley floor; higher density development will be more
acceptable near existing infrastructure and/or developed areas; commercial and
industrial development will be more acceptable in commercial hubs, villages, or
near existing established incorporated communities with similar characteristics
and infrastructure to serve the more intense land use needs.
   C.   The interpretation of the standards and procedures herein shall be to
encourage conditional uses where, in the opinion of the commission,
noncompatible aspects can be satisfactorily mitigated through development
agreements for the costs to service providers, provision for community housing,
site selection, application of technology, design, construction techniques,
topography, landscaping and structure location. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd.
Ord. 2025-02, 2-10-2025)
9-5-3: STANDARDS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the various buildings and uses
designated herein as conditional uses.
   A.   Lot Areas:
      1.   Minimum Lot Or Parcel Sizes: Minimum lot or parcel sizes are
specified herein under the site and development standards for the specific use
in articles C through F of this chapter.
      2.   Minimum Lot Size And Configuration: The minimum lot size and
configuration for any use shall be at least sufficient to accommodate water
supply facilities, sewage disposal facilities, replacement sewage disposal
facilities, buildings, parking areas, streets or driveways, stormwater
containment, snow storage, open areas, accessory structures, and setbacks in
accordance with provisions herein. All lots shall have a reasonable building
site and access to that site.
      3.   Direct Frontage Along Public Or Private Road: All lots or parcels
for conditional uses shall have direct frontage along a public or private road
with minimum frontage distance as specified in the site or development
standards for the specific use.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Structures Exceeding Three Feet In Height: The setbacks for all
structures exceeding three feet (3') in height are specified herein under the
site and development standards for the specific use.
      2.   Highway 55: All structures shall be set back one hundred feet (100')
from the right of way line of Highway 55 unless a more restrictive setback is
required within other sections of this title.
      3.   High Water Line: All residential buildings shall be set back at
least thirty feet (30') from high water lines. All other buildings shall be set
back at least one hundred feet (100') from high water lines.
      4.   Front Yards: Front yards shall be determined by the structure
establishing the principal use on the property and the location of the access
street or road.
      5.   Encroachment On Yards: No other structure may encroach on the yards
determined for the structure establishing principal use.
      6.   Measurement: All building setbacks shall be measured horizontally,
on a perpendicular to the property line, to the nearest corner or face of the
building including eaves, projections, or overhangs. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
   C.   Buildings:
      1.   Permanent Foundation; Minimum Roof Area; Building Regulations: All
buildings or structures to be set on a permanent foundation and exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) square feet in roof area are subject to the provisions of
title 6, chapter 1 of this code or any subsequent updates or adoptions.
Compliance with the provisions of said title 6, chapter 1 shall be a condition
of approval of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord.
11-5, 6-6-2011)
      2.   Building Permits Required: Building permits are required and may be
obtained from the county building department after the conditional use permit
is issued. The building department will assist the zoning department by
imposing pertinent conditions of approval on the building permit.
      3.   Site And Development Standards: Building height, shape, floor area,
construction material, and location on the property may be regulated herein
under the site and development standards for the specific use as well as by
provisions of the building code.
   D.   Impact Report:
      1.   Required: An impact report shall be required for all proposed
conditional uses.
      2.   Potential Environmental, Economic And Social Impacts: The impact
report shall address potential environmental, economic, and social impacts and
how these impacts are to be minimized as follows:
         a.   Traffic: Traffic volume, character, and patterns including
adequacy of existing or proposed street width, surfacing, alignment, gradient,
and traffic control features or devices, and maintenance. Contrast existing
with the changes the proposal will bring during construction and after
completion, build-out, or full occupancy of the proposed development. Include
pedestrian, bicycle, auto, and truck traffic.
         b.   Housing Affordability; Community Housing: Provision for the
mitigation of impacts on housing affordability.
         c.   Noise And Vibration Levels: Noise and vibration levels that exist
and compare to those that will be added during construction, normal activities,
and special activities. Include indoor and outdoor, day and night variations.
         d.   Heat And Glare: Heat and glare that exist and that might be
introduced from all possible sources such as autos in parking areas, outdoor
lights, water or glass surfaces, buildings or outdoor activities.
         e.   Particulate Emissions: Particulate emissions to the air including
smoke, dust, chemicals, gases or fumes, etc., both existing and what may be
added by the proposed uses.
         f.   Water: Water demand, discharge, supply source, and disposal
method for potable uses, domestic uses, and fire protection. Identify existing
surface water drainage, wetlands, flood prone areas and potential changes.
Identify existing groundwater and surface water quality and potential changes
due to this proposal.
         g.   Fire, Explosion And Other Hazards: Fire, explosion, and other
hazards existing and proposed. Identify how activities on neighboring property
may affect the proposed use.
         h.   Existing Vegetation: Removal of existing vegetation or effects
thereon including disturbance of wetlands, general stability of soils, slopes,
and embankments and the potential for sedimentation of disturbed soils.
         i.   Stabilization Of Soil; Restoration Or Replacement Of Vegetation:
Include practices that will be used to stabilize soils and restore or replace
vegetation.
         j.   Soil Characteristics And Potential Problems: Soil characteristics
and potential problems in regard to slope stability, embankments, building
foundation, utility and road construction. Include suitability for supporting
proposed landscaping.
         k.   Site Grading And Improvements: Site grading or improvements
including cuts and fills, drainage courses and impoundments, sound and sight
buffers, landscaping, fencing, utilities, and open areas.
         l.   Visibility: Visibility from public roads, adjoining property, and
buildings. Include what will be done to reduce visibility of all parts of the
proposal but especially cuts and fills and buildings. Include the effect of
shadows from new features on neighboring property.
         m.   Reasons For Selecting Particular Location: Reasons for selecting
the particular location including topographic, geographic and similar features,
historic, adjoining land ownership or use, access to public lands, recreation,
utilities, streets, etc., in order to illustrate compatibility with and
opportunities presented by existing land uses or character.
         n.   Increased Revenue: Approximation of increased revenue from change
in property tax assessment, new jobs available to local residents, and
increased local expenditures.
         o.   Economic Impacts: Approximation of costs for additional public
services, facilities, and other economic impacts.
         p.   Existing Developments: State how the proposed development will
impact existing developments providing the same or similar products or
services.
         q.   Natural Resources Or Materials: State what natural resources or
materials are available at or near the site that will be used in a process to
produce a product and the impacts resulting from the depletion of the resource.
Describe the process in detail and describe the impacts of each part.
         r.   Impacts If Project Abandoned At Partial Completion: What will be
the impacts of a project abandoned at partial completion?
         s.   Number Of Dwelling Units, Building Sites, Nonresidential Floor
Space Available: Number of residential dwelling units, other buildings and
building sites, and square footage or gross nonresidential floor space to be
available.
         t.   Stages Of Development: Stages of development in geographic terms
and proposed construction time schedule.
         u.   Range Of Sale, Lease Or Rental Prices: Anticipated range of sale,
lease or rental prices for dwelling units, building or other site, or
nonresidential floor space in order to ensure compatibility with adjacent land
use and development.
   E.   Bonds And Fee:
      1.   Recommendation Of Administrator; Board Option: Dependent on the
impact report and the compatibility rating as well as the applicant’s proposed
site improvements and structure to be used or constructed, the administrator
may recommend bonds, a development agreement, reimbursement fees or the impact
fee of the applicant. The board shall have the option of exclusively dealing
with the issues of bonds, reimbursement fees, and/or application fees, in the
case of developments, which are deemed by the board to be large enough in scale
to have significant impact on county services and infrastructure. In such case,
pursuant to the direction of the board, the commission shall defer such matters
to the board.
      2.   Imposition And Collection Of Fees: The commission or administrator
shall have discretion as an inherent condition of the permit to impose and
collect fees from the applicant for the cost of monitoring and enforcement of
standards. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5-4:    TABLE 5-A, STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES; FIGURES:
TABLE 5-A
STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
            Building Setbacks (feet)          Maximum
                                     Minimum  Percent Minimum  Maximum  Minimum
Use         Front Side S. Str. Rear  Lot Area Lot     Street   Building Parking
Description                                   Cover   Frontage Height   Spaces
                                                 Building Setbacks
                                                 (feet)               Minimum Maximum Minimum  Maximum  Minimum
                                                                      Lot     Percent Street   Building Parking
Use Description                                  Front Side S.   Rear Area    Lot     Frontage Height   Spaces
                                                            Str.              Cover

Civic or commercial services:                                                                        
    Cemetery                                 30    10   30   15   1              75       35        
    Central sewage treatment                 100   100  100  100  2              35                
                                                                                                        1/250
    Retirement home or center                50    30   50   50   1       40      75       35       square feet
                                                                                                        of floor
                                                                                                        area
    Sanitary landfill                        50    30   50   50   5                      35        
Commercial uses:                                                                                    
    Area business                            30    10   30   30          40      75       35       1+1/250
                                                                                                        square feet
    Neighborhood business                    30    10   30   30          40      75       35       1+1/250
                                                                                                        square feet
    Recreation business                      50    30   50   50                         45       1/each 4
                                                                                                        occupants
    Service business                         50    30   50   50          40      75       35       1+1/250
                                                                                                        square feet
Industrial uses:                                                                                     
    Extractive industry                      30    10   30   30                75                
    Heavy industry                           150   75   150  100         30      75       45       1+1/400
                                                                                                        square feet
    Light industry                           50    30   50   50          35      75       45       1+1/250
                                                                                                        square feet
                                                                                                        1/
Private recreation uses                                                                             4
                                                                                                        auditorium
                                                                                                        seats
Residential uses:                                                                                    
    Condominium, townhouse, or multi- family                                                        2/
residence                                        30    15   30   30          40      30       35       residential
                                                                                                        unit
    Mobile home or recreational vehicle park                                                     
    Planned unit development                                      2                               
    Subdivision for multi-family                                                                 
    Subdivision, mobile home - single-family                                                     
residence
    Subdivision, single-family residence                                                         
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-965.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-967.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-969.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-971.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-963.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-875.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-877.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-879.png]
 
      1.   Preapplication conference (section
 9-5H-1 of this chapter).
      2.   Application (section
9-5H-2 of this chapter).
      3.   Administrative review (section
9-5H-3 of this chapter).
         a. Denial.
         b. Approval.
      4.   Notice to agencies (section
9-5H-4 of this chapter).
      5.   Compatibility rating (section
9-5H-5 of this chapter).
      6.   Public notice (section
9-5H-6 of this chapter).
      7.   Commission and public hearing (section
9-5H-7 of this chapter).
         a. Denial.
         b. Table and time specified.
         c. Approval.
      8.   Conditional use permit issued (section
 9-5H-8 of this chapter).
         a. Appeal by applicant.
         b. Appeal by interested party.
      10.   Board of hearings and appeals, variances (section
9-5H-10 of this chapter), and PUDs (chapter 9 of this title).
         a. Denial.
         b. Table, time specified.
         c. Approval.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 17-02, 2-13-2017)
ARTICLE A. SITE IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
9-5A-1: Grading
9-5A-2: Roads And Driveways
9-5A-3: Parking And Off Street Loading Facilities
9-5A-4: Landscaping
9-5A-5: Fencing
9-5A-6: Utilities
9-5A-1: GRADING:
   A.   Permit Required: Grading to prepare a site for a conditional use or
grading, vegetation removal, construction or other activity that has any impact
on the subject land or on adjoining properties is a conditional use. A
conditional use permit is required prior to the start of such an activity.
   B.   Exemptions: Grading for bona fide agricultural activities, timber
harvest, and similar permitted uses herein are exempt from this section.
   C.   Flood Prone Areas: Grading within flood prone areas is regulated by
provisions of section
9-6-2 of this title and title 11 of this code. A permit, if required, shall be
a part of the conditional use permit.
   D.   Wetlands: Grading or disturbance of wetlands is subject to approval of
the U.S. corps of engineers under the federal clean water act. The federal
permit, if required, shall be part of the conditional use permit.
   E.   Site Grading Plan:
      1.   The conditional use permit application shall include a site grading
plan, or preliminary site grading plan for subdivisions, clearly showing the
existing site topography and the proposed final grades with elevations or
contour lines and specifications for materials and their placement as necessary
to complete the work. The plan shall demonstrate compliance with best
management practices for surface water management for permanent management and
the methods that will be used during construction to control or prevent the
erosion, mass movement, siltation, sedimentation, and blowing of dirt and
debris caused by grading, excavation, open cuts, side slopes, and other site
preparation and development. The plan shall be subject to review of the county
engineer and the soil conservation district. The information received from the
county engineer, the soil conservation district, and other agencies regarding
the site grading plan shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission
and/or the board of county commissioners in preparing the conditions of
approval or reasons for denial of the applications. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
      2.   For subdivisions, preliminary site grading plans and stormwater
management plans must be presented for review and approval by the commission as
part of the conditional use permit application. However, prior to construction
of the infrastructure, excavation, or recordation of the final plat, the final
plans must be approved by the county engineer. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd.
Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   F.   Land Surfaces Not Used For Roads, Buildings And Parking: All land
surfaces not used for roads, buildings and parking shall be covered either by
natural vegetation, other natural and undisturbed open space, or landscaping.
   G.   Stormwater Management Plan: Prior to issuance of building permits, the
administrator must receive a certification from the developer's engineer
verifying that the stormwater management plan has been implemented according to
approved plans. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5A-2: ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Roads For Public Dedication And Maintenance: Roads for public
dedication and maintenance shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
title 10 of this code and in accordance with "Construction Specifications And
Standards For Roads And Streets In Valley County, Idaho".
   B.   Access Roads Or Driveways: Residential developments, civic or community
service uses, and commercial uses shall have at least two (2) access roads or
driveways to a public street wherever practicable.
   C.   Private Roads: Private roads shall meet the provisions of the Valley
County subdivision ordinance and any policies adopted by the board of county
commissioners.
   D.   Cattle Guards: Cattle guards shall not be installed in public roads
within residential developments.
   E.   Access To Highway 55: Access to Highway 55 shall be limited at all
locations and may be prohibited where other access is available. An access
permit from the Idaho transportation department may be required. (Ord. 10-06,
8-23-2010)
9-5A-3: PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING FACILITIES:
   A.   Site Plan: The site plan for a conditional use permit shall include a
detailed scale drawing showing the parking area plan including driveways,
parking spaces, setbacks, landscaping, buildings, vehicle maneuver areas
including firetrucks and refuse collection trucks, snow storage, and drainage.
   B.   Accessory Parking And Loading Facilities Required: Accessory parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required herein for every building
and structure erected, and every land use established after the effective date
hereof; unless the commission or the board determines that the proposed parking
is adequate.
   C.   Required Spaces: The minimum number of spaces required is specified
herein under the site and development standards for the specific use.
   D.   Parking Space, Maneuvering Area And Aisle Dimensions: All parking
spaces and on site vehicular circulation areas shall comply with the following
minimum sizes 1 :
      1.   Parking Area Dimensions:
         a.   Minimum size parking spaces shall measure eight feet six inches
by eighteen feet (8'6" x 18').
         b.   All parallel parking spaces shall measure a minimum of eight feet
six inches by twenty two feet (8'6" x 22').
         c.   Recreational vehicle parking spaces shall measure a minimum of
ten feet by twenty four feet (10' x 24').
      2.   End Parking Space Maneuvering: A three foot (3') wide maneuvering
area shall be provided for end parking spaces in single access parking areas as
shown below.
      3.   Vehicle Overhang:
         a.   Recreational Vehicles And Parking Spaces: Recreational vehicles
and parking spaces are not allowed to overhang sidewalks, curbs or landscape
areas.
         b.   Standard Size Parking Spaces:
            (1)   Landscaped Areas: Standard size parking spaces are allowed to
overhang landscaped areas and curbs but this overhang shall not encroach into
any required setback and this area shall not be considered in meeting any
required percentage of lot to be landscaped.
            (2)   Sidewalks: Standard size parking spaces are allowed to
overhang sidewalks only where the sidewalk is a minimum of six feet (6') in
width.
         c.   Access To And From Streets: Parking areas must have safe,
convenient, and unobstructed access to and from streets by means of a driveway
not less than ten feet (10') wide nor more than forty feet (40') wide that
extends onto the private property at least twenty feet (20') beyond the
property line. Driveways to loading facilities will enable vehicles to leave
and enter streets in a forward direction.
         d.   Driveways: All driveways shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the county approach policies.
         e.   Surface: Parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with
asphalt, concrete, compacted gravel, and crushed rock, or other dust free,
durable material.
         f.   Surface Water Drainage: Drainage of surface water shall be
provided that will be adequate to drain the surface of the parking area while
preventing flows of water onto adjacent properties. Surface waters shall be
managed in accordance with best management practices to protect or improve
water quality.
         g.   Screening: Parking areas containing more than ten (10) spaces
shall be effectively screened on all sides adjoining residential uses by a
wall, fence, or plantings not less than four feet (4') in height.
         h.   Prohibited In Setback Zone: No part of a parking area shall be
located within a required setback zone such as a side, front, or rear yard.
         i.   Off Street Loading Facilities: Off street loading facilities
shall be provided separately from parking spaces for commercial, industrial,
and institutional uses. The facilities shall be adequate to provide loading and
unloading without obstruction to the street or parking areas.
         j.   Maintenance: Parking areas and off street loading facilities
shall be maintained in good order, clear of debris, and shall not be used for
any other use that interferes with or limits the intended use.
         k.   Lighting: Only indirect lighting may be used to illuminate a
parking area. See other lighting regulations in section
9-5B-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See parking diagram in section
  9-5-4 of this chapter.
9-5A-4: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Purpose And General Regulations:
      1.   Introduction:
         a.   This section provides minimum standards for landscaping, walls,
screening devices and lighting so as to promote the general welfare of the
community. This is accomplished by encouraging the creation of an attractive
appearance as well as screening from view any and all uses which may be
unattractive to public view. Landscaping materials, including ground covers,
shrubs and trees not only improve appearance, but also facilitate control of
erosion, reduction of dust and glare, and visually soften building masses.
Additionally, walls and screening devices allow for separation and aid in
buffering incongruous and intense activities. Used together, landscaping,
walls, screening devices and lighting help ensure privacy, aid in promoting
logical land development and enhance property values.
         b.   The county encourages the use of low water plant material in such
a way that a lush appearance is presented. Plant material that is high in
pollen production is discouraged. Also, extreme care should be exercised when
using plants that are known to be poisonous. Noxious weeds shall not be used.
         c.   Plants should be placed in such a way as to maximize
survivability (i.e., low water use plants should not be placed in drainageways,
and the use of frost tender plants should be limited to accent locations, not
primary focal points).
      2.   Definitions:
   CONCEPTUAL LANDSCAPE PLAN: Same as a "landscape plan" as defined in this
subsection, except that shrubs, ground cover and vines may be indicated by
size, quantity, name and general locations on the site.
   LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan drawn to scale, showing elements such as trees,
shrubs, ground covers, vines, sculptures, walls, lighting, water features,
walkways and other organic and inorganic materials. The plan shall include a
plant list, indicating the size, quantity, location and names of all plant
materials to be used.
   LANDSCAPING: The combination of elements such as trees, shrubs, ground
covers, vines, and other organic and inorganic materials for the express
purpose of creating an attractive and pleasing environment. Public art, water
features, plazas, patios, decorative courtyards and lighting may also be
considered landscape elements. Other paved surfaces are not included in the
minimum requirements.
   MAINTENANCE: Shall include the repair, painting, trimming, pruning, watering
and other ongoing activities that are associated with providing an attractive
site appearance.
   PUBLIC ART: Objects such as sculptures, water features or other
multidimensional designs that would be viewed by the general public as an
attractive amenity in private development. Said objects to be located in spaces
visible and/or accessible to the public in general so as to be enjoyed by the
community at large, and are not to be a business logo.
   SCREENING DEVICE: Any structure intended to fully conceal an activity,
element or mechanical equipment from view, adjacent uses, properties or
streets.
   SITE PLAN: A plan drawn to scale, showing all the uses proposed for a
specific property. The plan shall show all dimensions, buildings, structures,
sign locations, off street parking, loading spaces, points of ingress and
egress, all walls, refuse containers, walkways, all ultimate rights of way
(measured to the centerlines of streets, and alleys), a location map, complete
site data and any additional information which may be necessary to clearly
define the intended use and property lines.
      3.   General Regulations 1 :
         a.   Applicability: The provisions of this subsection A3 shall apply
to all new buildings, all new uses of land, and any addition to existing
buildings and uses requiring a conditional use permit. Maintenance requirements
of this section shall apply to all sites and uses where a conditional use
permit was issued.
         b.   Site Plan And Landscape Plan: The approved site plan and
landscape plan shall be a part of the conditional use permit.
         c.   Installation Of Walls, Screening Devices And Lighting:
            (1)   Required Prior To Issuance Of Occupancy Permit: Prior to
issuance of an occupancy permit, the walls, screening devices and lighting
shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction plans.
            (2)   Cash Deposit Or Letter Of Credit In Lieu Of Installation: In
lieu of the installation of plant material or public art prior to issuance of
an occupancy permit, a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount guaranteeing the complete installation of the plant material or public
art within six (6) months may be accepted by the administrator. Failure to
install the material in the six (6) month time period shall result in the
forfeiture of the deposit or bond, and deemed to be a violation of this
section.
         d.   Strip, Excavate, Remove Topsoil Or Berm Up Soil On Site: No
person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or remove topsoil nor shall
they berm up soil on a site, except to accommodate an approved building,
building addition or facilitate necessary and approved site improvements. These
changes must be part of the approved site grading and stormwater management
plan. This subsection does not apply to sites where permitted uses exist or are
proposed.
         e.   Landscape Areas In Public Right Of Way: Any landscape areas in
the public right of way shall meet these requirements. A permit is required
prior to any work.
         f.   Use Of Landscaped Areas: Landscaped areas shall not be used for
parking of vehicles, display of merchandise or other uses detrimental to the
landscaping.
         g.   Naturally Occurring Vegetation: Naturally occurring vegetation in
good condition and conforming with the goals for landscaping herein can be
included as essential parts of the plan. The boundary of groves or masses of
trees can be shown on the plan in lieu of showing the location of each
individual tree.
      4.   Maintenance:
         a.   Responsibility For Maintenance: The landscape areas on site, as
well as in the right of way, shall be maintained by the owner or owner's
association (should the property be subdivided) or the lessee of the site. Any
areas designated and intended for the purposes of on site water retention shall
be maintained and reserved for that specific purpose. Any alteration or
deterioration of those areas shall be considered a violation of this title and
any applicable ordinance.
         b.   Replacement Of Plant Material: Any plant material that does not
survive shall be replaced within thirty (30) days of its demise.
         c.   Removal Or Destruction Of Landscape Material: The removal or
destruction of landscape material previously approved by the county shall
constitute a violation of this title. Replacement of landscape material shall
be of like size as that which was removed or destroyed.
         d.   Maintained In Accordance With Site And/Or Landscape Plan:
Landscaping, irrigation systems, walls, screening devices, curbing and lighting
shall be reasonably maintained in accordance with the approved site and/or
landscape plan. Plant material shall not be severely pruned such that the
natural growth pattern or characteristic forms are significantly altered.
         e.   Modification And/Or Removal Of Existing Landscaping:
Modifications and/or removal of existing landscaping shall require prior
approval.
         f.   Lack Of Maintenance: The lack of maintenance shall constitute a
violation of this title.
         g.   Sight Obscuring Landscape Features: Sight obscuring landscape
features such as hedges shall be maintained in such a manner that vision
necessary for safe operation of motor vehicles or bicycles along or entering
public roadways is not obstructed.
   B.   Landscaping; Standards Of Design:
      1.   Minimum Requirements: Each site to be developed under a conditional
use permit shall be required to provide landscape areas equal to or exceeding
the following minimum amounts:
         a.   Multi-Family Use: Each site for a proposed multi-family use shall
have a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the net site/lot area in landscaping.
         b.   Service/Commercial Use: Each site for proposed service/commercial
use shall have a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the net site/lot area in
landscaping.
         c.   Industrial Use: Each site for a proposed industrial use shall
have a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the net site in landscaping.
         d.   Additional Landscaping: In addition to the minimum on site
landscaping, there shall be landscaping in the entire area of the right of way,
between street property line and back of street curb, road, back slope, or fill
slope, except for approved driveways, walkways, bike paths, and snow storage
areas.
      2.   Future Commercial And Industrial Development: Future commercial and
industrial development sites shall be landscaped in the first phase of
construction, unless a phased plan is approved by the commission.
      3.   Uses Adjacent To Multi-Family Residential Development: Fifteen (15)
gallon size trees (of a nondeciduous variety) fifteen feet (15') on center
shall be planted along any property lines of parcels developed for multi-
family, commercial, office, or industrial uses which are adjacent to or
separated by an alley from a multi-family residential development. Minimum
width of landscape buffer shall be six feet (6') clear. For commercial/
industrial users of over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, see subsection B5
of this section.
      4.   Use Adjacent To Single-Family Residential Development: Where multi-
family, commercial, office or industrial uses are adjacent to or separated by
an alley or lesser separation from a single- family residential development,
such trees shall be planted at ten feet (10') on center, with every other tree
being a minimum twenty four inch (24") box size.
      5.   Commercial, Office Or Industrial Use Adjacent To Residence: Where a
commercial, office or industrial user of over fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet building area is located adjacent to a residence, the landscape buffer
described in subsection B3 of this section shall be increased to fifteen feet
(15') (adjacent to that user), with two (2) rows of trees along the interior
side of the property line. Each row is to contain minimum fifteen (15) gallon
trees spaced fifteen feet (15') on center, staggered for maximum effect in
buffering the two (2) uses.
      6.   Criteria For Trees Along Street Frontage: Trees shall be required
along all street frontages according to the following criteria:
         a.   A minimum of one tree shall be planted for every twenty five feet
(25') of linear street frontage. The trees may be grouped or planted in groves;
         b.   Fifty percent (50%) shall be twenty four inch (24") box size or
larger with the balance being minimum fifteen (15) gallon size;
         c.   The trees selected shall be compatible with the overall site and
landscape plan as well as adjacent sites.
      7.   Standard Tree Planting Detail: All trees shall be planted and staked
in accordance with the "Standard Tree Planting Detail" diagram in section
9-5-4 of this chapter. Plant sizes to be in accordance with Nurseryman
Association standards.
      8.   On Site Water Retention Areas: All on site water retention areas,
other than paved surfaces, shall be entirely landscaped and shall comply with
the following criteria:
         a.   The retention areas shall not occupy more than sixty seven
percent (67%) of the on site street frontage landscape area;
         b.   All retention areas shall maintain slopes no steeper than three
to one (3:1).
      9.   Mounding And Berming: All mounding and berming shall have slopes no
steeper than three to one (3:1).
      10.   Ground Cover: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped
areas is to be planted with vegetative ground cover. Minimum size and spacing
to be one gallon size plants at a maximum three feet (3') on center.
      11.   Landscape Designs: Landscape designs shall be compatible with
adjacent properties. Selected stock shall be especially suited for this climate
or shall be from native stock. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See landscaping diagrams in section
  9-5-4 of this chapter.
9-5A-5: FENCING:
   A.   Substituted For Planting Screens: Fencing may be substituted for
planting screens subject to the approval of the staff and the commission.
   B.   Separation Or Screening: Fencing shall be installed to provide
separation or screening as specified in the site or development standards for
the specific use. A sight obscuring fence required by the commission for any
conditional use shall be stained or painted a single solid color, shall not be
used for advertising, and shall be maintained in good repair.
   C.   Livestock In Residential Development: If livestock are allowed in a
residential development, then fencing shall be installed to keep livestock out
of public street rights of way. Cattle guards shall not be installed in public
roads within residential developments.
   D.   Random Entry: Fencing shall be installed to secure against random entry
into hazardous areas or operations.
   E.   Construction And Materials: Fence construction and materials shall be
in accordance with commonly accepted good practices to produce a neat appearing
durable fence. The location, height, and materials used for constructing a
fence shall be approved by the commission and specified in the conditional use
permit. Fences required for any conditional use shall be maintained in good
repair.
   F.   Conditional Use Adjoins Agricultural Uses: Where a conditional use
adjoins an agricultural use where animal grazing is known to occur for more
than thirty (30) consecutive days per year, the permittee shall cause a fence
to be constructed so as to prevent the animals from entering the use area. The
permittee shall provide for the maintenance of said fence through covenants,
association documents, agreement(s) with the adjoining owner(s), or other form
acceptable to the commission prior to approval of the permit so that there is
reasonable assurance that the fence will be maintained in functional condition
so long as the conflicting uses continue.
   G.   Obstruction Of Vision: Sight obscuring fences, hedges, walls,
latticework, or screens shall not be constructed in such a manner that vision
necessary for safe operation of motor vehicles or bicycles on or entering
public roadways is obstructed. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5A-6: UTILITIES:
   A.   Direct Access Required: All lots or parcels, for or within conditional
uses, shall be provided, or shall have direct access to, utility services
including telephone, electrical power, water supply, and sewage disposal.
   B.   Central Water Supply And Sewage Systems: Central water supply and
sewage systems serving three (3) or more separate users shall meet the
requirements of design, operation, and maintenance for central water and sewage
systems in the subdivision ordinance.
   C.   Probability Of Water Supply: Probability of water supply, as referred
to in subsection A of this section, can be shown by well logs in the general
area or by a determination of a professional engineer, hydrologist, or soil
scientist.
   D.   Individual Septic Systems: If individual septic systems are proposed to
show compliance with sewage disposal requirements in subsection A of this
section, sanitary restrictions must be lifted on every lot prior to recordation
unless it is designated as a lot where a building permit will never be issued
for a residential unit, such as pasture lot, common area, open space, or a no
build lot.
   E.   Easements Or Rights Of Way: Easements or rights of way shall be set
aside or dedicated for the construction and maintenance of utilities in
accordance with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance.
   F.   Utility Plan: A utility plan showing the schedule of construction or
installation of proposed utilities shall be a part of the conditional use
permit. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
ARTICLE B. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5B-1: Noise
9-5B-2: Lighting
9-5B-3: Electrical Interference
9-5B-4: Emissions
9-5B-5: Dust
9-5B-6: Open Storage
9-5B-7: Fire Protection
9-5B-1: NOISE:
   A.   Commercial Or Industrial Activity: The noise emanating from any
commercial or industrial activity shall be muffled so as not to become
objectionable due to intermittent beat, frequency or shrillness, and shall not
exceed forty (40) decibels between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., and sixty (60) decibels at other hours at the
property line if adjacent uses are not the same.
   B.   Industry-Extractive And Industry-Heavy Land Uses: The above specified
noise level for daytime hours (7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.) shall not apply to
industry-extractive and industry-heavy land uses specifically related to
extracting and processing gravel and other building or landscape materials
including excavation, screening, classifying, crushing, stockpiling, and/or
hauling of said materials from site approved by the county for said purposes
that are located outside the North Fork of the Payette River drainage of the
county.
   C.   Residential, Recreational Or Commercial Airstrip Or Airport: The noise
emanating from any residential, recreational, or commercial airstrip or airport
will be considered in the conditional use permit process. The FAA will be
consulted. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5B-2: LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose: These regulations are intended to establish standards that
ensure minimal light pollution, reduce glare, increase energy conservation, and
maintain the quality of the county's physical and aesthetic character.
   B.   Applicability: These standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting
including, but not limited to, search, spot, or flood lights for:
      1.   Buildings and structures.
      2.   Recreational areas.
      3.   Parking lot lighting.
      4.   Landscape lighting.
      5.   Signage.
      6.   Other outdoor lighting.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   Prevention Required: All exterior lighting shall be designed,
located and lamped in order to prevent:
         a.   Over lighting or excessive lighting.
         b.   Energy waste.
         c.   Glare.
         d.   Light trespass.
         e.   Skyglow.
      2.   Turn Off Required: All nonessential exterior commercial and
residential lighting is encouraged to be turned off after business hours and/or
when not in use. Lights on a timer are encouraged. Sensor activated lights are
encouraged to replace existing lighting that is desired for security purposes.
      3.   Recreational Facilities: Recreational facilities such as baseball,
softball, soccer, volleyball or football fields; driving ranges; outdoor arenas
and amphitheaters; ski trails; or other outdoor field recreation facilities are
exempt from height restrictions provided the lights are used only while the
field is in use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
      4.   All Other Outdoor Lighting: All other outdoor lighting shall meet
the following standards and at a minimum the standards in title 6, chapter 2 of
this code: (Ord. 17-02, 2-13-2017)
         a.   The height of any light fixture or illumination source shall not
exceed twenty feet (20').
         b.   All lighting or illumination units or sources shall be hooded or
shielded in a downward direction so they do not produce glare or cause light
trespass on any adjacent lot or real property as depicted in section
9-5-4 of this chapter.
         c.   Lights or illumination units shall not direct light, either
directly or through a reflecting device, upon any adjacent lot or real
property. Lighting should not illuminate the sky or reflect off adjacent water
bodies or produce glare or cause light trespass on any adjacent lot or real
property.
         d.   External lighting of the face of signs shall be placed above the
sign and shielded and directed in a manner that the illumination source shall
not be visible from any adjacent lot or real property. Sign lighting shall not
reflect or glare beyond the face of the sign and immediately below the sign 1 .
      5.   Parking Areas, Walkways Or Similar Uses: All outdoor lights used for
parking areas, walkways, and similar uses mounted on poles eight feet (8') or
greater in height shall be directed downward. The light source shall be
shielded so that it will not produce glare or cause light trespass on any
adjacent lot or real property.
      6.   Searchlights: Searchlights shall only be operated for special events
or grand openings for a maximum of one week. Searchlights shall not be operated
on residential or agricultural property.
      7.   Mercury Vapor Lights: The installation of mercury vapor lamps is
hereby prohibited.
      8.   Flashing, Intermittent Or Moving Lights Prohibited: Flashing or
intermittent lights, lights of changing degree of intensity, or moving lights
shall not be permitted. This subsection shall not be construed so as to
prohibit the flashing porch light signal used only while emergency services are
responding to a call for assistance at the property, or holiday lights.
      9.   Industrial And Exterior Lighting: Industrial and exterior lighting
shall not be used in such a manner that produces glare on public highways and
neighboring property. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting, or similar
processes shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the
property line. Exceptions will be made for necessary repairs to equipment.
      10.   Sensor Activated Lights: Sensor activated lights, provided:
         a.   They are located in such a manner as to prevent glare and
lighting onto properties of others or into a public right of way.
         b.   They are set to only go on when activated and to go off within
five (5) minutes after activation has ceased.
         c.   They shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
      11.   Towers, Power Lines And Power Poles: Lighting of radio,
communication and navigation towers along with power lines and power poles,
provided the owner or occupant demonstrates that the federal aviation
administration (FAA) regulations can only be met through the use of lighting.
      12.   Outdoor Lighting Plan: All applications for a conditional use
permit shall include an outdoor lighting plan for the entire site which
indicates how the above standards are to be met. The approved permit shall be a
part of the conditional use permit and/or the building permit. (Ord. 10-06, 8-
23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this title.
9-5B-3: ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE:
Provisions must be made for necessary shielding or other preventive measures
against interferences occasioned by mechanical, electrical, electronic, and
nuclear equipment, uses or processes with electrical apparatus in nearby
buildings or land uses. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5B-4: EMISSIONS:
   A.   Obnoxious Odors; Toxic Or Corrosive Fumes Or Gases: The emission of
obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be permitted, nor the emission of any
toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.
   B.   Dust: Dust created by an industrial, commercial, or recreational
operation shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air. All operations shall
be subject to the standards in appendix C, fugitive dust 1 . State air quality
permits, when required, may be a condition of approval of the conditional use
permit or may be required to be a part of the conditional use permit at the
discretion of the commission.
   C.   Wood Burning Devices: Wood burning devices shall be limited to one per
site. Wood burning devices shall be certified for low emissions in accordance
with EPA standards. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-11-3 of this title.
9-5B-5: DUST:
   A.   Minimization Required: Dust and other types of air pollution borne by
the wind from such sources as storage areas and roads, shall be minimized by
appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, watering on a scheduled basis, or
other acceptable means.
   B.   Created By Approved Operation: Dust created by any approved operation
shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air. The standards in appendix C,
fugitive dust 1  along with state air quality permits, when required, may be a
condition of approval of the conditional use permit or may be required to be a
part of the conditional use permit at the discretion of the commission. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  9-11-3 of this title.
9-5B-6: OPEN STORAGE:
All storage shall be located within an area not closer than twenty feet (20')
from the street right of way line and shall be enclosed with a heavy wire or
board fence not less than six feet (6') high, or by plantings the same height.
Lumber, coal, or other combustible material will be fully accessible to
firetrucks at all times. Open storage of toxic or hazardous materials shall not
be allowed. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5B-7: FIRE PROTECTION:
Provisions must be made to implement prefire activities that may help improve
the survivability of people and homes in areas prone to wildfire. Activities
may include vegetation management around the home, use of fire resistant
building materials, appropriate subdivision design, removal of fuel, providing
a water source, and other measures. Recommendations of the applicable fire
district will be considered. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
ARTICLE C. RESIDENTIAL USES
SECTION:
9-5C-1: Compliance Required
9-5C-2: Minimum Lot Area
9-5C-3: Minimum Setbacks
9-5C-4: Maximum Building Height And Floor Area
9-5C-5: Site Improvement
9-5C-6: Density
9-5C-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Site Or Development Standards: Residential uses requiring a conditional
use permit shall meet the following site or development standards.
   B.   Subdivision Regulations: Subdivisions of land shall also comply with
the standards of the "Subdivision Regulations For Valley County, Idaho",
adopted April 29, 1970, and as revised hereafter, and referred to as title 10
of this code.
   C.   Mobile Homes, Motor Homes Or Recreational Vehicles: Developments
accommodating mobile homes, motor homes or recreational vehicles shall also
comply with the standards of the "Minimum Standards And Criteria For Approval
Of Development And Operation Of Mobile Home Subdivisions And Parks, Travel
Trailer Courts And Parks", adopted May 12, 1971, and as revised hereafter, and
referred to as title 12, chapter 1 of this code.
   D.   Planned Unit Developments, Condominiums And Multi-Family Residential
Developments: Planned unit developments, condominiums, and multi-family
residential developments shall be platted in accordance with the regulations of
this chapter, title 10 of this code, or as may be approved in accordance with
chapter 9 of this title as a planned unit development prior to the sale or
transfer of title to any lot, parcel, or unit. (Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-5C-2: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   Equivalent Minimum Lot Area: The equivalent minimum lot area shall be
unlimited herein, except for provisions of:
      Subsection B of this section
      Section
9-4-3-1 of this title
      Subsection
 9-5-3A2 of this chapter
      Section
9-5-4, table 5-A of this chapter
      Section
9-5C-6 of this article
      Subdivision regulations, title 10 of this code
      Mobile home standards, title 12, chapter 1 of this code
   B.   New Subdivisions:
      1.   Single-Family Residences: New subdivisions for single-family
residences shall provide the following minimum lot sizes:
         a.   One acre where individual sewage disposal systems and individual
wells are proposed.
         b.   Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet where a central water supply
system and individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
         c.   Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet where a central sewage
collection and disposal system and individual wells are proposed.
         d.   Eight thousand (8,000) square feet where both central systems are
proposed.
      2.   Density Limitation: These minimum lot sizes may not be used to
exceed the density limitation of section
9-5C-6 of this article for any development plans.
      3.   Planned Unit Developments: Lot sizes within new planned unit
developments and new multi-family residential subdivisions may vary from these
minimums because of reduced setbacks or other consideration in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
   C.   Frontage On Public Or Private Road: Frontage on a public or private
road shall not be less than thirty feet (30') for each lot or parcel. The lot
width at the front building setback line shall not be less than ninety feet
(90'). A PUD, condominium, or other cluster development may contain lots
without frontage on a road and widths less than ninety feet (90') in accordance
with the approved development plan or plat. (Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011; amd. Ord. 20-
12, 7-6-2020; Ord. 21-01, 11-23-2020)
9-5C-3: MINIMUM SETBACKS:
The minimum building setbacks shall be thirty feet (30') from front, rear, and
side street property lines and fifteen feet (15') from all side property lines.
Setbacks for mobile homes in subdivisions or parks shall be in accordance with
title 12, chapter 1 of this code. A PUD, condominium or other cluster
development may include zero lot line development and other reduced setbacks in
accordance with the approved development plan or plat. (Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-5C-4: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT AND FLOOR AREA:
   A.   Maximum Height: Building heights, except as may be modified by a PUD,
shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') above the lower of existing or finished
grade.
   B.   Building Size Or Floor Area: The building size or floor area, except as
may be modified by a PUD, shall not exceed the limitations of subsections
 9-5-3A and C of this chapter.
   C.   Lot Coverage: No structure or combination of structures, except as may
be modified by a PUD, may cover more than forty percent (40%) of the lot or
parcel. (Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-5C-5: SITE IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Off Street Parking Spaces: Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. These spaces may be included in driveways,
carports, or garages.
   B.   Utility Lines: All utility lines, including service lines, that are to
be located within the limits of the improved roadway in new residential
developments must be installed prior to placing the leveling coarse material.
(Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-5C-6: DENSITY:
   A.   The density of any residential development or use requiring a
conditional use permit shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5) dwelling units
per acre, except for planned unit developments or long-term rentals. Long-term
rental density can be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
regards to compatibility with surrounding land uses and will require a deed
restriction.
   B.   Density shall be computed by dividing the total number of dwelling
units proposed by the total acreage of land within the boundaries of the
development. The area of existing road rights of way on the perimeter of the
development and public lands may not be included in the density computation.
(Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011; amd. Ord. 20-12, 7-6-2020)
ARTICLE D. CIVIC OR COMMUNITY SERVICE USES
SECTION:
9-5D-1: Site Or Development Standards
9-5D-1: SITE OR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Civic or community service uses shall meet the following site or development
standards:
   A.   Minimum Lot Areas:
      1.   Hospitals, sanatoriums, retirement homes, government administration
buildings, cemeteries, and similar uses shall be located on lots or parcels of
minimum area as computed from subsection
9-5-3A2 of this chapter but shall not be less than one acre.
      2.   Sanitary landfills for solid waste disposal sites shall be in
accordance with federal and state standards and not be less than five (5)
acres. Central sewage treatment facility sites shall not be less than two (2)
acres. This minimum area does not apply to undesignated sewage treatment
facilities.
      3.   Other uses in this category shall occur on sites of an area
sufficient to accommodate the use, associated activities or uses, and to
adequately contain adverse impacts.
      4.   Frontage along a public or private road shall not be less than
seventy five feet (75').
   B.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   The minimum building setbacks shall be fifty feet (50') from front,
rear, and side street property lines and thirty feet (30') from side property
lines except the minimum setbacks for cemeteries shall be thirty feet (30')
from front and side street property lines, ten feet (10') from side property
lines and fifteen feet (15') from rear property lines. Central sewage treatment
facilities shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from any property
line.
      2.   Sanitary landfill sites shall be not less than one thousand feet
(1,000') from residential developments, other civic or community service uses,
or commercial uses. Central sewage treatment facilities shall be not less than
three hundred feet (300') from the above listed uses.
   C.   Maximum Building Heights And Floor Area:
      1.   Building heights shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') above the
lower of the existing or finished grade. The building size or floor area may
not exceed the limitations of subsections
9-5-3A and C of this chapter.
      2.   No structure or combination of structures may cover more than forty
percent (40%) of the lot.
   D.   Site Improvements: Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one
per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area as applicable where
buildings are a part of the use or as determined by the commission. (Ord. 10-
06, 8-23-2010)
ARTICLE E. PRIVATE RECREATION USES
SECTION:
9-5E-1: Site Or Development Standards
9-5E-1: SITE OR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Private recreation uses requiring a conditional use permit shall meet the
following site or development standards:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum area for any use in this category shall be sufficient to
accommodate the use, associated activities or uses, and to adequately contain
adverse impacts.
      2.   Frontage along a public or private road shall not be required.
   B.   Minimum Setbacks: The minimum building setbacks shall be fifty feet
(50') from front, rear, and side street property lines, and thirty feet (30')
from side property lines.
   C.   Maximum Building Heights And Floor Areas:
      1.   The maximum building height shall be thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Maximum floor areas shall not exceed the limitations of subsections
9-5-3A and C of this chapter.
      3.   No building or combination of buildings may cover more than one
percent (1%) of the lot or parcel.
   D.   Site Improvements: Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one
per every four (4) persons of total occupancy or attendance. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
ARTICLE F. COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
SECTION:
9-5F-1: Commercial Uses; Site Or Development Standards
9-5F-2: Industrial Uses; Site Or Development Standards
9-5F-1: COMMERCIAL USES; SITE OR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Commercial uses requiring a conditional use permit shall meet the following
site or development standards, except as may be modified by a PUD:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be unlimited herein except for the
provisions of subsection
9-5-3A2 of this chapter, and except the minimum area for a ski area shall be
forty (40) acres.
      2.   Frontage on a public or private road shall not be less than seventy
five feet (75') for each lot or parcel.
      3.   No frontage is required for recreation business.
   B.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   The minimum setbacks for neighborhood businesses shall be thirty
feet (30') from front, rear, and side street property lines and ten feet (10')
from all side property lines.
      2.   The minimum setbacks for service and recreation businesses shall be
fifty feet (50') from rear, front, and side street property lines and thirty
feet (30') from side property lines.
      3.   The minimum setbacks for area businesses shall be the same as those
for neighborhood businesses. Salvage yards, auto wrecking yards, or commercial
agricultural businesses shall be located not less than one thousand feet
(1,000') from any residential development, civic or community service use, or
other noncompatible commercial use, unless the impacts are adequately mitigated
by implementation of standards as approved by the commission. The setbacks will
be determined in relation to impact mitigation.
   C.   Maximum Building Height And Floor Area:
      1.   Building heights shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') above the
lower of the existing or finished grade.
      2.   The building size or floor area shall not exceed the limitations of
subsections
 9-5-3A and C of this chapter and title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
      3.   No building or combination of buildings may cover more than forty
percent (40%) of the lot or parcel, except recreation business buildings may
not cover more than one percent (1%) of the lot and agricultural business
buildings may not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the lot or parcel.
   D.   Site Improvements:
      1.   Where commercial uses are proposed on a lot or parcel having
frontage on Highway 55 and a side street, the access shall be limited to the
side street.
      2.   Parking spaces for neighborhood and area businesses shall be
provided at the rate of one, plus one per each two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of floor area.
      3.   Parking spaces for service businesses shall be provided as follows:
 
Use                 Required Spaces
Gas and service stations 1 for each 2 gas pumps and 2 for each service bay
Motel, hotel, etc.       1 per sleeping room, plus 1 for each 2 employees
Restaurant               1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Other service business   To be determined by staff
 
      4.   Parking spaces for recreation businesses shall be provided at the
rate of one per each four (4) occupants or as determined by the commission.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5F-2: INDUSTRIAL USES; SITE OR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Industrial uses requiring a conditional use permit shall meet the following
site or development standards:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be adequate to accommodate the use,
associated activities or use, and to adequately contain adverse impacts.
      2.   The minimum frontage along a public or private road shall not be
less than seventy five feet (75').
   B.   Minimum Setbacks:
      1.   Light Industrial Uses: The minimum building setbacks for light
industrial uses shall be fifty feet (50') from front, rear, and side street
property lines and thirty feet (30') from side property lines.
      2.   Heavy Industrial Uses:
         a.   The minimum building or use setbacks for heavy industrial uses
shall be one hundred fifty feet (150') from front and side street property
lines, one hundred feet (100') from rear property lines, and seventy five feet
(75') from side property lines. Heavy industrial uses shall be located not less
than one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential development, civic, or
community service use or commercial use, unless the impacts are adequately
mitigated by implementation of standards as approved by the commission. The
setbacks will be determined in relation to impact mitigation.
         b.   The current use of vacant adjacent property shall be presumed to
be its highest and best permitted use.
         c.   The above specified minimum building or use setbacks and the
setback from any residential development, civic or community service use, or
commercial use shall not apply to those heavy industrial land uses specifically
related to processing gravel and other building or landscape materials
including screening, classifying, and/or crushing said materials at sites
approved by the county for said purposes that are located outside the North
Fork of the Payette River drainage of the county and the duration of the
processing is less than thirty (30) days per calendar year.
         d.   The above specified minimum setback from any residential
development, civic or community service use, or commercial use shall not apply
to those extractive industry uses specifically related to gravel and other
building or landscape materials including excavation, stockpiling, and/or
hauling said materials at sites approved by the county for said purposes that
are located outside the North Fork of the Payette River drainage of the county.
      3.   Extractive Industry Uses: The minimum building setbacks for
extractive industry uses shall be thirty feet (30') from front, rear, and side
street property lines and ten feet (10') from side property lines. Extractive
industry uses shall be located not less than one thousand feet (1,000') from
any residential development, civic or community service use, or commercial use
unless the impacts are adequately mitigated by implementation of standards as
approved by the commission. The setbacks will be determined in relation to
impact mitigation. The extractive use shall be set back at least ten feet (10')
from all property lines unless the adjacent land use is permitted as an
extractive industry and there is an agreement that is approved by the county
engineer between the two (2) property owners to excavate to the property line.
   C.   Maximum Building Height And Floor Area:
      1.   Building heights shall not exceed forty five feet (45') for light
industrial uses, and shall be unlimited herein for extractive industrial uses.
Building heights for heavy industrial uses shall not exceed forty five feet
(45').
      2.   The building size or floor area shall not exceed the limitations of
subsections
9-5-3A and C of this chapter.
      3.   No building or combination of buildings may cover more than forty
percent (40%) of a lot for light industrial uses and thirty percent (30%) of a
lot for heavy industrial uses.
   D.   Site Improvements:
      1.   Applications for extractive industry uses proposing excavations
exceeding fifteen feet (15') below the average surface grade shall include an
operations plan and a final reclamation plan according to the guidelines in
subsection E of this section.
      2.   Fencing shall be installed in heavy industrial and extractive
industry uses where hazardous conditions or operations are proposed. The
fencing shall be adequate in height and construction to secure against random
entry into such areas.
      3.   Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one plus one per two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area where applicable for light
industrial uses; and one plus one per four hundred (400) square feet of floor
area for heavy industrial uses. In any event the parking area shall be adequate
to provide parking for employees and visitors.
   E.   Extractive Industrial Requirements; Reclamation Plan: The operation and
final reclamation plan for a proposed new extraction operation where
excavations exceeding five feet (5') in depth are proposed shall be submitted
with an application for a conditional use permit and shall contain the
following:
      1.   Location of the site and its area in acres. Location of the proposed
extraction. Show setbacks from each property line to the use limits.
      2.   Existing contour lines at not more than five foot (5') intervals.
      3.   Proposed contour lines after extraction is complete. Maximum slope
on excavations may be vertical but maximum abandoned slope shall not exceed one
and one-half to one (11/2:1). An abandoned slope is where the resource is
exhausted or where excavation will be abandoned for a period of one year or
longer. Reclaimed slopes shall be stabilized by seeding.
      4.   Where water will fill the abandoned pit, the sides may be left
vertical, except the perimeter shall be graded to a five to one (5:1) slope or
flatter to a depth at least ten feet (10') below the high water level.
      5.   Indicate an approximate total volume to be extracted, approximate
annual removal, and estimated life of operation. The conditional use permit
shall be void and final reclamation will have been completed by the date
specified. A new conditional use permit shall be required to continue the
operation.
      6.   Indicate private and public roads that will be used including
intended destination of the extracted materials and maximum trips per day.
Indicate normal hours of operation.
      7.   Indicate equipment type and number that will be used in connection
with the operation including excavation, processing, handling, or delivering.
Show locations of permanent or semipermanent equipment including parking areas.
      8.   Indicate incidental structures such as offices, toolsheds, storage
sheds, fuels, etc.
      9.   Indicate method of sanitary provisions for employees, water supply,
solid waste disposal, telephone, electrical power, and other utilities.
      10.   If dewatering is required, indicate location, method, point of
discharge, and estimated volume. If discharge is to a stream, river, lake, or
reservoir, provide approval of the department of water resources. (Ord. 10-06,
8-23-2010)
      11.   If material is to be hauled to fill the site, indicate where and
how it will be hauled. Demolition or excavation wastes shall constitute a
sanitary landfill and a separate conditional use permit shall be required. No
materials that would potentially adversely affect the quality of the permanent
water table may be placed in the excavation. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord.
11-5, 6-6-2011)
      12.   Indicate the method of securing the site including gates and
fencing. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
ARTICLE G. ALTERNATIVE ENERGY USES
SECTION:
9-5G-1: Site Or Development Standards
9-5G-1: SITE OR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Alternative energy uses requiring a conditional use permit shall meet the
following site or development standards:
   A.   Solar Panels Greater Than Eight Square Feet In Accumulated Area And
Detached From Primary Structure:
      1.   Must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from property lines.
      2.   Glare shall not create a hazard to vehicular traffic.
      3.   Cannot be over thirty feet (30') in height.
      4.   Impact to neighbors will be a determining factor.
   B.   Geothermal Plants:
      1.   Shall comply with all federal and state rules and regulations.
      2.   Shall comply with performance standards in this chapter.
   C.   Wind Turbines:
      1.   Detailed site plan identifying all property lines, existing
buildings, proposed buildings, parking areas, utilities, signs, neighboring
properties, proposed transmission lines, any other information that may be
required to determine if the use is within the intent and requirements of this
title.
      2.   Regarding setbacks, each wind turbine shall comply with the
following requirements:
         a.   Communication And Electrical Lines: One times its total height
from the nearest aboveground public electric power line or telephone line.
         b.   Property Line: One and one-half (11/2) times its total height
from the nearest property line, unless mitigation has taken place and agreed to
by owner/operator and affected property owners involved and recorded in the
Valley County recorder's office which describes the benefited and burdened
properties and which advises all subsequent owners of the burdened property.
         c.   Public Roads: One and-half (11/2) times its total height from the
nearest public road right of way.
         d.   Railroads: One and one-half (11/2) times its total height from
all railroad rights of way.
         e.   Inhabited Structures (Applies Only To Commercial Wind Turbines):
One-half (1/2) mile from the nearest existing residence, school, hospital,
church, place of employment or public library, unless mitigation has taken
place and agreed to by owner/operator and affected property owners involved.
Agreement must be recorded in the Valley County recorder's office, which
describes the benefited and burdened properties and advises all subsequent
owners of the burdened property. However, the distance cannot be less than one
and one-half (11/2) times its total height.
      3.   Regarding minimum ground clearance, the tip of a blade shall, at its
lowest point, have a ground clearance of no less than fifteen feet (15'),
except commercial turbines shall have a ground clearance of no less than
seventy five feet (75').
      4.   A building permit is required and must comply with the currently
adopted building code.
      5.   The system shall comply with all applicable federal aviation
administration (FAA) standards. Lighting shall not be allowed unless required
by the FAA.
      6.   Wind turbines shall be painted a nonreflective, nonobtrusive color.
      7.   Shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator. Any such
identification shall not appear on the blades or other moving parts or exceed
six (6) square feet.
      8.   Hobbyist turbines shall be limited to no more than two (2) wind
turbines per parcel. Personal turbines shall be limited to no more than one
wind turbine per lot or parcel.
      9.   Electrical controls and control wiring and power lines shall be
wireless or not aboveground except where wind farm collector wiring is brought
together for connection to the transmission or distribution network, adjacent
to that network.
      10.   A time line prior to the construction phase of the project shall be
submitted to the planning and zoning commission identifying the starting and
completion date of all construction.
      11.   All wiring between wind turbines and the tie in to the grid shall
be underground.
      12.   Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to fifteen feet (15') above
ground level.
      13.   All access doors to the wind turbine towers and electrical
equipment shall be lockable and locked when unattended.
      14.   Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on all wind turbine
towers, electrical equipment and facility entrances.
      15.   The design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the
extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the facility to the natural setting and existing
environment.
      16.   Weight limits and potential road damage shall be a consideration of
approval.
      17.   For commercial wind turbines, a decommissioning and reclamation
plan: expected beginning, end of construction and end of project life span. How
the decommissioning and reclamation is secured (bonds, contracts):
         a.   Applicants are required to hold a performance bond, completion
bond, or other financial assurance with an A-rated firm in the amount of five
percent (5%) of the tower's value.
         b.   A detailed decommissioning and reclamation plan in accordance
with state and federal law. The owner/operator of a commercial wind energy
facility and/or property owner is responsible for removing the wind turbines
and related facilities when no longer useful. They must remove the turbines and
facilities within three (3) years of the end of electricity generation unless a
new plan is proposed to reuse the turbines. Reclamation shall be restored to
its original state before the wind energy facility site construction.
         c.   Decommissioning requirements transfer with ownership of the
turbine or ownership of wind facility and/or property owner.
      18.   Evidence of compliance with FAA, United States fish and wildlife
services, Idaho fish and game, DEQ, and the appropriate fire department must be
submitted by the applicant to the planning and zoning department prior to the
issuance of a building permit. If an area is identified by fish and wildlife
services to house a significant bird population, a monopole tubular type tower
shall be used instead of lattice type towers.
   D.   Nuclear Plants:
      1.   Shall comply with all federal and state rules and regulations.
      2.   Shall comply with performance standards in this chapter.
   E.   Hydroelectric Plants:
      1.   Shall comply with all federal and state rules and regulations.
      2.   Shall comply with performance standards in this chapter. (Ord. 10-
06, 8-23-2010)
ARTICLE H. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 1
SECTION:
9-5H-1: Preapplication Conference
9-5H-2: Application Form
9-5H-3: Application Review
9-5H-4: Notice To Agencies
9-5H-5: Compatibility Rating And Administrator Or Staff Report
9-5H-6: Setting Hearing Date; Public Notice
9-5H-7: Commission And Public Hearing
9-5H-8: Issuance Of Conditional Use Permit
9-5H-9: Application And Review For Final Plat
9-5H-10: Variances
9-5H-11: Conduct Of Hearings
9-5H-12: Appeals
9-5H-13: Reconsideration
 
Notes
1 1. See chart of routing procedures for conditional use permit in section
  9-5-4 of this chapter.
9-5H-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Conference Required: Prior to the formal filing of an application, the
applicant shall confer with the administrator or staff to obtain proper forms,
information, and guidance.
   B.   Familiarity With Standards, Goals And Objectives: The applicant shall
familiarize himself with the standards of this title, the goals and objectives
of the comprehensive plan, and review procedure and submittal requirements,
which will affect the proposal.
   C.   Meeting At Site Or Other Investigations: The preapplication conference
may include a meeting at the proposed site and other investigations deemed
necessary by the administrator or staff.
   D.   Neighborhood Meetings: Applicants shall conduct a neighborhood meeting
for any proposed subdivision that contains five (5) or more lots. The purpose
of such meetings is to obtain input to improve plans and reduce negative
comments from neighbors.
      1.   It shall be the sole duty of the applicant to provide written notice
to all property owners or purchasers of record owning property within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the property subject to the
application. In lieu of a neighborhood meeting, evidence can be submitted that
the applicant spoke with or provided information to all property owners within
300'.
         a.   Notification of the neighborhood meeting shall be sent by US mail
to all property owners within 300' of the site of the proposed application a
minimum of 10 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
         b.   Notice of a neighborhood meeting shall be in addition to, and not
combined with, notices already required by this chapter, and shall include the
date, time, location, and purpose of the neighborhood meeting.
      2.   The meeting shall be held at a time when most neighbors can attend.
      3.   The meeting shall be on the property subject to the application; at
a nearby available public meeting place including, but not limited to, a fire
station, library, school, or community center; or at a location with suitable
meeting facilities if such facilities are within a one-mile radius of the
nearest public meeting place. Meetings can also be on a virtual platform.
      4.   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to acceptance of
the application. The neighborhood meeting shall not be conducted earlier than
six (6) months prior to the acceptance of the application.
      5.   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting shall be to review the
proposed project and discuss neighborhood concerns, if any.
      6.   Each application should include a Summary of the Meeting that
includes the location, date, time of the meeting; mailing list; a summary of
the comments received at the meeting; and, a list of persons attending.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2023-01, 7-10-2023)
9-5H-2: APPLICATION FORM:
   A.   Filing; Number Of Copies; Placement On Agenda: All applications for
conditional use permits shall be filed, with the fee, with the administrator or
staff on forms prescribed by the commission at least forty five (45) days prior
to the hearing at which it is to be considered. The administrator may set
applications on the agenda if received prior to the notice deadline of thirty
(30) days prior to the hearing at which it is to be considered, if the
application can be determined to be complete. Ten (10) copies of each item
comprising the application shall be submitted.
   B.   Legal Or Equitable Interest Required: All applications shall be filed
by a person or firm holding a legal or equitable interest in the property to be
considered. A letter from an agency who administrates public land authorizing
review of public lands for a permit will meet the requirements. An authorized
agent may present the application to the administrator or staff and the
commission.
   C.   Names, Addresses, Telephone Numbers: The names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of the applicant, owner, and agent shall be included on the
application. The applicant or owner shall sign the application form.
   D.   Required Information: An application shall be accompanied by notes
disclosing the following:
      1.   Solid waste disposal methods.
      2.   An estimated timetable for construction.
      3.   The names and addresses of property owners within three hundred feet
(300').
      4.   Impact report.
      5.   A legal description of the property.
   E.   Plans: An application shall be accompanied by plans clearly and
accurately disclosing sufficient information for the administrator or staff and
the commission to review the application as follows:
      1.   Natural features of the site including slope, drainage, rock
outcrops, soils classification, vegetative cover, etc. A topographic survey
map, aerial photograph, or copy of a USGS map to appropriate scale may be used
to indicate these and the following features.
      2.   Boundaries of the property and adjoining parcels with a list of
property owners within three hundred feet (300').
      3.   Existing uses of the property, uses of the adjoining parcels, and
the proposed use. Where more than one use is proposed, then indicate the
boundary of each use.
      4.   Boundaries of special areas 1 .
      5.   Total acreage and area of each use.
      6.   Existing or proposed access roads and utility access easements.
Indicate width, type, and condition of surfacing material on existing roads.
      7.   Proposed on site streets, walks, paths, and utility easements
including construction standards, width, and type of dedication.
      8.   Proposed parking area locations, dimensions, and construction
standards.
      9.   Proposed snow removal and storage plans.
      10.   Existing and proposed structures.
      11.   Existing and proposed utilities including electricity, telephone,
gas, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and potable water.
      12.   Method, location and type of sanitary waste collection and
treatment facilities.
      13.   Existing irrigation and drainage systems and any proposed
alterations, improvements, extensions or new construction. Also indicate
whether the property is in an existing district or association. Also indicate
the stormwater management plan.
      14.   Any proposed fencing, site screening, and landscaping and
provisions for maintenance.
      15.   Open space and provisions for their use, preservation, and
maintenance.
   F.   Compliance Required: Applications and procedures for all subdivisions
and planned unit developments shall also be in accordance with the "Subdivision
Regulations For Valley County, Idaho", adopted April 29, 1970, and subsequent
amendments. Approval of a conditional use permit shall be a requirement for
such developments and said approval shall be deemed approval for the
preliminary plat. Approval of the conditional use permit can be reviewed and
decided upon independently or simultaneously with concept approval for a
planned unit development or the planned unit development approval.
   G.   Application Fee: The application fee for conditional use permits or
requests for a variance shall be set by resolution of the county board of
commissioners. The fee for a conditional use permit shall be in addition to
other fees, charges, or assessments. The schedule of fees shall be available at
the commission office.
   H.   Acceptance Signature: The administrator or staff shall sign and date
the application upon acceptance thereof. The application will be officially
accepted only after it has been completed and submitted along with the required
plans, notes, and fees as set by the board of commissioners. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 6 of this title.
9-5H-3: APPLICATION REVIEW:
Within fifteen (15) days of reviewing the application, the administrator or
staff, acting as an agent for and on behalf of the commission, shall notify the
applicant that the plans and general submission materials do or do not meet the
objectives of these regulations. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
   A.   Denial: If the evaluation is negative, the administrator or staff shall
notify the applicant in writing, listing the reasons for such evaluation. The
applicant may: (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
      1.   Withdraw the application and receive a refund of all but fifteen
dollars ($15.00) of the fee; or
      2.   Revise the application to mitigate the negative aspects.
      3.   Request the administrator or staff to proceed with the application
so that the application can be reviewed by the commission.
   B.   Approval: If the evaluation is affirmative, the administrator or staff
shall proceed with the review. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-4: NOTICE TO AGENCIES:
   A.   Notice Required: Thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date, the
administrator or staff shall notify other governmental or administrative
agencies that the application has been received. The notice shall include
copies of the application or a brief description of the proposed use. The
purposes of the notice will be to alert the agency of a proposed use that may
affect matters within their jurisdiction or to obtain comments relying on the
expertise within that agency to provide information helpful to the commission's
review of the application. The agencies that may be notified include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Local agencies:
         a.   Cities;
         b.   Fire departments;
         c.   Sheriff's department;
         d.   School administration;
         e.   Assessor;
         f.   County engineer;
         g.   County building official;
         h.   Prosecuting attorney;
         i.   Irrigation or drainage districts;
         j.   Water or sewer district;
         k.   Central district health department;
         l.   Valley soil and water conservation district;
         m.   Utilities (electric, telephone, cable);
         n.   Valley/Adams regional housing authority;
         o.   Valley County pathways committee.
      2.   State agencies:
         a.   Water resources;
         b.   Environmental;
         c.   Transportation;
         d.   Commerce and labor;
         e.   Fish and wildlife;
         f.   Department of lands;
         g.   Southern Idaho timber protective association.
      3.   Federal agencies:
         a.   Forest service;
         b.   Department of housing and urban development;
         c.   U.S. bureau of reclamation;
         d.   Army corps of engineers.
   B.   Agency Comments: The comments received from the agencies may be used by
the commission and staff to evaluate items in the impact report, the
compatibility rating, in preparing the conditions of approval or reasons for
denial of the application. When permits are required by other agencies for all
or parts of the application, evidence of the permit and compliance with the
provisions of the permit shall be a condition of the conditional use permit.
Such permits include, but are not necessarily limited to, building permits;
individual sewage, electrical permits; and similar permits to construct
specific parts of a project. Other permits more technical in nature or greater
in scope may be required before the conditional use permit is issued, as
determined by the commission or the board. Such permits include, but are not
necessarily limited to: permits to use public lands; permits to construct
central sewage treatment facilities; permits to alter wetlands; permits to
construct in flood prone areas; and in other situations where the review and
issuance of the permit will assure the commission that the proposal is
technically feasible. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-5: COMPATIBILITY RATING AND ADMINISTRATOR OR STAFF REPORT:
   A.   Staff Report: Prior to the public hearing, the staff shall have
prepared a report to the commission relating the following:
      1.   The essential parts of the application and proposed use.
      2.   An evaluation of the proposed use in regard to the comprehensive
plan.
      3.   An evaluation of the proposed use in regard to provisions herein or
in other pertinent ordinances.
      4.   Additional questions and proposed conditions of approval.
   B.   Compatibility Evaluation: The administrator or staff shall evaluate the
compatibility of the proposed use in accordance with the guidelines in section
 9-11-1 of this title. A copy of the report and the compatibility rating shall
be sent to the applicant and/or his agent and to members of the commission the
week prior to the hearing.
   C.   Site: The commission is encouraged to view the site so long as they
verify their location is the correct site by demonstration of a sign being
posted by staff.
   D.   Compatibility Rating: The commission may choose to accept the
compatibility rating as prepared by staff or may choose to complete their own
compatibility rating. The commission's ratings may be done at the public
hearing and shall be an average of all the commissioner's values of each
question after discussion. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-6: SETTING HEARING DATE; PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Placement On Agenda: The application shall be placed on the agenda of
the earliest regular meeting of the commission where proper advertising and
notice can be given. The agenda shall be posted at the Valley County
Courthouse.
   B.   Notice: A notice to adjoining property owners within three hundred feet
(300') and the public relating a brief description of the proposed use and the
date, time, and place for the hearing will be posted by the administrator or
staff not less than seventeen (17) days before the hearing. Posting shall
include direct mail to adjoining owners and advertising in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. The site of the application shall be posted at least one week prior to
the hearing. Agencies shall be noticed thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
(All times are counted on calendar days.) (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-7: COMMISSION AND PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Commission Consideration: The commission shall consider the application
at the date, time and place specified in the advertisement in accordance with
the agenda prepared by the administrator or staff and in accordance with the
rules, procedures, and bylaws adopted by the commission.
   B.   Criteria For Granting: The commission shall grant an application when a
preponderance of the evidence presented to the commission establishes:
      1.   The application and the proposed project is consistent with this
title.
      2.   The proposed project, by its compatibility rating, is shown not to
have any unreasonable negative impacts on adjacent property if all the terms of
the application and/or terms of applicable development agreements are
satisfied.
      3.   The proposed project will not place any unreasonable burden on the
public infrastructure. In the case of an application for a PUD, and, if
directed by the board, the commission shall be entitled to defer the
presentation of evidence regarding, and decisions regarding, this item to the
board.
   C.   Application Tabled: The commission may table the application to a
future specified date when:
      1.   Testimony during the public hearing provides conflicting
information.
      2.   When new information or questions are raised that, in the opinion of
the commission, should be studied by the administrator or staff.
      3.   When a legal opinion or counsel is needed.
      4.   When additional information is needed from the applicant.
   D.   Commission Approval; Recommendation To Board: The commission may
approve the application as proposed or with conditions stipulated by the
administrator or staff and/or the commission. The commission's approval of a
conditional use permit for a planned unit development shall be a recommendation
to the board of county commissioners who will consider the item at a public
hearing. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-8: ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Minutes Of Proceedings: The administrator or staff shall prepare
minutes of the proceedings for each hearing, including the action taken by the
commission, and forward copies to the members of the commission, the clerk of
the board, and the applicant within ten (10) days after the meeting.
   B.   Issuance Of Permit; Form: Upon recommendation of the commission, the
administrator or staff shall issue a conditional use permit on forms prescribed
by the commission.
      1.   The approval shall be for a period of one year from the date of the
hearing, after which time, the approval will expire and be null and void unless
the applicant has substantially complied with the provisions thereof or has
applied for an extension of time, or the commission has approved a phasing plan
for a longer period. Longer approvals may be given for community service uses,
so long as they phase improvements, such as landscaping. This will allow better
long range planning for utility companies and adjacent property owners.
      2.   The commission may approve extensions for increments of one year or
specified time period with definite benchmarks upon proper application prior to
the expiration of the previous approval. Expiration of the previous approval
will be the date specified on the conditional use permit.
      3.   Applications for extensions shall be reevaluated by the commission
and the fee for a new application charged as set by the board of commissioners.
The application shall summarize the original plan; describe the significant
progress made in accordance with the approved application; explain what has yet
to be completed; and specify an updated completion date. Financial guarantees
will be reevaluated and extended to meet the updated completion date. The
application shall contain an updated list of adjoining property owners and be
noticed in the same manner as a new application. With the extension, impacts
can be reevaluated and mitigated with the addition of new conditions of
approval. A progress report schedule shall be set, with milestones identified.
The commission may choose not to approve an extension based upon their
reevaluation of the proposed use and lack of activity to complete the project.
The extension request is a public hearing. Extensions will not be approved
unless all fees are paid and/or reimbursed to the county.
      4.   Conditional use permits will not be issued until ten (10) days after
the hearing and, in the event an appeal to the board is filed within the ten
(10) days' limitation, the permit will not be issued until after a decision by
the board.
      5.   When the commission's decision is subject to board approval, as for
planned unit developments, the conditional use permit will not be issued until
after the board's decision.
      6.   The permit shall accurately describe the approved use and any
conditions placed on the approval by the commission, including the time for
completion of the work. Occupancy of any part or portion of the approved use
shall not be allowed until all the improvements required to meet the conditions
of approval and related laws and regulations have been satisfactorily
completed. Occupancy may be allowed for a completed portion of the project upon
the posting of a surety for completing the improvements required in the
conditions of approval. The procedure and form of surety shall be in accordance
with section
10-5-3 of this code.
      7.   Record the conditional use permit when issued.
   C.   Appeals: Appeals may be filed, in writing, by any interested party with
the administrator. An appeal of a commission decision on a conditional use
permit will clearly state the decision being appealed, the nature of the
appeal, and how the decision of the commission was not consistent with the
preponderance of the evidence presented. Appeals shall also comply with and be
heard in accordance with section
9-5H-12 of this article.
   D.   Resubmittal: If an applicant fails to appeal a denial within ten (10)
days of the date of the hearing, then a resubmittal may not be made for a
period of one year from the hearing date unless substantial modifications are
made so that the administrator or staff may consider the resubmittal of a new
application. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-9: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FOR FINAL PLAT:
The form of application and procedure for review shall be in accordance with
the "Subdivision Regulations For Valley County, Idaho", adopted April 29, 1970,
and subsequently amended. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   Conditions: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6516, the commission
shall be empowered to grant variances relaxing or modifying the requirements of
this title with respect to lot size, setbacks, parking space, height of
buildings, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a
structure upon lots, and other land use requirements of this title. In the case
of a PUD involving variations from the requirements of this title, it shall not
be necessary for the applicant to file a separate application for such
variances. Variances may also be heard simultaneously with conditional use
permit applications.
   B.   Application:
      1.   A variance may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of
undue hardship as a result of characteristics of the site.
      2.   A written application for a variance shall be submitted to the
administrator or staff containing:
         a.   Description of the nature of the variance requested. (Ord. 10-06,
8-23-2010)
         b.   A narrative statement and graphic material demonstrating:
            (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are not
a result from any action of the applicant, which are peculiar to the land use
or structure involved, and which are not applicable to other similar or
adjacent lands, uses, or structures.
            (2)   That granting the variance requested will not result in any
special privilege otherwise denied to other similar or adjacent lands, uses,
and structures.
         c.   A site plan showing the location of the variance and the special
characteristics of the site.
         d.   A list of adjoining property owners within three hundred feet
(300') of the site.
         e.   The fee set by resolution of the board shall accompany the
application for a variance. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   C.   Procedure: An application for a variance shall be reviewed by the
administrator or staff and the commission in accordance with section
9-5H-11 of this article. The administrator shall post notice of the public
hearing to the applicant, adjoining property owners, on site, and the public in
accordance with subsection
9-5H-6B of this article.
   D.   Granting Of Variance:
      1.   A variance may be granted if the commission makes specific findings
of fact based directly on the particular evidence in the application which
supports the conclusion that the above conditions have been met by the
applicant.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
administrator or staff shall provide the applicant with written notice of the
action by regular mail if so requested by the applicant.
      3.   The commission's decision shall be a recommendation to the board.
      4.   The clerk, upon receipt of a recommendation from the commission,
shall set the item on the agenda of the board at the earliest possible regular
meeting of the board.
      5.   The board shall consider and act upon the commission's
recommendations by following the procedures outlined in section
9-5H-11 of this article. However, if the commission's recommendation is
unanimous and there is no opposition to approval of the variance, then the
board need not hold a public hearing, but may make a decision as a regular
agenda item. Only the applicant must be notified as to the time on the agenda
of the public meeting.
      6.   A permit for the variance may be issued by the administrator or
staff only after approval by the board.
      7.   The variance approval is valid for five (5) years, unless a more
specific date is specified. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-11: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
The administrator or staff or board which conducts public hearings under this
title shall conduct said hearings in conformity with the following standards.
At all such hearings:
   A.   A sign in roster shall be kept at the entrance to the hearing room for
all persons who wish to testify at the hearing on a particular application or
issue.
   B.   The chair of the meeting shall conduct the hearing in accordance with
the rules adopted March 10, 1983, and amendments thereto.
   C.   A transcribable record shall be taken and maintained.
   D.   The chair shall call upon the administrator or staff to make a
preliminary presentation of facts not to exceed twenty (20) minutes in length.
   E.   Following the close of the presentation of facts by the administrator
or staff, the chair shall invite the applicant to make a presentation of
evidence to the commission or board.
   F.   Every document referred to by any person during testimony (including
charts, maps, photographic evidence or any other evidence) shall be offered
into the record. Every exhibit offered shall be marked and entered into the
record of the proceeding. Such exhibits shall be maintained in the county
planning department during the appeal period, or permanently, if provided as
evidence of future plans. Exhibits offered may be made conditions of approval.
   G.   After the administrator or staff presentation and testimony by the
applicant, the chair shall open the hearing for public testimony and shall
invite the public to address the commission or board in the order of names
found on the sign in roster. If, in the opinion of the chair, the number of
persons testifying is so large as to unduly delay the process of the hearing,
the chair may limit public testimony to three (3) minutes for each member of
the public. Representatives of groups may be limited to five (5) minutes. The
public hearing may be continued, upon motion, to a date certain, which shall be
announced to the public there assembled.
   H.   All persons testifying before the commission or board shall state, for
the record, their full name and address.
      1.   Any person desiring to speak must first be recognized by the
presiding officer.
      2.   Testimony shall directly address the subject at hand.
      3.   Testimony shall not be repetitious with other entries into the
record.
      4.   Testimony shall not be personally derogatory and shall be
respectful.
      5.   Testimony shall comply with time restrictions.
      6.   If oral testimony fails to comply with the aforementioned standards,
the presiding officer may declare such testimony out of order and require it to
cease.
      7.   The chairman may ask people who are unruly to leave the premises.
      8.   Public displays shall not be tolerated.
      9.   The chairman may stop the meeting at any time and continue it to a
specified time.
   I.   Members of the commission or board or its legal representative may
question any person who testified at any time or may, upon a majority of the
members present, ask for further testimony.
   J.   Before the close of the public testimony, the chair shall ask if any
persons attending the hearing who did not sign the roster wish to be heard, and
any such person shall be given the opportunity to testify.
   K.   At the close of public testimony, the chair shall solicit comments from
the administrator or staff for additional testimony or clarifications as the
result of the testimony given. After comments from the administrator or staff,
the applicant or appellant shall be given an opportunity to address final
comments to the commission or board. If new information is presented by the
applicant, the public shall have a chance to address that specific information.
   L.   After all testimony, the chair shall declare the public hearing closed
and shall bring the matter back before the commission or board for discussion
and action. The discussion and decision may be deferred until another date
certain, which shall be then announced to the public there assembled.
   M.   Following the commission hearing, if the commission makes a material
change in the proposal, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
commission gives final approval or forwards the proposal with its
recommendation to the board. For purposes of this section, a material change
shall mean any modification of the proposal, which, in the opinion of the
commission, is of such importance that the public interest will be better
served by additional notice and public hearing.
   N.   At any public hearing, the commission may order the hearing to be
continued by publicly announcing the time and place of continuance and no
further notice thereof shall be required. Failure of the commission or board to
provide actual notice to each person so entitled shall not render any
proceeding hereunder invalid; provided, that the county substantially complies
with the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter.
   O.   The procedure for quasi-judicial public hearings shall follow the order
of events set forth below (see "Procedures For Conducting A Public Hearing" at
the end of this section):
      1.   Brief introduction of application by chairman.
      2.   Presentation by staff.
      3.   Presentation by applicant (decision makers should address their
questions to the applicant at this time).
      4.   Open public hearing testimony from the public in the following
order: (Questions from the decision makers should be asked of the person
testifying before they leave the podium.)
         a.   Proponents (speakers in favor).
         b.   Uncommitted (neutral speakers).
         c.   Opponents (speakers opposed).
      5.   Rebuttal testimony from applicant. (Decision makers should ask any
final questions.) If new facts are elicited at any point, the public must be
given an opportunity to comment on such new facts.
      6.   Close public hearing.
      7.   Discussion of hearing subject among governing board members.
Questions may also be directed to staff during this period. Any procedural
rules requiring a motion prior to discussion are hereby suspended for purposes
of such discussion. Decision makers may table the matter until later in the
meeting or to a later meeting for deliberations.
      8.   The recommendation or decision arrived at should state why the
result was reached. A reasoned statement that explains the criteria and
standards considered relevant; state the relevant facts relied upon, and
explain the rationale for the decision based on applicable provisions of the
comprehensive plan, relevant ordinance and statutory provisions, pertinent
constitutional principles and factual information contained in the record,
should be part of the motion to approve or deny, or should be developed with
staff assistance for action at a subsequent meeting.
   P.   Written testimony and exhibits from the public to be presented for the
record shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Written submittal, other than petitions or illustrations, must be
submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
      2.   Written submittal shall include the signature and address of the
submitter.
      3.   Written submittal shall address the issue at hand. Portions of
written submittal that raise irrelevant issues or include improper information
may be excluded from consideration in whole or in part.
      4.   Documents may be submitted at the public hearing only with the
approval of the presiding officer and only if their introduction will not
inject unfair surprise into the process. The presiding officer may require
duplication of any acceptable documents or continuation of any hearing if
necessary to provide an opportunity for response from hearing participants.
      5.   If documentation submitted at a hearing fails to comply with the
aforementioned standards, the presiding officer may decline to admit them for
consideration during the hearing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-881.png]
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-12: APPEALS:
Any administrative level or commission level decision may be appealed in
accordance with the procedures established herein. All such appeals must be
written, accompanied by the fee as set by resolution of the board of
commissioners and submitted to the administrator prior to the deadlines set
forth herein. If the appeal deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, the appeal
period is automatically extended to the next workday. Each appeal must clearly
state the name, address and phone number of the person or organization
appealing and the specific issues, items or conditions that are being appealed
and state the nature of his or their interest and extent of damages.
   A.   Appeals Of Administrative Decisions: Any action of the administrator on
a specific administrative level application or on the general interpretation of
this title may be appealed as follows:
      1.   Interpretation Of Title: Decisions of the administrator or staff may
be appealed to the planning and zoning commission within ten (10) days from the
date of such decision by any person aggrieved by such decision. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the administrator or staff shall schedule the appeal before the
commission at the next public meeting following the appeal.
      2.   Administrator Or Staff Design Review Decisions: Decisions of the
administrator on design review decisions may be appealed to the commission
within ten (10) calendar days from the date of such decision by any person
aggrieved by such decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the administrator or
staff shall schedule the appeal before the commission at the next public
meeting following the appeal.
      3.   Other Administrative Level Applications: Actions of the
administrator on administrative level applications, other than design review,
may be appealed to the commission within ten (10) calendar days from the date
of the action by the applicant or any aggrieved person. Upon acceptance of the
appeal, the administrator shall establish completeness of the appeal and shall
notify the appealing party, the applicant, all property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the property, and the public. The commission, in
reviewing the administrator's decision, may impose additional or different
conditions and limitations.
   B.   Appeals Of Commission Decisions:
      1.   Any decision of the commission may be appealed to the board by the
applicant, any aggrieved person or the administrator. The appeal shall be filed
with the administrator before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the tenth calendar
day after the determination of the commission has been made.
      2.   The administrator shall ascertain that the procedural requirements
have been met and notify the board of the appeal.
      3.   The clerk, upon notice of an appeal of a decision by the commission,
shall set the item on the agenda of the board at the earliest possible regular
meeting of the board.
      4.   Notice of the public hearing shall be posted in accordance with
subsection A3 of this section.
      5.   An appeal may not be withdrawn without the approval of the board.
      6.   All pertinent information in the planning and zoning file shall be
forwarded to the board for review.
      7.   The board shall hold a public hearing to review the commission's
proceedings and decisions and may obtain additional information from the
administrator or staff, the applicant, the appellant, or the public.
      8.   The board may sustain, deny, amend or modify the decision of the
commission. The decision of the board is final and need not be referred back to
the commission; except, the board may elect to refer the matter to the
commission with specific instructions.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-5H-13: RECONSIDERATION:
   A.   Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial review of a Board
of County Commissioner's (Board) final decision must first submit with the
Planning and Zoning Director an application for reconsideration of the Board's
decision within fourteen (14) days of the date of the final decision, along
with the applicable fee. The application should identify deficiencies based on
the record. New deficiencies that are not part of the record will not be
considered.
   B.   The reconsideration will be scheduled on an open business meeting
agenda. The Board will determine whether to grant or deny the request. If the
Board grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a public hearing will be
scheduled to address the specific deficiencies identified by the applicant or
affected person and to allow interested persons to have an opportunity to be
heard. If the reconsideration is denied it will be memorialized as an Order
approved by the Board. If the Board does not make any decision within sixty
(60) days of receipt of the reconsideration it will be deemed a denial.
   C.   Notice of the public hearing on the reconsideration, identifying the
specific deficiencies alleged in the reconsideration request, will be provided
as follows, including:
      1.   Notice To Agencies: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the P&Z Director shall send notice to all affected agencies and
political subdivisions providing services with the planning jurisdiction.
      2.   Legal Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the P&Z Director shall publish a notice of the time and place in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation in the county.
      3.   Notice to Neighbors: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing the P&Z Director will send notice to all neighbors within three-hundred
feet (300') of the site.
   D.   If the Board grants the request to hold a hearing on the
reconsideration, it must be held within sixty (60) days of receipt of the
request for reconsideration.
   E.   Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the Board may affirm,
reverse, or modify its prior decision and shall provide a written decision to
the applicant and the affected person(s).
(Ord. 2025-03, 5-1-2025)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL AREAS
SECTION:
9-6-1: General Provisions
9-6-2: Flood Prone Areas
9-6-3: Airport Vicinities
9-6-4: Roseberry Townsite Historical Overlay District
9-6-5: Wellhead Protection Overlay District
9-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter defines and contains standards and procedures for special areas
and the use and development of lands therein. The purpose of designating
special areas with greater restrictions is to fulfill the intent of the
comprehensive plan, protect persons and property from potentially hazardous
conditions, indirectly minimize property taxes which may be used to repair such
damages, and to minimize the destruction of resources which are economically,
ecologically, and/or socially important to the county. Since the guidelines for
uses in special areas are supplementary to other regulations, the special areas
are also called overlay districts.
   A.   Special Areas: The following are herein recognized as special areas:
      1.   Flood prone areas: Refer to section
 9-6-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Airport vicinities: Refer to section
 9-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
      3.   Roseberry townsite historical overlay district: Refer to section
9-6-4 of this chapter.
      4.   Wellhead protection overlay district: Refer to section
9-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
   B.   Maps Of Special Areas:
      1.   The boundaries of the special areas have been generally indicated on
maps which are on file at the county courthouse.
      2.   The flood prone areas have been indicated on the 7.5 minute series
topographic maps published and prepared by the department of the interior
geological survey and on the "Flood Insurance Rate Map For Valley County,
Idaho" prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
      3.   The airport vicinity for the McCall Airport is currently being
studied.
   C.   Special Area Boundaries And Overlaps:
      1.   The interpretation of the precise location of an overlay district
boundary may be aided by the definition of the "special areas" in section
9-1-10 of this title, supplementary mapping or data obtained by the county or
provided by an applicant disclosing greater detail of the pertinent features of
the special area, and on site inspection of the site by the staff.
      2.   Wherever two (2) or more special areas overlap, all applicable
standards shall apply. When standards conflict or are otherwise incompatible,
the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-6-2: FLOOD PRONE AREAS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this overlay district is to protect the health
and safety of the public, and to minimize damage to property and fragile
ecologies by preventing surface and ground water pollution and loss and
destruction from flooding and siltation.
   B.   Areas Of Application:
      1.   The standards and procedures for flood prone areas shall apply to
those lands which are subject to special flood hazard as defined in title 11,
chapter 1 of this code. The flood prone areas generally lie along major
drainage channels. A large percentage of these areas are fully saturated
seasonally or continuously. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
      2.   Certain flood prone areas have been identified on the "Flood
Insurance Rate Map For Valley County, Idaho" as prepared by the federal
emergency management agency. The applicable maps are identified in title 11 of
this code. The maps are available in the county planning and zoning office or
on the Valley County GIS website. (Ord. 17-03, 2-21-2017)
   C.   Permitted Uses: The following are permitted uses within flood prone
areas:
      Agricultural and open space uses, except structures for enclosing
animals.
      Civic or community service uses, except structures, shelters, sewage
treatment facilities, cemeteries, or sanitary landfills.
      Industrial uses, except structures and the storage of chemicals,
petroleum products, and similar products which are water soluble or floatable.
Wood processing plants without structures may be permitted uses.
      Private or commercial recreation uses, except structures or shelters for
human occupancy or for enclosing animals.
      Residential uses when the lot is located within a subdivision plat
recorded prior to February 1, 2019; there is no portion of the lot where the
structures can be located outside the identified flood prone area; and, the
structures comply with the applicable standards in subsection D of this
section.
      Structures established prior to February 1, 2019, that are in a flood
prone area, that are destroyed or substantially damaged by extraordinary events
such as fire, earthquake, etc., may be replaced, but shall be in compliance
with title 11 of this Code.
      Temporary uses where the season of use does not correspond to the flood
season.
      Uses not listed above, such as residential and commercial uses, except
for open space and infrastructure for uses with a conditional use permit, shall
not be allowed in flood prone areas.
   D.   Standards:
      1.   Excavation Or Fills:
         a.   Excavation or fills shall be allowed only for a public or private
road crossing the floodplain from one side to the other on a direct route and
for uses permitted in subsection C of this section.
         b.   Embankments resulting from such excavation or fills shall be
protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, bulkheading, or other
acceptable means.
         c.   Excavation or fills shall not alter or restrict channel flow
unless a permit has been obtained from the State Department of Water Resources.
         d.   Excavation or fills shall comply with the provisions of title 11,
chapter 1 of this Code.
      2.   Structures:
         a.   Structures shall be limited by subsection C of this section and
shall generally be restricted to bridges; culverts; or drainage, irrigation, or
flood control devices.
         b.   Structure crossing or providing crossing of flood prone areas
shall be sized to accommodate channel flows of an intensity equal to that of a
100-year return period.
         c.   Structures located within three hundred feet (300') of a flood
prone area shall be set on foundations not less than two feet (2') above the
elevation determined for the flood intensity equal to that of a 100-year return
period.
         d.   Structures shall not alter or restrict channel flow unless a
permit has been obtained from the State Department of Water Resources.
         e.   All improvements to be located within an identified flood prone
area, including all uses allowed in subsection C of this section, shall also
comply with the provisions of title 11, chapter 1 of this Code. However, no
structure will be deemed permitted by this title merely because it is discussed
in title 11 of this Code.
      3.   Storage Of Material And Equipment:
         a.   Material and equipment not subject to major damage by floods may
be stored within flood prone areas.
         b.   Materials subject to potential damage by floods, including
buoyant items, may be stored temporarily but must be removed upon general
warning of flood conditions.
         c.   Materials that are subject to potential damage by flood and which
would be environmentally degrading if such damage occurred, such as fuels and
other petroleum products, chemicals, liquids, radioactive materials, water
solubles, and similar materials, shall not be stored within flood prone areas.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 19-03, 1-7-2019; Ord. 21-05, 5-3-2021)
9-6-3: AIRPORT VICINITIES:
   A.   Cascade Airport Overlay District:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this overlay district is to avoid airport
hazards, protect the lives and property of airport users and occupants of the
land within the airport vicinities, and to prevent destruction and impairment
of the utility of the Cascade Airport and the public investment therein.
      2.   Boundary Description: The Cascade Airport vicinity overlay district
is comprised of all the lands underlying the various zones described herein.
These zones have been plotted on maps on file in the planning and zoning
office. Where these zones are located within the city of Cascade, regulations
of that governing entity shall apply.
         a.   Primary Zone: The primary zone is coincident with primary surface
and is centered longitudinally on the runway. When the runway has a specially
prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred feet (200')
beyond each end of that hard surface; when the runway has no specially prepared
hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of the runway. The primary
zone is two hundred fifty feet (250') wide and the elevation of any point
thereon is the same elevation as that of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The airport elevation is four thousand seven hundred thirty nine
feet (4,739') above mean sea level. It is the intent of this title for the
zones described herein to automatically extend, in accordance with the
descriptions herein, upon extension or hard surfacing of the runway.
         b.   Runway Visual Approach Zone: An imaginary approach surface
longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at each end of a runway. The
inner edge of the approach surface shall be the same width and elevation as,
and coincides with, each end of the primary surface. The approach surface shall
incline outward and upward at a slope of twenty to one (20:1). The approach
surface shall expand uniformly to width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet
(1,250') and extend horizontally five thousand feet (5,000').
         c.   Transitional Zones: An imaginary surface extending outward and
upward at right angles to the runway centerline and centerline extended at a
slope of seven to one (7:1) from the side of the primary surface and from the
sides of the approach surface until they intersect the horizontal surface of
the horizontal zone.
         d.   Horizontal Zone: An imaginary horizontal surface one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, four thousand eight
hundred eighty nine feet (4,889') above mean sea level, the perimeter of which
is constructed by swinging acres of five thousand foot (5,000') radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not
include the primary, approach, or transitional zones.
         e.   Conical Zone: An imaginary conical surface extending outward and
upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one
(20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000') measured
radially outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface.
      3.   Prohibited Uses, Permitted And Conditional Uses And Standards:
         a.   Projecting Structures Or Trees: Except as otherwise provided in
this title, and as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no
structures or trees shall be constructed, altered, maintained or allowed to
grow in any airspace zone described herein so as to project above any of the
imaginary airspace surfaces described in this section.
         b.   Interference With Radio Or Electronic Communications: No use
shall be made of any land or water underlying any of the "airspace zones" as
defined in subsection A3a of this section, which creates or causes interference
with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or with
radio or electronic communications between the airport and aircraft, makes it
difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights,
results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, creates bird strike hazards, or otherwise
endangers the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use
the airport.
         c.   Safety Zone A: Building and temporary structures and any use
which will create, attract or otherwise bring together an assembly of persons
shall be prohibited in safety zone A. Only the following uses shall be
permitted so long as no part of the use conflicts with other provisions of this
title: section
 9-3-1, table 3-A, uses 1a through 1d inclusive, 1h, 3h, 3i, 3j, 3m, 3n, 3o,
and 6c of this title.
         d.   Safety Zone B: Residential density in safety zone B shall be a
minimum of one unit per five (5) acres and no more than ten percent (10%) of
the parcel shall be developed. Each recreational, commercial and industrial use
shall have a minimum lot size of two (2) acres and no more than twenty percent
(20%) of any parcel shall be developed. No use shall be allowed which is
designed for more than fifteen (15) inhabitants, employees, shoppers and/or
spectators to occupy the site at any one time. Prohibited uses in zone B
include: section
9-3-1 table 3-A, uses 2e, 2f, 3a through 3f inclusive, 3l, 5c(2), 5d, and 5e(9)
of this title.
         e.   Safety Zone C: Uses in this zone are subject only to the general
standards of subsections A3a and A3b of this section.
         f.   Grant Of Aviation Easements: No building permit or conditional
use permit may be issued for any tract of land underlying any of the safety
zones described herein until and unless a grant of aviation easement for the
parcel of land described in the application has been accepted by the city of
Cascade. The grant of easement shall be on forms provided by the county
planning and zoning commission.
   B.   McCall Airport Overlay District: This subsection is reserved for future
needs. When the plan for the McCall Airport has been adopted, this subsection
may be used to incorporate similar standards for development of lands within
that airport vicinity.
   C.   Donnelly Airport Overlay District: This subsection is reserved for
future needs. When the plan for the Donnelly Airport has been adopted, this
section may be used to incorporate similar standards for development of lands
within that airport vicinity. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-6-4: ROSEBERRY TOWNSITE HISTORICAL OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this overlay district is to protect the
Roseberry Townsite from encroachment of uses that are not compatible with the
long range plans and goals of the Long Valley Preservation Society (LVPS). The
LVPS's plans are to preserve the heritage of the county, to save the memories
before they disappear, and to provide historical education to the public. The
LVPS's goals are to preserve historical uses and structures within the
townsite. Implementation of these plans and goals is socially important to the
county.
   B.   Areas Of Application: The standards and procedures for the Roseberry
Townsite historical overlay district apply to designated properties which are
contained within the original townsite of Roseberry, Idaho. The historical
overlay district is depicted on a map dated November 7, 2005, and is on file in
the planning and zoning office. Designated properties are as follows:
      1.   Property owned by the LVPS at the time of adoption hereof.
      2.   Future LVPS land acquisitions.
      3.   Private property within the historical overlay district boundaries
if it has been requested, in writing, by the owner of the property to be
designated as such.
      4.   Once any or the property is designated as encumbered by the
historical overlay, it cannot be removed.
   C.   Permitted Uses: The following are permitted uses within the historical
overlay district:
      Agricultural and open space uses.
      Historical buildings owned by the LVPS and sited on LVPS property that
are placed for the enjoyment of the public as part of the museum complex, so
long as they have a building permit.
      Other uses permitted by a conditional use permit through the county
planning and zoning commission.
      Periodic public recreation functions sponsored by the LVPS, so long as
they have administrative approval from the county road department, county
planning and zoning department, and the county sheriff's department. The
functions must also comply with Central district health department
requirements. These functions may not violate any state or federal statutes.
      Single-family residential uses.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited uses within the
historical overlay district:
      Amusement parks.
      Fast food establishments (drive-throughs).
      Industrial uses.
      Large businesses.
      Mobile home/trailer parks.
      Motocross tracks.
      Recreational events after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
      Storage units.
      Strip malls.
      Transfer stations.
   E.   Standards:
      1.   All structures must be permitted by the county building department.
      2.   All structures must comply with the county setbacks or be
constructed to maintain the established setback with adjoining properties or
properties in the same block.
      3.   All new structures must comply with approved design guidelines.
      4.   All sign structures must be permitted by the county planning and
zoning department in accordance with the approved design guidelines.
   F.   Historical Overlay Board And Design Guidelines:
      1.   Formation: The historical overlay board will be formed by the LVPS
board that is composed of at least three (3) LVPS board members and two (2)
private landholders within the historical overlay district.
      2.   Duties:
         a.   The historical overlay board will review conditional use permit
applications for compliance with the design guidelines and make recommendations
to the commission within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notification.
         b.   The historical overlay board will review building permit
applications for compliance with the design guidelines and make recommendations
to the planning and zoning administrator within thirty (30) days of the receipt
of notification.
      3.   Design Guidelines: The following design guidelines will apply to
designated properties only:
         a.   Buildings: Buildings are to be in character with existing
buildings and the height shall not exceed the Arling House. If buildings are to
be closer than six feet (6') between the structures, a firewall must be
constructed.
         b.   Signs: Signs shall be permitted by the county planning and zoning
department. Signs shall be painted and in character with Roseberry in the early
1900s. Signs shall not be neon, billboards, or lighted and must comply with
chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-6-5: WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Short Title And Purpose:
      1.   Short Title: This section shall be known as the WELLHEAD PROTECTION
OVERLAY DISTRICT.
      2.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses
due to contamination of the public water supply, to maximize groundwater
protection/pollution abatement control procedures, and minimize land use
restrictions that:
         a.   Protect human life and health;
         b.   Minimize expenditures of public money for costly pollution
remediation projects;
         c.   Minimize regulations on land use;
         d.   Minimize business interruptions;
         e.   Ensure that the public is provided with a safe potable water
supply now and for future generations.
   B.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings given in this subsection:
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public water system that serves at least fifteen
(15) service connections used by year round residents or regularly serves at
least twenty five (25) part time residents.
   FACILITIES: Refers to any person, business, or corporation dealing with
toxic or hazardous wastes or handling toxic and hazardous wastes within the
wellhead protection overlay district and specific zone.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material which, because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics,
may:
      1.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
      3.   Any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic
substance by the United States Of America acting through the environmental
protection agency or any successor agency, section 101(14) of the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980, or any material
or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance by the state of
Idaho, acting through the division of environmental quality or any successor
agency.
   NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public water system that is not a community
water supply.
   OVERLAY WELLHEAD PROTECTION DISTRICT: Overlay wellhead protection districts
are delineated using a calculated fixed radius based upon pertinent
hydrogeologic data, described in table 1 1 .
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system that provides the public with piped water for
human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections
or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five (25) individuals daily
at least sixty (60) days out of the year. Such term includes:
      1.   Any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities
under control of the operator of such system, and used primarily in connection
with such a system; and
      2.   Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such
control that are used primarily in connection with such system.
A public water system is either a "community water system" or a "noncommunity
water system".
   SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earthen cover
thereon.
   TIME OF TRAVEL DISTRICTS (TOT): The time required for a contaminant to
reasonably move in the ground from a specific point to a well. The area over
which contaminants will typically travel during a specified period in a
specified type of aquifer, as defined by table 1 2 .
   WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves, and other attachments.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT: A land use designation on the land use
map, or a zoning designation on a zoning map, that modifies the basic
underlying designation in some specific manner. The "wellhead protection
overlay district" will also appear in the hazardous component of the
comprehensive plan. A map will define specific area districts centering around
wells supplying drinking water to a "public water system", as defined in this
subsection.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT I: A minimum fixed radius extending no
less than fifty feet (50') radially from the wellhead supplying potable water
to the county public water supplies.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT II: A three (3) year time of travel
district (TOT) as determined from table 1 3 .
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT III: A six (6) year time of travel
district (TOT) as determined from table 1 4 .
   C.   Establishment Of Wellhead Protection Overlay District: There is hereby
established a wellhead protection overlay district identified and described as
all the area within the six (6) year TOT district around public water supplies
for wells in the county. It is further established that these areas be composed
of three (3) districts, i.e., "wellhead protection overlay district I",
"wellhead protection overlay district II", and "wellhead protection overlay
district III", as they are defined in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Zone I:
      1.   Prohibited Uses Or Conditions: The following uses or conditions,
including, but not limited to, the following, shall be and are hereby
prohibited within zone I of the wellhead protection overlay district:
         Animal feedlots.
         Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires, and all other petroleum
products.
         Hazardous waste disposal sites.
         Sanitary landfills.
         Sanitary sewer lines.
         Septic tanks and drainfields.
         Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including
herbicide and pesticide applications to the soils, groundwater, or surface
water.
         Underground injection wells.
         Underground storage tanks.
         All other facilities involving the collection, handling, manufacture,
use, storage, transfer, or disposal of any solid or liquid material or waste
having a potentially hazardous impact on groundwater quality.
      2.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within zone I shall be limited to
necessary wellhead equipment, wellhead facility buildings, water storage tanks,
and approved landscaping.
   E.   Zone II:
      1.   Prohibited Uses Or Conditions: The following uses or conditions,
including, but not limited to, the following, shall be and are hereby
prohibited within zone II of the wellhead protection areas whether or not such
use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as part of a use
permitted under subsection E2 of this section:
         All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer of disposal of any solid or
liquid material or waste having potentially hazardous impact on groundwater.
         Animal feedlots.
         Auto repair or auto painting facilities and/or junk or salvage yard.
         Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires, and all other petroleum
products.
         Existing sewer lines shall not fall below one hundred feet (100') of a
wellhead or upon installation of new sanitary system, sewer lines shall not
fall below one hundred fifty feet (150') of a wellhead.
         Hazardous waste disposal sites.
         Sanitary landfills.
         Septic tanks or drainfields shall be in compliance with Central
district health department requirements.
         Underground injection wells.
      2.   Permitted Uses: The following uses may be permitted within zone II
of the wellhead protection area:
         Most uses will not be restricted as long as these uses comply with
existing ordinances, county, state, and federal regulations pertaining to the
discharge of contaminants.
   F.   Zone III:
      1.   Prohibited Uses Or Conditions: The following uses or conditions,
including, but not limited to, the following, shall be and are prohibited
within zone III of the wellhead protection area, whether or not such use or
condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as part of a use permitted under
subsection E2 of this section:
         Hazardous waste disposal sites.
         Land use activities posing an inordinate hazard or potential threat to
existing groundwater quality as deemed by the planning and zoning commission
and the board of county commissioners during review process of applications.
         Sanitary landfills.
      2.   Permitted Uses: The following uses may be permitted within zone III
of the wellhead protection area:
         Most uses will not be restricted as long as these uses comply with
existing ordinances, county, state, and federal regulations pertaining to the
discharge of contaminants.
   G.   Facilities Existing Within Wellhead Protection Areas: Upon request of
the planning and zoning staff, facilities shall provide copies of all federal,
state, and local facility operation approvals already in existence.
   H.   Requirements For New Wells: Prior to the development of new wells for
the purpose of supplying potable water to any public community water system,
the proposed well site will be delineated in accordance with subsection C of
this section using anticipated yields to determine time of travel zones. The
delineated areas will then be inventoried for potential contaminant sources and
the proposed site evaluated as to the potential adverse impact to the well
site.
   I.   Administration:
      1.   Policies And Procedures: The policies and procedures for
administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this section,
including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses,
exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in this
title, as the same are presently enacted or may from time to time be amended.
      2.   Attachments 5 : This section has two (2) attachments. First is an
inventory map with known public drinking water supplies, per gallon a minute
capacity, and overlay zones. The second attachment is the calculated fixed
radii of major aquifers in Idaho. The overlays are determined and reviewed to
new applications for compliance with the provisions of this section.
   J.   Enforcement:
      1.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or
business to occupy or use the land within the area designated in the wellhead
protection overlay district of zones I, II, and III contrary to, or in
violation of, any of the provisions of this section.
      2.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, or business violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be handled as any other planning and zoning
violations as provided for in chapter 2 of this title. This may include civil
and/or criminal penalties, fines, and imprisonment. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. Maps and tables will be provided in the planning and zoning office.
2 1. Maps and tables will be provided in the planning and zoning office.
3 2. Maps and tables will be provided in the planning and zoning office.
4 3. Maps and tables will be provided in the planning and zoning office.
5 1. Maps and tables will be provided in the planning and zoning office.
CHAPTER 7
SIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose
9-7-2: Scope
9-7-3: Definitions
9-7-4: Exemptions
9-7-5: Procedure
9-7-6: Standards
9-7-7: Land Use Standard For Signage
9-7-8: Existing Nonconforming Signs
9-7-9: Enforcement
9-7-10: Fees
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide maximum visibility
for safety purposes along roadways, maintain unobstructed views at
intersections and prevent undue distractions to vehicle operators by preventing
confusion at or near traffic signs and signals and along corridors.
   B.   Intent: It is also the intent of this chapter to preserve the rural
character by not allowing flashing, shiny plastics, reader boards or outsize
billboards but to encourage artistic design and creativity through simple
effective signage. Therefore, the intent of this chapter is to promote rural
character and not a city center appearance in the open valleys and open
corridor areas while allowing a village appearance in designated areas.
Furthermore, the intent of this chapter is to require preplanning of select
signage and promote artistic license within the same size limit and similar
location for less confusion and clutter. Signs meeting this intent will act as
a signature block for creative expression but not an advertising billboard.
This chapter contains sign standards for uniform but creative signage. The
pride of ownership and entrepreneurism is encouraged by artistic signage in the
community. Residents and tourists will notice the improvement this makes to the
general appearance of the county. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-7-2: SCOPE:
   A.   The scope of this chapter is to adopt policies and procedures to review
signs in the unincorporated portions of the county. This document will enable
staff to review the erection, design and materials of signs and to promote
quality and safety due to a lack of confusion on the roadway.
   B.   Compliance with this chapter will ensure the safe construction of sign
structures by regulating the design, quality, construction methods, locations,
electrification and maintenance of signs and sign structures not located within
a building. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign, sign structure or use of sign existing before
enactment of this title that does not conform to the standards cited by this
title.
   OFF PREMISES OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS: Any sign that directs attention
to the use, name, business, commodity, service, entertainment or land use
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than the sign location.
ON PREMISES SIGNS: Any sign or advertising structure whose message identifies
the property on which the sign is located, its owner or tenant, or directs
attention to an offer for sale, lease or rent of said property, or warns the
public as to danger, or trespassing thereon, or directs the public upon said
property, or informs the public as to current or proposed use of the property,
or recites the name of the land use, business, proprietor or nature of products
or services provided or manufactured upon said property. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
9-7-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Signs exempted from county permit requirements are as follows:
   A.   Directional Or Informational Signs: Directional or informational signs
that are no larger than three (3) square feet per face, which help direct on
premises land uses or activities, and do not display an advertising message
(for example: public convenience signs identifying restrooms, public
telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities, parking directions,
etc.).
   B.   Memorial Signs Or Tablets: Memorial signs or tablets displaying names
of buildings and dates of erection, when cut into the surface or facade of the
building.
   C.   Signs Required By Law Or Serve Public Interest: Signs required by law
or that serve the public interest such as traffic signs, railroad crossing
signs, legal notices, warnings of temporary emergencies, construction zones,
presence of underground cables, utility signs, and similar signs installed on
public property and are owned and maintained by county, state, or federal
agencies or a public utility company.
   D.   Signs Or Banners For Nonprofit Community Or Civic Events: Signs or
banners that bear no product advertising and announce nonprofit community or
civic events. Such signs or banners shall be removed within seven (7) days
following the event.
   E.   Signs Visible Only On Parcel Where Found: A sign that is visible only
from within the parcel on which it is found.
   F.   Signs Within Limits Of Municipality: Signs to be built within the
limits of a municipality.
   G.   Identification Signs: Signs that identify the architects, engineers,
contractors, lenders, government agencies or programs (for instance:   FHA,
HUD, FMHA, low cost housing, senior citizen center, etc.) and other individuals
or firms involved with the construction. This shall not include any
advertisement of any product, or signs announcing the character of the building
enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, or use of the
project. The signs shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall
be removed within fourteen (14) days after the beginning of the intended use of
the project.
   H.   Homeowner Locator Signs: Homeowner locator signs placed at
intersections are traditional in the county and are allowed if each sign is not
more than one square foot per face and the mounting device is located off
public road rights of way. Such signs shall be kept in good repair.
   I.   Signs Advertising Sale, Rental Or Lease Of Real Property: Signs
advertising the sale, rental, or lease of real property or part of the real
property on which the signs are displayed up to a total area of thirty two (32)
square feet per face. The number of signs shall be limited to one sign per
parcel up to and including forty (40) acres, or not more than one sign per
frontage. All such signs shall be confined to the property to which they apply.
Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the sale, rental or
lease. However, permanent signs advertising rental units are not permitted on a
permanent basis unless the business has been issued a conditional use permit.
   J.   Political Signs: Signs announcing candidates seeking public political
office and other data pertinent thereto, up to an area of thirty two (32)
square feet for each premises. Such signs shall be confined to private property
and removed within fourteen (14) days after the election for which they were
intended.
   K.   Show Window Signs: Show window signs in a window display of merchandise
when incorporated with such a display. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-7-5: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit is required before any sign regulated by
these provisions is displayed or built on any premises in this jurisdiction.
   B.   Application Form:
      1.   Contents: Applications shall be made on forms provided by the county
planning and zoning department. The content of the application shall be as
required herein and shall include all of the information needed to complete the
application form, supplementary drawings of the sign plan, and any other
information needed to complete the application review.
      2.   Fee: The application shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in
section
9-7-10 of this chapter.
   C.   Sign Plan: A sign plan shall be included with the application and shall
contain at least the following information:
      1.   Information requirements:
         a.   Materials to be used in manufacturing and constructing the sign.
         b.   Sign size, message size or field of lettering, and proportions.
         c.   Lettering size or graphic style.
         d.   Design features other than lettering such as symbols, logos, etc.
         e.   Color scheme.
         f.   Lighting, if proposed.
         g.   Location of each sign on the building(s) and/or property.
      2.   Sign plans shall be drawn neatly to scale to present a clear and
accurate picture of the proposal. More than one drawing and drawings at various
scales may be used.
      3.   The sign plan shall be a simple layout reviewed for compliance with
standards and artistic merit.
      4.   Artistic merit shall be seen in two (2) categories:
         a.   Display skill of handiwork, line work and mechanics.
         b.   Exhibit quality and design in signage layout and lettering.
   D.   Application Review: The sign permit application will be accepted when
the completed forms, including a sign plan and fee are submitted to the
planning and zoning office in person or by mail. The application will be
reviewed by office personnel (staff) within seven (7) working days of
acceptance of a complete application. The permit will be either approved or
denied based upon compliance with provisions herein. If the application is
denied, staff will include a written statement of the specific reasons for
denial. The applicant may correct the application and request another review by
staff. The applicant may appeal any action of staff regarding the review of an
application to the planning and zoning commission according to section
9-7-9 of this chapter.
   E.   Permit Issued: When staff has completed the review of the application
and has found that the proposal complies with the provisions herein, staff will
promptly approve the permit. Staff will notify the applicant by phone or mail.
The applicant may then construct, build and display the sign and shall notify
staff that the work approved by the permit has been completed. (Ord. 10-06, 8-
23-2010)
9-7-6: STANDARDS:
   A.   Regulation By County: The county will regulate the size, amount and
location of signage as provided by this title.
   B.   Discussed In Comprehensive Plan: Signs are also discussed in the
comprehensive plan under the community design section of the plan.
   C.   Requirements: All signs within the unincorporated areas of the county
shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Flags, Rotating Beam, Beacon Or Flashing Illumination: No rotating
beam, beacon or flashing illumination that may resemble an emergency light
shall be used with any sign display. There shall be no blinking, rotating or
moving parts or components on temporary or permanent signs. Signs shall not
have pennants, balloons, flags, or portable signs or wheeled trailers. Moving
parts is defined as flags, feathers, or other devices that are meant to attract
attention or acts as a signal or waves. However, one open flag is allowed per
business so long as it is not larger than 3' x 5'.
      2.   Responsibility To Remove When Use Discontinued: It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property and/or improvements to remove any
sign or signs where the associated land use has been discontinued for more than
ninety (90) days. If a onetime event, the removal of signs shall take place
within seven (7) days after the event closure.
      3.   Preview Sign: If a preview sign has been erected for a future use,
it shall be for a business that has received a conditional use permit to
operate and meet the provisions of this chapter. If the use is permitted, the
preview sign must also meet the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   Size: The size shall be not greater than a thirty two (32) square
feet per face, for example: that of four feet by eight feet (4' x 8'). Cut out
or molded letters, or advertising when applied to buildings, shall not be
greater than a thirty two (32) square foot field on the building. In designated
city areas, the size can be increased to forty eight (48) square feet per face
if located a minimum of eighty feet (80') from the centerline of the highway;
or, up to sixty four (64) square feet, if over one hundred thirty feet (130')
from the centerline of the highway. The area of all signs shall not be greater
than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the side of the building where the
sign is attached.
      5.   Permanent Signs: Permanent signs shall be rural in character and
appearance and the materials shall be of wood or stone character or accent.
Signs may be painted, sandblasted, carved or constructed by other technically
feasible methods. Shiny metal or shiny plastic signs shall not be allowed.
Unnatural colors such as neon, fluorescent, etc., shall not be allowed.
      6.   Design: The design shall incorporate a well thought out layout
design with clean lines and an uncluttered appearance.
      7.   Construction: The sign construction shall be completed in a
workmanlike manner.
      8.   Message: The message may include: service, business, owner name,
address, telephone number, a logo, or graphic illustration of the product(s) or
service(s) offered.
      9.   Ground Mounted Signs: On ground mounted signs, the top of the signs
shall be mounted not more than ten feet (10') off the ground. If the street/
road elevation is greater than the elevation of the mounting site, street/road
elevation may be used to determine the height. The total height of the mounting
structure shall be no greater than twelve feet (12'). The sign shall be placed
a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line, unless characteristics of
the site require less. The intent is to keep the sign within the vision
triangle of the motor vehicles. Special attention must be given to the
placement of signs near intersecting roads to assure there is no obstruction of
vision from any vehicle. Special consideration can be given to the height and
placement of the sign when the view of the driver will be blocked, i.e., buses
or motor homes, or is subject to damage from snow removal or road maintenance.
      10.   Number Of Signs Limited: No more than three (3) permanent signs may
be placed at a given land use. One sign is allowed on the building. One two-way
sign, or two (2) one-way signs facing each direction, is allowed in the land
use area.
      11.   Commercial Malls Or Planned Unit Developments: For commercial malls
or planned unit developments (industrial or commercial or a combination of land
use), not more than one ground mounted sign structure shall be allowed on each
road or street frontage. The sign may be used as a land use and occupant
identification sign. A projecting or a swinging sign is not allowed. One sign
shall be allowed to be mounted flat to the building front of each shop, store
or land use.
      12.   Placement Upon County Street Or Right Of Way: No sign or sign
structure, for any purpose other than approved county, state and federal signs,
shall be placed upon any county street or highway right of way. At no time
shall any sign be mounted or affixed to any utility pole or structure other
than as may be required by the utility owner or law.
      13.   Mixed Use District: In the county, a mixed use district, buffering
impacts of signage will still be a conditional use permit process.
      14.   Flashing Signs Placed Inside Window: If placed inside a window,
flashing signs must be not less than three hundred feet (300') from any
residentially zoned lot. Distance shall refer to the linear measurement in any
direction with relation to the street that the sign faces.
      15.   Projection Above Roofline: At no time shall a sign or portions of
it be allowed to project above the roofline of the building on which the sign
is mounted.
      16.   Off Premises Or Outdoor Advertising Signs: Off premises or outdoor
advertising signs are prohibited in the unincorporated areas of the county.
      17.   Signs Not Regulated: An application for any sign or advertising
display or structure for which no specific regulation appears in this chapter
shall receive appropriate planning and zoning and building department staff
review as outlined in this chapter and this title, if not exempt.
      18.   Illumination: Signs may be illuminated by shielded or directed
light sources and shall comply with section
 9-5B-2 of this title.
      19.   State Highway 55 Or Byway 55: Any signs placed along State Highway
55 or Byway 55, a scenic byway, must meet the standards of the department of
transportation and the county.
      20.   Off Premises Directional Signs: Off premises directional signs for
approved uses, not including subdivisions, can only be located at key
intersections in the public right of way. The off premises directional signs
can be a maximum of eighteen inches by thirty inches (18" x 30"). They must be
placed on four inch by four inch (4" x 4") wood posts, the existing signpost,
or breakaway steel posts as approved by the road department. The location of
the post in the right of way and height of the sign will be reviewed on an
individual basis. In the event that too many signs are located at an
intersection, the county can require collocation of signs on any of the posts
previously approved or may require consolidation of signs in a standardized
kiosk. The road department shall approve all off premises directional signs
with regard to public safety, snowplowing, and preservation of the sign. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
9-7-7: LAND USE STANDARD FOR SIGNAGE:
   A.   Agricultural use: One two-way or two (2) one-way identification signs,
each not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per face.
   B.   Residential subdivision entry(ies): One identification sign at two (2)
entries, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per face.
   C.   Commercial businesses: One two-way or two (2) one-way identification
signs, each not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per face or other sign
size limitations. When two (2) businesses are located at the same site,
additional signage shall be approved as part of the conditional use permit.
   D.   Recreation or forestry use: One identification sign, not to exceed
thirty two (32) square feet per face.
   E.   Residential use: One identification sign, not to exceed six (6) square
feet per face, and shall be exempt from permit requirements. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
9-7-8: EXISTING NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Preexisting Nonexempt Signs: A permit will be required for any
nonexempt sign existing in the county on June 27, 1994.
   B.   Conforming Signs: If the sign is conforming, a permit shall be issued.
   C.   Grandfathered Sign Permit: If the sign is nonconforming, a
grandfathered sign permit shall be issued. This permit shall allow the sign,
which was made nonconforming by the adoption hereof, to remain in place and be
maintained. The nonconforming elements cannot be increased. A sign will no
longer be grandfathered if a conditional use permit is required for a change in
use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-7-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Authority To Enforce: The planning and zoning administrator and the
building official are hereby authorized and furthermore directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Enforcement provided for violations of this chapter
shall be as provided for in chapter 2 of this title. The procedure for handling
a violation of this chapter will be the same as any planning and zoning
violation.
   B.   Abandoned Use Signs: A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of
the premises upon which the sign is located when the business it identifies is
no longer conducted on the premises. The owner shall be notified, by mail, to
remove the sign within thirty (30) days or shall be subject to chapter 2 of
this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-7-10: FEES:
Fees shall be set by resolution by the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 10-
06, 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 8
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Definitions
9-8-3: Applicability
9-8-4: General Standards For Commercial Tower Structures And Associated
Equipment
9-8-5: Tower Construction, Height, Lighting, Setback And Fall Zone Standards
9-8-6: Conditional Use Permit Application For New Or Modified
Telecommunications Facilities
9-8-7: Additional Technical Requirements
9-8-8: Private Tower Or Antenna Structure
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are
to:
   A.   Protect residential areas and other land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
   B.   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
   C.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
   D.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers;
   E.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
   F.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful
design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
   G.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
   H.   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
   I.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and
   J.   Comply with the applicable sections of this title and to be consistent
with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below:
   ADMINISTRATOR: Personnel employed by the county to administer this chapter
and this title.
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage
or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving apparatus mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
   ANTENNA HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   CAMOUFLAGED: A telecommunications facility that is disguised, hidden, or
integrated with the existing environment and trees so as to be significantly
screened from view.
   CELL SITE OR SITE: A tract or parcel of land that contains
telecommunications facilities including any antenna, support structure,
accessory buildings, and parking, and may include other uses associated with
and ancillary to personal wireless service.
   COLLOCATION: The placement of additional antennas on an existing
transmission tower or structure. Such antennas shall be placed and colored to
blend into the architectural detail and coloring of the host telecommunications
facility or cell site.
   CONDITIONAL USE: Any use as defined by this chapter which, because of its
potential incompatibility with adjacent or traditional uses, is subject to
review by the commission and comment at a public hearing to best ensure
compatible land uses.
   DESIGN: The appearance of telecommunications facilities, including such
features as their materials, colors, and shape.
   ENCLOSURE: A structure, shelter, cabinet, or vault used to house and protect
the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communication
signals. Associated equipment may include air conditioning, backup power
supplies and emergency generators.
   FAA: The federal aviation administration.
   FCC: The federal communications commission.
   FALL ZONE: That area that the tower is designed to collapse into.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Valley County board of county commissioners.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE, PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES, AND
FACILITIES: As used in this chapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in
title 47, United States Code, section 332(c)(7)(C), as may be amended now or in
the future, and includes facilities for the transmission and reception of radio
or microwave signals used for communications, cellular phones, personal
communication services, enhanced specialized mobile radios, and other wireless
services licensed by the FCC and unlicensed wireless services.
   PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which
a building permit or conditional use permit has been properly issued prior to
the effective date hereof, including permitted towers or antennas that have not
yet been constructed, so long as such approval is current and not expired.
   PROVIDER: A corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm,
partnership, sole proprietorship, limited liability company, other entity or
individual which provides telecommunications facilities.
   SECURITY BARRIER: A wall or fence that has the purpose of securing a
telecommunications facility from unauthorized entry or trespass.
   SITING AREA: That portion of a lot that contains the transmission tower,
related buildings and/or equipment required for the operation of a wireless
telecommunications facility.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A facility, site, or location that contains one
or more antennas, telecommunications towers, alternative support structures,
satellite dish antennas, other similar communication devices, and support
equipment which is used for transmitting, receiving, or relaying
telecommunications signals.
   TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term encompasses telecommunications
facilities including radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal
communications services towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The following regulations shall apply to tower structures and
associated equipment for the purpose of radio, television, telephone, paging,
or satellite reception and/or transmission.
   B.   A telecommunications facility that meets one of the following standards
shall be reviewed as a permitted use. All other telecommunications facilities
shall be reviewed as a conditional use permit according to this title:
      1.   The proposed telecommunications facility will be located on an
existing telecommunications facility and it will not increase the height of the
existing structure.
      2.   The tower or antenna structure does not exceed ten feet (10') in
height, is accessory to a permitted or approved use, and the proposed
telecommunications facility meets all conditions of the previously approved
use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-4: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL TOWER STRUCTURES AND ASSOCIATED
EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Radio Frequency Emissions: The telecommunications facility shall comply
with FCC standards regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
   B.   Required Approvals: The telecommunications facility shall have approval
from the federal aviation administration and the chief of the Idaho bureau of
aeronautics prior to operation.
   C.   Obtain Necessary Permits: The applicant or owner shall be required to
obtain all necessary permits, as may be required under federal, state or local
statutes, regulations, or ordinances including, but not limited to, building
permits.
   D.   Maintenance; Construction Standards: The telecommunications facility
shall be maintained in compliance with all federal, state and local regulations
and the construction standards set forth herein.
   E.   Maintenance And Upkeep: The owners, or owner's agent of the
telecommunications facility, shall have a continuous obligation to ensure the
maintenance and upkeep and to prevent the creation of a public nuisance. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-5: TOWER CONSTRUCTION, HEIGHT, LIGHTING, SETBACK AND FALL ZONE STANDARDS:
   A.   Construction: The tower shall be constructed to the Telecommunications
Industry Association/Electronic Industries Association (TIA|EIA) 222 revision F
standard entitled "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Supporting
Structures", or as hereinafter may be amended.
   B.   Camouflaged With Surrounding Environment: All telecommunications
facilities shall be constructed or modified in such a way as to best blend in
and be camouflaged with the surrounding environment and, in some circumstances,
may not be readily recognized as a wireless telecommunications facility, unless
specifically waived, in writing, by the board of county commissioners. Said
telecommunications facility shall be architecturally and visually compatible
with the existing structures, vegetation, and/or uses in the area or likely to
exist in the area under the terms of the applicable zone and/or comprehensive
plan. The decision making body shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the
following factors: similar height, color, bulk, and/or shape, or camouflage
techniques to disguise the telecommunications facility. This shall not preclude
towers requiring FAA painting and/or lighting and/or marking from meeting those
standards.
   C.   Height Limit: Within the McCall, Donnelly, and Cascade airport overlay
areas, the height limit on the tower or antenna structure shall be as required
by the code of federal regulations 14 CFR 77.
   D.   Lighting: Lighting shall be consistent with the requirements of the
FAA. The FAA lighting requirement shall be met in the least obtrusive manner.
Security lighting for the siting area is permitted as long as it is not greater
than twenty feet (20') high, downward directed and shielded to prevent
illumination at the siting area boundary. Motion detectors on security lighting
is recommended.
   E.   Tower Design: Towers must be designed to allow for future placement of
additional antennas upon the tower. Such towers must also be designed to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
   F.   Facilities And Siting Area Design: All telecommunications facilities
and siting areas shall be designed to structurally allow for a minimum
collocation of two (2) additional providers.
   G.   Location; Setbacks: All telecommunications facilities shall not be
located within at least one thousand feet (1,000') of State Highway 55, unless
located in an existing structure and/or constructed as an alternative tower
structure or not visible from the highway. In addition, setbacks shall be equal
to the height of the tower, plus ten feet (10'), from any public road or
property line, and a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest
residence, single-family subdivision in each direction, unless written consent
of residents, lot owners, and building owners is given. This section shall not
prohibit the placement of towers on a commercial building(s).
   H.   Maximum Allowable Tower Height: Maximum allowable tower height,
including antennas, is one hundred fifty feet (150'). The county may impose
stricter height limitations due to obstruction of views or incompatibility with
surrounding uses.
   I.   Fall Zone: Every tower shall have a fall zone which shall be delineated
and permanently restricted from future development as follows:
      1.   The fall zone shall consist of the land area centered beneath the
tower and circumscribed by a circle with a radius equal to a length of one foot
(1') for every ten feet (10') of tower height.
      2.   If the fall zone does not lie completely within the subject
property, the applicant must obtain a nonrevocable easement from all owners of
property within the fall zone that prohibits the construction or placement of
new structures within the fall zone, except as may be specifically permitted
through the conditional use process. If an easement is utilized, a copy of the
fully executed easement agreement shall be submitted as part of the
application. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION FOR NEW OR MODIFIED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
The application materials shall include the following written documentation,
and the applicant shall be in compliance with the standards and requirements
listed below:
   A.   Statement Of Lot Size And Location: The minimum lot size allowable
shall be one hundred feet by one hundred feet (100' x 100').
   B.   Description Of Need: A description of the need for the proposed
telecommunications facility at the proposed location and justification for site
selection.
   C.   Final Appearance Drawings: Final appearance drawings shall be
furnished. The applicant shall also include drawings of all accessory
buildings, which shall be aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area.
   D.   Suitability Analysis Of Site: Suitability analysis of the proposed
site. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Description Of Surrounding Area: Description of the surrounding area
within one mile of the subject site including topography, which may come from
the latest USGA maps.
      2.   Propagation Charts: Previously prepared propagation charts showing
existing and total proposed transmission coverage at the subject site and
within an area large enough to provide an understanding of why the facility
needs to be placed at the chosen location to provide total coverage, which
shall include the following information.
      3.   Verification Of Consideration Of Alternative Sites: Written
verification that alternative sites within a radius of two (2) miles have been
considered and have been determined to be technologically unfeasible or
unavailable.
      4.   Written Analysis: Written analysis demonstrating that the
telecommunications facility cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower within:
         a.   A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one hundred
feet (100');
         b.   A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet
(80'), but not more than one hundred feet (100');
         c.   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over fifty
feet (50'), but not more than eighty feet (80'); or
         d.   A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height of fifty
feet (50') or less.
         e.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the
proposed telecommunications facility cannot be accommodated on an approved
tower or structure within the required search radius due to one or more of the
following reasons:
            (1)   Unwillingness of a property owner, tower or
telecommunications facility owner to allow shared use.
            (2)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing tower or structure, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, and the existing tower or telecommunications facility
structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
            (3)   The planned equipment would cause radio interference
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
structure, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer or other
professional qualified to provide necessary documentation. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
            (4)   Existing or approved towers or other structures within the
search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
be commercially functional as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer or other professional qualified to provide necessary
documentation.
            (5)   The proposed collocation with an existing tower or structure
would be in violation of local, state or federal law.
            (6)   Any other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to
collocate upon an existing or approved tower or structure as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, or other professional qualified
to provide necessary documentation.
   E.   Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent committing the telecommunications
facility owner and successors to allow the shared use of the telecommunications
facility, as required, if additional users agree, in writing, to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   F.   Proof Of Recorded Legal Right Of Access: Proof of a duly recorded legal
right of access to the site for the intended purpose. The county may restrict
the location and number of access points to the property.
   G.   Lease Agreement: If applicable, relevant portions of a signed lease
agreement that requires the applicant to remove the tower and/or associated
facilities upon cessation of use.
   H.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage of any supplies or vehicles related to
the use of the telecommunications facility is prohibited.
   I.   Signs, Striping Or Graphics: No signs, striping, graphics or other
attention getting devices are permitted on telecommunications facility except
for warning and safety signage with a surface area of no more than three (3)
square feet. Such signage shall be affixed to the fence at the siting area;
number of signs is limited to no more than two (2).
   J.   Landscape Standards: The following landscape standards shall apply:
      1.   Existing Vegetation: Existing vegetation at the siting area shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. In all zones, landscaping shall be
placed as required by the relevant sections of this title.
      2.   Security Barrier: A security barrier shall be installed around each
siting area, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. If a fence is
installed, it shall be not less than six feet (6') in height from the finished
grade. Barbed wire may be placed on the top of the fence. Access shall be by
locked gate. The applicant shall also provide the proposed maintenance of the
security barrier which shall also be a condition of approval.
   K.   Abandonment: If any antenna or tower is not operated for a continuous
period of six (6) months, it shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such
antenna or tower, or property owner, shall remove the same within ninety (90)
days. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the
county may, at the property owner's expense, remove the antenna or tower and
file a lien on the subject property for expenses incurred in removal. If the
county is compelled to seek judicial authority to undertake such removal, the
reasonable costs and attorney fees incurred by the county in the course of
doing so shall constitute a charge against the owner. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-7: ADDITIONAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following documents must be provided during the application process or as a
condition of approval, if the applicant can demonstrate that the burden to
provide the document during the application process would justify providing it
as a condition of approval:
   A.   FAA FORM 7460-1: Applicant must provide an FAA form 7460-
1 demonstrating that the FAA has reviewed the proposal and a written approval
has been received.
   B.   Engineering Data: Engineering data showing that the tower is designed
structurally, electrically, and in all other respects to accommodate both the
applicant's equipment and comparable equipment for a minimum of two (2)
additional users.
   C.   Engineering Report: A report from a qualified and licensed professional
engineer that: describes the telecommunications facility height and design
(including a cross section and elevation); documents the height above grade for
the recommended mounting position for collocated antennas and the minimum
separation distances between antennas; describes the telecommunications
facility's capacity; and any other information necessary to evaluate the
request. The report must include the engineer's stamp and registration number.
   D.   Conflict With Other Legal Requirements: In case of a conflict with
other legal requirements, the most restrictive shall apply to the extent that
such requirements do not conflict with the 1996 telecommunications act. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-8-8: PRIVATE TOWER OR ANTENNA STRUCTURE:
   A.   Applicability: The following regulations shall apply to tower
structures for the purpose of private radio, television, or satellite reception
and antennas for amateur radio. Towers shall not be subject to the accessory
structure regulations of this chapter.
   B.   Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under
seventy feet (70') in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only
antennas.
   C.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Prohibited Locations: Accessory structures shall not be located in
any required setback yard or on any publicly dedicated easement.
      2.   Maximum Height If Located In Rear Yard: An accessory structure
located in the rear yard shall not exceed a height of twenty four feet (24').
      3.   Located In Residential Subdivision Or Rural Area: Accessory
structures in a residential subdivision or rural area shall be architecturally
compatible (as defined in this subsection) with the principal permitted
dwelling, if:
         a.   The accessory structure is located in the side yard, or portion
thereof; or
         b.   The square footage of the footprint of the accessory structure is
greater than the square footage of the footprint of the principal permitted
dwelling.
   D.   General Standards:
      1.   The tower or antenna structure is only for private, not commercial,
use.
      2.   The tower or antenna structure is accessory to a permitted or
approved use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Definition
9-9-2: Purpose
9-9-3: PUD Review And Determination
9-9-4: Time For Completion
9-9-5: Changes From Approved Plans
9-9-6: Submission Requirements
9-9-7: Standards
9-9-8: Other Information And Disclosure Requirements
9-9-9: Development Agreement
9-9-10: Impact Fees
9-9-11: Reimbursement Fees
9-9-12: Process
9-9-1: DEFINITION:
A "planned unit development" (hereinafter referred to as a PUD) is an area of
land controlled by one or more landowners, which is to be developed under a
single and comprehensive plan of development. Any mix of residential building
types, or any mix of residential commercial, industrial recreational, and
agricultural uses may be permitted to provide greater flexibility in land
usage. Additional flexibility in development is furnished because setbacks,
height, lot size, density, and other site regulations may differ from those
normally imposed for similar uses. Residential units and other buildings, if
any, may be constructed by either the developer or individual buyers; however,
the application must be accompanied by plans and other documents sufficient for
the administrator, staff and commission to review the application for
compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd.
Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
9-9-2: PURPOSE:
The PUD concept allows the site planner to propose the best use and arrangement
of development on the parcel of land by reducing the more rigid regulations
herein. A PUD is designed so that buildings are clustered together to create
open space of common ownership, preserve natural features and landscape
character, more efficiently use the site and to minimize development costs by
sharing common walls, shortening and narrowing roads, and concentrating
utilities. It is expected that a PUD will provide certain amenities like
recreational facilities, landscaping, and natural open spaces for the enjoyment
of all owners, employees, etc., and will demonstrate better than average
quality of development. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-3: PUD REVIEW AND DETERMINATION:
In considering whether to approve a PUD, the commission shall determine:
   A.   That the proposed use nets a positive score on the compatibility rating
system herein. The compatibility rating shall be completed by the commission
and computed for the full application as presented to the commission after
revisions requested during any preliminary review and after the public hearing
is closed;
In the case of PUDs in which the board determines that it is in the public's
interest that the board deal exclusively with certain of the nine (9)
compatibility questions contained in section
9-11-1, appendix A of this chapter, then, subject to the board's direction, the
commission shall not consider such questions as part of its compatibility
rating of the proposed use;
   B.   That the proposal works with the characteristics of the site by
protecting or highlighting attractive features and by minimizing the impact of
development where natural constraints exist;
   C.   That the proposal's layout promotes the clustering and separation of
different kinds of land uses so that both internal compatibility and common
open spaces can be maintained;
   D.   That the proposal's layout and design provides economics in the
provision of roads and other site improvements; and
   E.   That it is more desirable to have a PUD than a subdivision or some
other singular use, and that the PUD is not being proposed simply to bypass or
vary the more restrictive standards required of a subdivision, business,
industry, or other similar use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-4: TIME FOR COMPLETION:
The proposed development shall be completed within the time specified in the
phasing plan. Extensions may be approved by the commission if it can be shown
as necessary and in the public interest. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-5: CHANGES FROM APPROVED PLANS:
Changes in building design and layout may be approved by the commission if it
can be shown as being necessary or more desirable. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-6: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the items required for a conditional use permit, graphic and
written material shall also be submitted regarding:
   A.   Proposed Setbacks: Proposed front, side, and rear setbacks as different
from those required under normal standards for like uses and any other changes
in similar kinds of standards including, but not limited to, building height,
minimum number of parking spaces per unit, street widths, and lot size.
   B.   Proposed Building Sites: Proposed building sites if these are to be
indicated without, or in addition to, lots, complete with dimensions.
   C.   Common Open Space And Facilities: Common open space and facilities with
conditions for their permanency.
   D.   Phase Of Development; Time Schedule: Phase of development to be shown
geographically and indicating stages in the construction program and time
schedule for progressive completion.
   E.   Outline Of Restrictive Covenants: An outline of the restrictive
covenants expressing key provisions.
   F.   Maintenance Plans: Plans for maintaining roads, parking, and other
areas of circulation, snow removal, snow storage, and any other necessary
upkeep.
   G.   Surface Water Management: Plans for surface water management.
   H.   Other Information: Any other information deemed necessary by the
commission because of the proposed use. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-7: STANDARDS:
   A.   Size: The acreage shall be large enough to accommodate the proposed
PUD.
   B.   Streets, Utilities And Other Site Improvements: Streets, utilities, and
other site improvements shall be made for their later installation, at the
developer's expense, prior to recording the plat. Streets shall be constructed
in accordance with the minimum standards set forth in chapter 5 of this title
and all references made therein if they are to be dedicated to the county.
   C.   Waiver Or Modification Of Specifications, Standards And Requirements:
It is recognized that the uniqueness of each proposal for a PUD requires that
the specifications, standards, and requirements for various facilities,
including, but not limited to: roads, alleys, easements, utilities, signs,
parking areas, storm drainage, water supply and distribution, and sewage
collection and treatment, may be subject to modification from the
specifications, standards, and requirements established for subdivisions and
like uses in this title. The commission may, therefore, at the time of general
submission as requested by the applicant, waive or modify these specifications,
standards, and requirements which otherwise shall be applicable.
   D.   Averaging And Transferring Densities: Averaging and transferring
densities within the PUD shall be allowed: 1) upon a showing that it fits the
definition of a PUD; 2) as long as the overall average residential density is
no greater than six (6) dwelling units per gross acre; and 3) only if
residential units are to be connected to central water and sewer systems. The
overall average residential density shall be calculated by summing the number
of residential dwelling units planned within the boundary of the PUD and
dividing by the total gross area expressed in acres within the boundaries of
the PUD, except public lands. It is recognized that the increased residential
density of a PUD shall be in relationship to the site and structure location,
application of technology, design, construction techniques, landscaping and
topography. Dwelling units per gross acre may be increased to provide community
and workforce housing at negotiated percentages that are memorialized in a
development agreement with the Board of County Commissioners; consideration
will be based upon distance from incorporated cities, impact areas, and
available infrastructure.
   E.   Lot And Building Setbacks: Lot and building setbacks may be decreased
below or otherwise altered from the standards of like uses set forth elsewhere
in this title.
   F.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of buildings may be increased above
those for like uses mandated elsewhere in this title in consideration of the
following characteristics:
      1.   Unreasonable adverse visual effect on adjacent sites or other areas
in the immediate vicinity.
      2.   Potential problems for adjacent sites caused by shadows, loss of air
circulation, or loss of view.
      3.   Influence on the general vicinity with regard to extreme contrast,
vistas, and open space.
   G.   Parking Spaces: The design and construction standards for parking
spaces shall conform to section
9-5A-3 of this title, and the number of parking spaces required may be
increased or decreased relative to the number mandated for like uses elsewhere
in consideration of the following factors:
      1.   Estimated number of cars owned by occupants of dwelling units in the
PUD.
      2.   Parking needs of each specific use.
      3.   Varying time period of use whenever joint use of common parking
areas is proposed.
      4.   Surface parking areas shall not be considered open space for the
purposes of subsection I of this section.
   H.   Internal Street Circulation System: The PUD shall provide an adequate
internal street circulation system designed for the type of traffic generated,
safety, separation from living areas, convenience, and access. Private internal
streets may be narrower than normally required; provided, that adequate access
for police and fire protection and snow removal equipment is maintained.
   I.   Common Open Space: At least fifty percent (50%) of the total area
within the boundary of any residential PUD and twenty percent (20%) of any
commercial or industrial PUD shall be devoted to common open space; provided,
however, that the commission may reduce this requirement if they find that such
a decrease is warranted by the design of, and the amenities and features
incorporated into, the plan and that the needs of the occupants of the PUD for
open space can be met in the proposed development. Each residential unit shall
have ready access to common areas and facilities.
   J.   Materials, Textures And Colors: Harmonious variations in materials,
textures, and colors shall complement and supplement the natural beauty and
pleasant environment of the site and the individual buildings. The site,
design, and construction of all residences shall be planned in such a manner
that there is a substantial resemblance of uniformity.
   K.   Assurances Of Performance Bond: It is recognized that the uniqueness of
each proposal for a PUD requires that the applicant must make adequate
assurances of performance of each phase of the proposal. The commission may
impose any form of bond on those portions of the proposal which will provide
common services to the public or users of the PUD as deemed appropriate by the
commission under the circumstances.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 2023-01, 7-10-2023)
9-9-8: OTHER INFORMATION AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant shall disclose and provide the following:
   A.   The name, address, telephone number of any owner, equitable interest
holder, stockholder, partner, associate, or any other person having a financial
interest of ten percent (10%) or greater in the proposed planned unit
development.
   B.   The method of financing and the cost of improvements that serve the
common services of the public and users of the PUD.
   C.   The cost of the proposed planned unit development.
   D.   The cost of each phase of the planned unit development.
   E.   The ratio of the amount of all loans to the value of the property
throughout the development of the planned unit development.
   F.   Plans for housing employees, construction workers, subcontractors,
independent contractors or any other person related to or associated with the
applicant's buildings, improvements, developments or temporary uses during and
after the proposal.
   G.   Plans for providing any additional fire protection and emergency
medical services which may be necessary during and after construction.
   H.   Proposals for guarantees that the applicant will complete all those
improvements that serve the common services of the public and users of the PUD
or that the land will be reclaimed to its condition prior to construction.
   I.   Plans for any impact fees to be paid by the applicant for the proposal.
   J.   Plans for minimizing any water runoff created by the buildings,
improvements, developments or other temporary uses of the proposal.
   K.   Plans for minimizing the impact on solid waste disposal during and
after the proposal.
   L.   Plans for minimizing the impact on fish, wildlife or biotic resources
in the general area of the proposal before, during and after the completion of
the proposal.
   M.   Plans for providing for enforcement of security on the site of the
proposal.
   N.   Plans for transporting workers to and from job sites and special
traffic control measures for public safety during and after construction.
   O.   Certain disclosures required by this section will not apply to certain
PUDs because of the uniqueness and small size of the proposal. When disclosures
in subsections B, F, G, H, L, M and N of this section are either not applicable
or not of sufficient importance because the impact of the PUD would be minimal,
the applicant shall include a statement showing why the disclosure does not
apply. Staff shall make a recommendation to the commission as to each
application, and the commission shall decide the applicable procedures. All PUD
applicants shall adequately respond to disclosures in subsections A, C, D, E,
I, J and K of this section. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-9: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
Because of the uniqueness of each proposal, a PUD may impact county services
and/or property which may be mitigated through a development agreement.
Compensation for these impacts shall be negotiated in work sessions with
appropriate county entities and a development agreement shall be entered into
between the applicant and the county through the board as additional conditions
considered for approval of a PUD. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-10: IMPACT FEES:
The commission may recommend to the board impact fees as authorized by Idaho
Code section 31-870 for any PUD proposal. The board may implement the impact
fees as recommended by the commission or as it deems necessary for the
proposal. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-11: REIMBURSEMENT FEES:
The applicant shall be required, in addition to the filing fee otherwise
imposed, to pay a reimbursement fee. The reimbursement fee shall be negotiated
by the staff with approval of the board. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-9-12: PROCESS:
   A.   Review And Approval: The PUD can be reviewed and approved prior to
approval of any conditional use permit. However, the PUD and conditional use
permits can be reviewed and approved simultaneously.
   B.   Diagram Of PUD Layers:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-883.png]
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 10
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Initiation
9-10-2: Application
9-10-3: Procedures
9-10-1: INITIATION:
In recognition of the changing character of land use in the county and the
necessity for an ongoing review and revision process in order to more fully
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, this title may be amended
pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6526(d) and
(e). Amendments to this title may be initiated as follows:
   A.   By adoption of a motion by the commission or board of Valley County; or
   B.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who has
an existing interest in property affected by this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-
2010)
9-10-2: APPLICATION:
Applications for amendments to this title, as referred to in subsection
9-10-1B of this chapter, shall contain at least the following information:
   A.   Name, address, and phone number of applicant.
   B.   Proposed amending ordinance.
   C.   Present and proposed land use.
   D.   Vicinity map drawn to scale sufficiently illustrating the property in
question and surrounding properties, roads, and geographical features, and
including a north arrow, scale, and names of adjacent property owners on the
respective parcels, or any other graphic material which may be appropriate.
   E.   A statement of how the amendment may affect the comprehensive plan,
availability of public facilities, and compatibility with the surrounding
areas.
   F.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of any single
parcel of property to be affected. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
   G.   A filing fee consisting of the cost of codification plus five percent
(5%), along with notification costs. Additional charges for the county
prosecuting attorney's time may be added if the amendment is not adopted. (Ord.
10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
9-10-3: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Schedule Public Hearing: Upon receipt of an application or
upon the formal recommendation of the commission or board for an amendment to
this title, notice for and scheduling of a public hearing shall be made at the
next regularly scheduled meeting for which proper notification can be made.
   B.   Commission Recommendation: Within thirty (30) days after the final
public hearing, the commission shall recommend action on the amendment to the
board and include their findings and conclusions, in writing. The commission
may have a work session with the board in order to discuss the proposed
amendments prior to making their formal recommendation.
   C.   Hearing; Board Action: The board shall hold a public hearing at the
next available time for which proper notification can be made, so long as it is
less than sixty (60) days. A special meeting may be held. The board shall then
act on such recommendation within thirty (30) days of the final public hearing
held by the board or at a specified date and time. If no decision is made, the
proposed amendment will be considered denied. The board shall make written
findings and conclusions. If approved, the amendment shall thereafter be made a
part of this title. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 11
APPENDICES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Appendix A, Compatibility Evaluation
9-11-2: Appendix B, Thirty Percent Winter Opacity
9-11-3: Appendix C, Fugitive Dust
9-11-1: APPENDIX A, COMPATIBILITY EVALUATION:
   A.   General: One of the primary functions of traditional zoning is to
classify land uses so that those which are not fully compatible or congruous
can be geographically separated from each other. The county has opted to
substitute traditional zoning with a multiple use concept in which there is no
separation of land uses. Proposed incompatible uses may adversely affect
existing uses, people, or lands in numerous ways: noise, odors, creation of
hazards, view, water contamination, loss of needed or desired resources,
property values, or infringe on a desired lifestyle. To ensure that the county
can continue to grow and develop without causing such land use problems and
conflicts, a mechanism designed to identify and discourage land use proposals
which will be incompatible at particular locations has been devised. The
compatibility evaluation of all conditional uses also provides for evaluations
in a manner which is both systematic and consistent.
   B.   Purpose; Use:
      1.   The compatibility rating is to be used as a tool to assist in the
determination of compatibility. The compatibility rating is not the sole
deciding factor in the approval or denial of any application.
      2.   Staff prepares a preliminary compatibility rating for conditional
use permits, except for conditional use permits for PUDs. The commission
reviews the compatibility rating and may change any value.
   C.   General Evaluation: Completing the compatibility questions and
evaluation (form):
      1.   All evaluations shall be made as objectively as possible by
assignment of points for each of a series of questions. Points shall be
assigned as follows:
         Plus 2 - assigned for full compatibility (adjacency encouraged).
         Plus 1 - assigned for partial compatibility (adjacency not necessarily
encouraged).
         0 - assigned if not applicable or neutral.
         Minus 1 - assigned for minimal compatibility (adjacency not
discouraged).
         Minus 2 - assigned for no compatibility (adjacency not acceptable).
      2.   Each response value shall be multiplied by some number, which
indicates how important that particular response is relative to all the others.
Multipliers shall be any of the following:
         x4 - indicates major relative importance.
         x3 - indicates above average relative importance.
         x2 - indicates below average relative importance.
         x1 - indicates minor relative importance.
   D.   Matrix - Questions 1 Through 3: The following matrix shall be utilized,
wherever practical, to determine response values for questions one through
three (3). Uses classified and listed in the left hand column and across the
top of the matrix represent possible proposed, adjacent, or vicinity land uses.
Each box indicates the extent of compatibility between any two (2) intersecting
uses. These numbers should not be changed from proposal to proposal, except
where distinctive uses arise which may present unique compatibility
considerations. The commission shall determine whether or not there is a unique
consideration.
   E.   Terms:
   DOMINANT ADJACENT LAND USE: Any use which is within three hundred feet
(300') of the use boundary being proposed; and
      1.   Comprises at least one-half (1/2) of the adjacent uses and one-
fourth (1/4) of the total adjacent area; or
      2.   Where two (2) or more uses compete equally in number and are more
frequent than all the other uses, the one with the greatest amount of acreage
is the dominant land use; or
      3.   In all other situations, no dominant land use exists. When this
occurs, the response value shall be zero.
   LOCAL VICINITY: Land uses within a one to three (3) mile radius. The various
uses therein should be identified and averaged to determine the overall use of
the land.
   F.   Questions 4 Through 9:
      1.   In determining the response values for questions 4 through 9, the
evaluators shall consider the information contained in the application, the
goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan, the provisions of this title
and related ordinances, information gained from an actual inspection of the
site, and information gathered by the staff.
      2.   The evaluator or commission shall also consider proposed mitigation
of the determined impacts. Adequacy of the mitigation will be a factor.
   G.   Compatibility Questions And Evaluation:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1439.png]
 
   H.   Matrix For Rating:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1441.png]
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-11-2: APPENDIX B, THIRTY PERCENT WINTER OPACITY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d97ec670e07fc972f7d2afffda4c33d8ebd2269c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1443.png]
 
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
9-11-3: APPENDIX C, FUGITIVE DUST:
   A.   Purpose: To reduce the amount of particulate matter entrained in the
ambient air, or discharged into the ambient air, as a result of anthropogenic
(manmade) fugitive dust sources by requiring actions to prevent, reduce or
mitigate fugitive dust emissions.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions of this rule shall apply to any
conditional use application capable of generating fugitive dust. These rules
specifically apply to quarrying and surface mining operations, or to sand and
gravel mining, rock crushing, and aggregate and sand processing operations;
provided, that a permit has been issued by Valley County, general permit
requirements, for such operations.
   C.   Exemptions: The provisions of this rule shall not apply to:
      1.   Agricultural activities conducted and maintained for commercial
agricultural purposes.
      2.   Active operations conducted during emergency life threatening
situations, or in conjunction with any officially declared disaster or state of
emergency, or to attend to uncontrolled fires.
      3.   Active operations conducted by essential service utilities to
provide electricity, natural gas, telephone, water and sewer during periods of
service outages and emergency disruptions.
      4.   Active operations conducted at solid waste landfills.
      5.   Active operations within state and federal lands.
      6.   Unpaved roads, unless such roads:
         a.   Are within and part of a property undergoing development or
construction; or
         b.   Are public unpaved roads being constructed or undergoing a
maintenance activity.
      7.   Weed abatement operations, fire hazard abatement, or vegetation
clearing for fire defense purposes ordered or conducted by a county department,
or any state, county, or municipal fire department, or that is required by
local ordinance.
   D.   Definitions:
   ACTIVE OPERATIONS: Any activity capable of generating fugitive dust,
including, but not limited to, earthmoving activities, construction/demolition
activities, or heavy duty and light duty vehicular movement on disturbed
surface areas, including inactive disturbed surface areas, and unpaved roads
within a construction or development project.
   BOUNDARY LINE: The boundaries of an area in which either a person causing
the emission or a person allowing the emission has the legal use or possession.
This may include all or portions of legal parcels as defined by the county
assessor.
   BULK MATERIAL: Any material, which can emit dust when stored, disturbed, or
handled and is generally unpacked, including sand, gravel, soil, aggregated
material less than two inches (2") in length or diameter, and other organic or
inorganic particulate matter.
   DISTURBED SURFACE AREA: A portion of the earth's surface that has been
physically moved, uncovered, destabilized, or otherwise modified from its
undisturbed natural soil condition.
   DUST SUPPRESSANTS: Water, hydroscopic material, or nontoxic chemical
stabilizers used as a material to reduce fugitive dust emissions.
   FUGITIVE DUST: Any solid particulate matter that becomes airborne, without
first passing through a stack or duct, directly or indirectly as a result of
the activities of man, including the raising and/or keeping of animals.
   OPEN STORAGE PILE: Any accumulation of bulk material with five percent (5%)
or greater silt content which is not fully enclosed, covered or chemically
stabilized, and which attains a height of three feet (3') or more and a total
surface area greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Silt content
level is assumed to be five percent (5%) or greater unless a person can show
otherwise by sampling and analysis in accordance with ASTM method C-136 or
other equivalent.
   PM10: Particulate matter with an aerodynamic smaller than or equal to a
nominal ten (10) microns as measured by an applicable reference test method.
   SILT: Any aggregate material with a particle size less than seventy four
(74) micrometers in diameter that passes through a no. 200 sieve.
   SIMULTANEOUS SAMPLING: The operation of two (2) PM10 samplers in such a
manner that one sampler is started within five (5) minutes of each other, and
each sampler is operated for a consecutive period which must be not less than
two hundred ninety (290) minutes and not more than three hundred ten (310)
minutes.
   VISIBLE EMISSION: Any particle matter that is visually detectable without
the aid of instruments other than corrective lenses.
   E.   Standards:
      1.   Visible Emissions Not Allowed Beyond Boundary Line: A person shall
not cause or allow the emissions of fugitive dust from any active operation,
open storage pile, or disturbed surface area (including disturbances as a
result of the raising and/or keeping of animals or by vehicle use), such that
the presence of such dust remains visible in the atmosphere beyond the boundary
line of the emission source.
      2.   Visible Emissions From Active Operations: A person shall not cause
or allow fugitive dust by active operations, open storage piles, or disturbed
surface areas, such that the fugitive dust is of such opacity as to obscure an
observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke as dark or
darker in shade designated as no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart (i.e., 40 percent
opacity), as published by the United States bureau of mines.
      3.   Concentrations Limit: A person shall not cause or allow PM10 levels
to exceed fifty (50) micrograms per cubic meter, twenty four (24) hour average,
when determined by simultaneous sampling, as the difference between upwind and
downwind samples collected on high volume particulate matter samplers or other
EPA approved equivalent method for PM10 monitoring. Sampling shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedures specified in this subsection.
   F.   Minimum Dust Control Requirements: The following dust mitigation
measures are to be initiated at the start and maintained throughout the
duration of the mining construction or grading activity, including any
construction or grading for road construction or maintenance:
      1.   Unpaved areas subject to vehicle traffic must be stabilized by being
kept wet, treated with a chemical dust suppressant, or paved.
      2.   The speed of any vehicles and equipment traveling across unpaved
areas must not be more than fifteen (15) miles per hour unless the road surface
and surrounding area is stabilized to prevent vehicles and equipment traveling
more than fifteen (15) miles per hour from emitting dust exceeding Ringelmann
2, or visible emissions, from crossing the project boundary line.
      3.   Storage piles and disturbed areas not subject to vehicular traffic
must be stabilized by being kept wet, treated with a chemical dust suppressant,
or covered when material is not being added to or removed from the pile.
      4.   Prior to any ground disturbance, including grading, excavating, and
land clearing, sufficient water must be applied to the area to be disturbed to
prevent emitting dust exceeding Ringelmann 2 and to minimize visible emissions
from crossing the boundary line.
      5.   Construction vehicles leaving the site shall be cleaned to prevent
dust, silt, mud, and dirt from being released or tracked off site.
      6.   When wind speeds are high enough to result in dust emissions
crossing the boundary line, despite the application of dust mitigation
measures, grading and earthmoving operations shall be suspended.
      7.   No trucks are allowed to transport excavated material off site
unless the trucks are maintained such that no spillage can occur from holes or
other openings in the cargo compartments; and loads are either:
         a.   Covered with tarps; or
         b.   Wetted and loaded such that the material does not touch the
front, back, or sides of the cargo compartment at any point less than six
inches (6") from the top, and that no point of the load extends above the top
of the cargo compartment.
   G.   Monitoring And Recordkeeping:
      1.   Monitoring:
         a.   Sampling to determine the particulate matter concentration limit
of subsection G1c of this section is only required when deemed necessary by the
county zoning compliance officer.
         b.   The conduct of sampling to demonstrate compliance with the
standards section may be required, with reasonable notice, of the person
discharging emissions, or sampling may be conducted by the county with the
costs of sampling, not to exceed actual costs, borne by the person discharging
emissions.
         c.   Samplers shall be operated, maintained and calibrated in
accordance with the code of federal regulations (CFR), part 50, appendix J, or
appropriate EPA published documents for the EPA approved equivalent method(s)
for PM10.
         d.   Samplers shall be placed upwind and downwind of key activity
areas and as close to the boundary line as feasible, such that the other
sources of fugitive dust between the sampler and the boundary line are
minimized.
         e.   Procedures for the conduct of simultaneous sampling to determine
compliance with the standards section, and the reporting of results, shall be
approved by the county. (Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010)
      2.   Recordkeeping: Any contractor engaged in any active operation
subject to this rule shall maintain records of actions to stabilize surface
areas sufficient to establish location, type and date of treatment. Records
shall be maintained and be readily accessible for two (2) years after the date
of each entry and shall be provided to the county upon request and shall be
open for inspection during unscheduled audits during normal business hours.
(Ord. 10-06, 8-23-2010; amd. Ord. 11-5, 6-6-2011)
CHAPTER 12
OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Purpose
9-12-2: Definitions
9-12-3: Zoning Classifications
9-12-4: Permit Requirement
9-12-5: Permit Application
9-12-6: Issuance Of Permit
9-12-7: Site Design And Installation
9-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide, through zoning provisions, for the
reasonable development of land for oil and gas drilling while providing
adequate health, safety and general welfare protections of the Valley County
residents. Oil and gas exploration, drilling and extraction operations involve
activities that are economically important and will impact Valley County.
Accordingly, it is necessary and appropriate to adopt reasonable requirements
for oil and gas resource development so that these resources can be obtained in
a manner that is economically remunerative, and that minimizes the potential
impact on the residents of Valley County.
Local governments are preempted from regulating the same features of oil and
gas well operations or accomplishing the same purposes regulated under Idaho
statutes 47-317. Local zoning regulates surface land use as authorized under
the local land use planning act 1 . (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-65.
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For any terms in this section that also appear in IDAPA's oil and gas rules,
the state's definition is used so as to prevent any potential conflict in terms
or interpretation between state and local rules.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE: A regulatory review and/or action performed by an employee
or contractor of Valley County and not deemed a legislative or quasi-judicial
action.
   APPLICANT: Any person, owner, operator, partnership, company, corporation
and its subcontractors and agents who has an interest in real estate for the
purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas.
   COLLECTOR STREET: A public street or road which, in addition to providing
access to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and provides a route for
carrying considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and
arterial streets.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any work which actively promotes bringing in production.
   DRILLING PAD: The area of surface operations surrounding a proposed or
existing well or wells and accessory structures and equipment necessary for
drilling, completion, recompletion, work over, development and production
activities.
   IDL: The Idaho department of lands.
   LOCAL STREET: A public street or road designed to provide access to abutting
lots and to discourage through traffic.
   OIL AND GAS: Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, propane, butane and/or any
other constituents or similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil
or gas well.
   OIL AND GAS WELL: A hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring
for or extracting oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances.
   ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT: A written agreement between the applicant and the
local highway jurisdiction obligating the applicant to repair damage, excluding
ordinary wear and tear, if any, to public streets, including, but not limited
to, bridges, caused by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors or representatives in the performance of drilling or production
of any wells authorized by the city or county.
   WELL: An oil and gas well or an injection well, including, but not limited
to, directional drilling wells (for example, any well hole drilled into the
ground). (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
9-12-3: ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS:
Subject to the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   An oil or gas well site shall be considered a permitted use by right
within any zoning district(s), subject to the standards listed herein. (Ord.
13-5, 9-16-2013)
9-12-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   No oil or gas well site, or an addition to an existing oil or gas well
site, shall be constructed or located within Valley County unless an
administrative zoning permit under this chapter has been issued by the planning
and zoning administrator to the applicant approving the construction or
preparation of the site for oil or gas development or construction of natural
gas compressor stations or natural gas processing plants.
   B.   Each application shall be submitted with the fee established pursuant
to resolution of the board of Valley County commissioners as adopted. Such fee
shall be reasonable related to the cost of administering this section.
   C.   Any modification to an existing and/or permitted oil or gas well site
that materially alters the size, type, location, number of wells or accessory
equipment or structures, shall require a modification of the permit under this
chapter. Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
   D.   Wells that were permitted and constructed prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter. Any
modification to an existing or permitted oil or gas well site that occurs after
the effective date hereof and materially alters the size, type, location,
number of wells and other accessory equipment or structures, shall require
compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Upon receiving notice from the IDL that an application has been
submitted, the local jurisdiction will notify all property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the affected tax parcel that an application for a new
oil and gas operation has been filed with the Valley County planning and zoning
department. The notice is for informational purposes only and will not solicit
any public comments on the application.
   F.   No land use permits shall be required for exploration of oil or gas.
Exploration of oil or gas means geologic or geophysical activities, including,
but not limited to, surveying and seismic exploration, related to the search
for oil, gas, or other subsurface hydrocarbons.
   G.   If an applicant does not conduct said business for a period of one
year, the administrative zoning permit shall be null and void. Permits issued
under this chapter shall not be transferable to any other applicant, except by
a majority vote of the board of county commissioners, and the filing of an
application by the applicant to whom such permit is, or may be, transferred or
assigned. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
9-12-5: PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   The applicant shall provide to the Valley County planning and zoning
office at the time of permit application:
      1.   A narrative describing an overview of the project including the
number of acres to be disturbed for development, the number of wells to be
drilled including IDL permit number(s) for all wells, if available, at the time
of submittal and provided when issued later, and the location, number and
description of equipment and structures to the extent known.
      2.   The address of the oil or gas well site and a legal description of
the parcel as determined by the Valley County planning and zoning administrator
and sheriff and information needed to gain access to the well site in the event
of an emergency.
      3.   The contact information of the individual or individuals responsible
for the operation and activities at the oil or gas well site shall be provided
to the Valley County planning and zoning office and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by the administrator. Such information shall include a
phone number where such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four
(24) hours per day, three hundred sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or
upon any change of relevant circumstances, the applicant shall update such
information and provide it to the Valley County planning and zoning and all
applicable emergency responders as determined by the Valley County planning and
zoning.
      4.   A scaled site plan of the oil or gas well site showing the drilling
pad, planned access roads, the approximate location of derricks, drilling rigs,
equipment and structures and all permanent improvements to the site and any
postconstruction surface disturbance in relation to natural resources. Included
in this map shall be an area within the development site for vehicles to locate
while gaining access to the oil or gas well site.
      5.   A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the well
sites on public roads including the transportation and delivery of equipment,
machinery, water, chemicals and other materials used in the siting, drilling,
construction, maintenance and operation of the oil or gas well site.
      6.   A statement that the applicant will make the operation's
preparedness, prevention and contingency plan available to the Valley County
planning and zoning department, sheriff's office, and all emergency responders
at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an oil or gas well and at least
annually thereafter while drilling activities are taking place at the oil or
gas well site.
      7.   An appropriate site orientation of the preparedness, prevention and
contingency plan for all applicable emergency responders as determined by the
local emergency responders and Valley County. The cost and expense of the
orientation shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. If multiple
wells/well pads are in the same area (covered by the same emergency response
agencies), evidence from the appropriate emergency response agencies that a
training course was offered in the last twelve (12) months shall be accepted.
      8.   A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
project on the site and surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or
mitigate such impacts shall be provided to the Valley County planning and
zoning department.
      9.   A narrative describing cleanup and disposal of drilling tailings.
All chemicals, etc., must be removed to an approved county site in an approved
disposal method.
   B.   Must submit approvals from all state and federal agencies as part of
the application. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
9-12-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Within ten (10) business days after receipt of a permit application,
the Valley County planning and zoning department will determine whether the
application is complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
   B.   If the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this
chapter, the Valley County administrator shall issue a permit within twenty one
(21) days following the date the complete application was submitted.
   C.   If the application is incomplete or does not fulfill the requirements
of this chapter, the Valley County planning and zoning administrator will
notify the applicant of the missing and/or inadequate material and, upon
receiving said material, shall issue the permit within twenty one (21) days
following the date the complete application was submitted.
   D.   As a condition of permit approval, applicant shall provide all permits
and plans from the IDL and all other appropriate regulatory agencies within
thirty (30) days of receipt of such permits and plans.
   E.   If temporary housing for well site workers is proposed on the well
site, a plan showing the number and location of the units shall be provided to
the Valley County planning and zoning department. Temporary housing plans shall
be in compliance with all applicable regulations of this title and not subject
to the twenty one (21) day approval time limit. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
9-12-7: SITE DESIGN AND INSTALLATION:
   A.   Access:
      1.   Vehicular access to a natural gas well, oil well or well pad solely
via a residential street is prohibited unless it can be proven that the only
viable vehicular access to the well site is via the residential route. The use
of collector streets is preferred.
      2.   Valley County's adopted professional standards pertaining to minimum
traffic sight distances for all access points shall be adhered to.
      3.   Access directly to state roads from a well site may require an Idaho
transportation department (ITD) approach permit. Prior to initiating any work
at a drill site, the Valley County planning and zoning department shall be
provided a copy of the required approach permit.
      4.   Access directly to Valley County local streets shall require a
Valley County road repair agreement prior to initiating any work at a well
site. Operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding and
permitting requirements for Valley County roads that are to be used by vehicles
for site construction, drilling activities and site operations.
   B.   Height:
      1.   There shall be an exception to the height restrictions contained in
this section for the temporary placement of drilling rigs, drying tanks, pad
drilling and other accessory uses necessary for the actual drilling or
redrilling of an oil or gas well. The duration of such exemption shall not
exceed the actual time period of drilling or redrilling of an oil or gas well
or pad drilling.
   C.   Setbacks/Location:
      1.   Setback distances shall, at minimum, follow requirements listed in
the IDL rules governing oil and gas conservation or a minimum of two hundred
feet (200') from property lines.
      2.   Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities
is an integral part of the oil and gas development, and as part of the planning
process, operator shall strive to consider the location of its temporary and
permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to minimize
interference with Valley County residents' enjoyment of their property and
future Valley County development activities as authorized by the Valley County
applicable ordinances.
      3.   Exception from the standards established in this subsection may be
granted by Valley County upon good cause by the operator that it is not
feasible to meet the setback requirements from surface tract property lines and
that adequate safeguards have or will be provided to justify the exception.
   D.   Screening And Fencing:
      1.   Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well sites
during the initial drilling, or redrilling operations, as long as manned twenty
four (24) hour on site supervision and security are provided.
      2.   Upon completion of drilling or redrilling in residential or
commercial zones, security fencing consisting of a permanent chainlink fence
shall be promptly installed at the oil or gas well site to secure wellheads,
storage tanks, separation facilities, water or liquid impoundment areas, and
other mechanical and production equipment and structures on the oil or gas well
site.
      3.   Valley County may use its discretion to determine whether fencing
requirements shall be enforced for wellheads, storage tanks, separation
facilities, and other mechanical and production equipment and structures on the
oil or gas well site in those zones.
      4.   Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height equipped
with lockable gates at every access point and having openings no less than
twelve feet (12') wide. Additional lockable gates used to access oil and gas
well sites by foot may be allowed, as necessary.
      5.   Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the oil or
gas well site providing notice of the potential dangers and the contact
information in case of an emergency. During drilling and hydraulic fracturing,
clearly visible warning signage must be posted on the pad site.
      6.   In construction of oil or gas well sites, the natural surroundings
should be considered and attempts made to preserve existing trees and other
native vegetation. Existing trees and respective root systems should not be
disturbed whenever possible. Reforestation/revegetation of the well site will
be provided by the owner/operator as required by rules governing oil and gas
conservation.
   E.   Lighting:
      1.   Lighting at the oil or gas well site, either temporary or permanent,
shall be directed downward and inward toward the activity, to the extent
practicable, so as to minimize the glare on public roads and adjacent
properties.
   F.   Noise:
      1.   Valley County recognizes that oil and gas development is accompanied
by inherent noise. However, the operator shall consider, to the extent
possible, mitigation of noise resulting from the oil or gas well development.
   G.   Dust Control:
      1.   Operator shall control fugitive dust control arising from
operations. Operator shall dustproof work area by sprinkling with water or a
water/calcium chloride mixture where necessary.
   H.   Work Hours:
      1.   Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through
Friday and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday.
Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and, well
servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the site shall
be limited to the above same work hour restrictions except in cases of an
emergency. The operator may request an exception to this section for good cause
shown. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Scope
10-1-4: Property Within One Mile Of City Limits
10-1-5: Compliance With County Comprehensive Plan
10-1-6: Definitions
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the VALLEY COUNTY SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE, AS AMENDED IN 2010. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose and intent of the regulations of this title is to promote
the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the population of the
county and to help assure the orderly development of the county consistent with
applicable policies and plans adopted by the board through the proper
subdivision of land and street layout.
   B.   The regulations of this title are hereby deemed reasonable and
necessary to accomplish the above purpose and are designed, among other things,
to achieve well laid out streets, and building sites in accordance with
proposed uses, and adapted to the terrain and natural setting, to conserve the
natural beauty of the county, to provide safe access, adequate drainage and
utilities for the proposed sites, to facilitate the transfer of real property,
to encourage a linked pathway system throughout the county, and in general to
provide for the orderly development of the county. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-1-3: SCOPE:
   A.   The regulations of this title shall apply to the subdivision of all
land within the unincorporated territory of Valley County, except for land
within impact areas for which different ordinances have been adopted, as
defined by the definition of a "subdivision".
   B.   It shall be unlawful hereafter to make a subdivision of land, unless it
is qualified as an exception in the scope, until plans and a subdivision plat
thereof are submitted to and approved by the administrator or the county
planning and zoning commission, and by the board of county commissioners.
   C.   Exceptions: The following division of land shall not be deemed a
subdivision for land use purposes, but must comply with Title 11 of the Valley
County Code - Flood Control:
      1.   A readjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat or the
assessor's plat which does not result in a violation of the setbacks or
dimensional standards of the Valley County land use and development ordinance
or any covenant pertaining to said plat, and does not increase the number of
building sites.
      2.   An easement providing rights for ingress and egress, utilities, or
drainage for one building site across any portion of a parcel of land, which
does not transfer title to any portion of the parcel.
      3.   A division of land for financing or mortgage purposes only where the
entire parcel remains in one ownership.
      4.   Allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a descendent as
provided in a will or a court decree for the distribution of property in the
settlement of an estate of a descendent.
      5.   Allocation of land for a pathway that can be used by the public.
      6.   Any acquisition or division of land by a public agency.
      7.   Separation of lots to their original configuration from a previously
platted subdivision shall be allowed so long as it does not create a violation
of setbacks. This includes lots that were combined by the assessor for taxing
purposes only. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010; amd. Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; Ord. 21-08,
6-28-2021; Ord. 2022-02, 2-22-2022)
10-1-4: PROPERTY WITHIN ONE MILE OF CITY LIMITS:
In those instances when the subdivision of land considered by the county
planning and zoning commission describes property situated within one mile
outside the limits or impact area of any incorporated city, the application
shall also be submitted by the administrator to said city for review of the
continuity of proposed street patterns, street widths, public infrastructure,
drainage provisions or other appropriate standard, and receive a recommendation
from the council of said city before a decision is made by the planning and
zoning commission. If no recommendation is given by the city council within
forty five (45) days of receipt of an application, it will be assumed that
there are no issues with the subdivision. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
To carry out the purpose of this title, all subdivisions of land and all
dedications and vacations of streets shall be reviewed for compliance with
applicable policies and plans adopted by the board of county commissioners.
(Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
 
                 That official of Valley County appointed by the board whose duties are to
ADMINISTRATOR:   administer the Valley County subdivision ordinance, review all property splits,
                 process applications for subdivisions, assist the general public, and coordinate
                 with various agencies.
APPLICATION FOR
APPROVAL FOR     A form approved and issued by the commission and completed and filed by the
PRELIMINARY PLAT subdivider. The subdivider shall certify the accuracy of information required.
OR SUBDIVISION:
APPLICATION FOR  A form approved and issued by the commission and completed and filed by owners of
DEDICATION OF    property lying in the unincorporated portions of Valley County, which owners
STREETS, OR      desire to dedicate, grant, or convey rights of way or easements over, across or
GRANT OF RIGHT   under all or a portion of their property for benefit of the public. The owners
OF WAY           shall certify the accuracy of information required.
EASEMENTS:
APPLICATION FOR
TOTAL OR PARTIAL
VACATION OF AN   A form approved and issued by the commission relating to a total or partial
EXISTING         vacation of an existing subdivision or plat, right of way or easement. The
SUBDIVISION OR   applicant shall certify the accuracy of information required.
OTHER PUBLIC
RIGHTS OF WAY:
                 A group of lots within defined and fixed boundaries, usually a parcel of land
BLOCK:           bounded by physical barriers, one or more streets, or a boundary line of a
                 subdivision that has been legally surveyed and recorded.
BOARD:           The Valley County board of county commissioners.
BUILDABLE        A parcel or tract of land that was not created by violating the subdivision
PARCEL:          regulations or was of record prior to October 15, 1991, and has separate access
                 to an existing street.
CITY:            Any incorporated municipality within Valley County.
COMMISSION:      The planning and zoning commission of Valley County.
                 The plan, or coordinated policies and plans, in preparation or which have been
                 adopted by the board for the social, physical and economic development of Valley
COUNTY           County, intended among other things to encourage the most appropriate use of
COMPREHENSIVE    land, to indicate the general location and extent of desirable public facilities;
PLAN:            and to provide a street system, coordinated with land use, for the safe,
                 expeditious movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic throughout the county or
                 any portion thereof.
                 The registered civil engineer appointed by the board to provide general civil
COUNTY ENGINEER: engineering services for the county and to advise the board and county agencies
                 in engineering matters.
COUNTY ROAD      That official of Valley County appointed by the board whose duties are those of
SUPERINTENDENT:  the county road superintendent and who is responsible for the administration of
                 engineering (construction) matters on other county works.
                 The registered surveyor appointed by the board to check plats and make surveys,
COUNTY SURVEYOR: maps and plats as ordered by the board (and to advise the board and county
                 agencies in matters pertaining thereto).
                 The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public. Land
                 becomes dedicated only when accepted by the board as a public dedication, either
DEDICATION:      by the passage of a county ordinance or by entry of a resolution of approval in
                 the official minute book of the official meetings of the board, or by the
                 recording of a plat showing such dedication.
DOMESTIC         Including, but not limited to: cows, horses, llamas, rabbits, poultry and
LIVESTOCK:       chinchillas on premises less than five (5) acres in size.
EASEMENT:        A grant of the right to use a parcel of land for specific purposes.
                 A street or road that is on the official road name list, has been accepted by the
EXISTING STREET: board of county commissioners, or approved by the board of county commissioners
                 to be added to the official road name list.
                 Three (3) or less adult dogs and/or three (3) or less adult cats and other
HOUSEHOLD PETS:  household domestic animals, and including their offspring under six (6) months of
                 age.
LOT:             A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or
                 development.
                 A lot in a platted subdivision or a tract of land of record at the time of the
ORIGINAL PARCEL: adoption of the subdivision regulations on April 29, 1970, as evidenced by a
                 parcel number having been assigned by the Valley County assessor.
                 The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having
OWNER:           sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided to commence and
                 maintain proceedings under this title.
                 Any sidewalk, route, lane, path, corridor, open space, or trail designated to
PATHWAY:         move people by nonmotorized means for transportation or recreation. Nonmotorized
                 does not include snowmobiles.
                 The plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication, or any portion thereof, prepared
                 for recording by the Valley County recorder and containing those elements of
                 requirements set forth in sections
PLAT, FINAL:     10-3-3-2 and
                 10-3-3-3 of this title and applicable sections of state law. After the Valley
                 County recorder has recorded the final plat, it shall thereafter be known as an
                 authorized plat, subdivision or dedication.
                 A preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication containing the elements
PLAT,            and requirements set forth in sections
PRELIMINARY:     10-3-2-2 and
                 10-3-2-3 of this title.
PRIVATE ROAD     Privately owned land for a private road system.
RIGHT OF WAY:
PUBLIC RIGHT OF  Any land dedicated and open to the public and under the jurisdiction of a public
WAY:             highway agency.
PUBLIC ROAD:     Road, thoroughfare, alley, highway or bridge under the jurisdiction of a public
                 highway agency.
                 A plan of a resubdivision, altering an existing plat or portion thereof,
REPLAT:          complying with the requirements of this title and applicable laws of the state of
                 Idaho and prepared for filing for record with the county recorder.
                 That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
ROADWAY:         travel, exclusive of sidewalks, shoulders, berms, and other portions of the
                 public or private right of way.
SHALL:           The word “shall” is used when an action is mandatory.
SIDEWALK:        A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing, constructed to county standards.
SIXTEENTH OF A   A nominally square forty (40) acre tract of land situated within a section per
SECTION:         the description set forth in the “Manual Of Instructions For Surveys Of The
                 Public Lands”, as published by the United States government.
                 A public right of way or private parcel, and relative improvements, which
                 provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. The term
STREET:          “street” includes highway, parkway, way, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and
                 other such terms. Streets within Valley County are classified as arterials,
                 collectors, local or other depending upon their function, level of service and
                 condition.
   Alley:     Public access of limited use intended only to provide access to the rear or side
                 of lots or buildings in urban districts.
   Arterial   Highway controlled and maintained by the Idaho transportation department.
Highway:
   Cul-De-Sac A short local road having one end permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
Road:
   Frontage   Minor road parallel and adjacent to a major route that intercepts local traffic
Road:            and controls access to the major route.
                 A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision where
   Half Streetthe remaining portion of the street will be provided in the adjoining
                 subdivision.
                 Road that provides direct access to residential, commercial, and/or industrial
   Local:     sites for local traffic movement and connects to minor and major roads or
                 arterial highways.
   Loop Road: Minor road with both terminal points on the same road of origin.
   Major      General term for a road including primary county roads that provide travel
Collector:       corridors between cities, recreational sites and industrial areas.
   Minor      Roadway that provides for traffic movement within neighborhoods and between major
Collector:       roads and local roads with occasional access to abutting property.
   Stub StreetA short local street terminating at the subdivision boundary where the extension
                 will be provided to the adjoining property.
                 An individual, firm or group who undertake the subdividing of a lot, tract or
SUBDIVIDER:      parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development,
                 and including dedication of streets or changes in street or lot lines.
                 The division of an original parcel of land by deed, mortgage, deed of trust, or
                 contract of sale which: a) results in more than two (2) subparcels of the
SUBDIVISION:     original parcel; or b) provides land for a new street, either on the perimeter or
                 across any portions of a parcel of land; or c) the redivision of any lot or
                 parcel that was divided from an original parcel as defined by the subdivision
                 regulations for Valley County, Idaho, adopted April 29, 1970.
UTILITIES:       Facilities for service to, and used by, the public. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010; amd.
                 Ord. 15-03, 7-6-2015; Ord. 2022-02, 2-22-2022)
 
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Interpretation
10-2-2: Commission Meetings
10-2-3: Expenses For Processing Application
10-2-4: Variances
10-2-5: Appeals
10-2-6: Amendments
10-2-7: Validity
10-2-8: Violations And Penalties
10-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Duty Of Commission: It shall be the duty of the commission to rule on
the meaning, spirit and intent of the provisions of this title as is necessary
for the administration thereof.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions herein shall apply to all plats filed for
commission approval after the effective date hereof, except the preliminary
plats approved prior to the effective date and filed for final approval not
more than one year after said effective date shall be approved under the
provisions existing prior to this title. Preliminary plats approved prior to
the effective date of this title but not filed for final approval within one
year shall be void. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-2: COMMISSION MEETINGS:
The commission shall follow the process for meetings, rules of order, quorum
and voting as defined in the bylaws and Valley County land use and development
ordinance. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-3: EXPENSES FOR PROCESSING APPLICATION:
All expenses necessary to provide the data required hereunder for processing
and/or qualifying an application for approval of a plat, subdivision or
dedication shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-4: VARIANCES:
   A.   Hardship: Where the commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with this title, it may vary the regulations or
standards so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan or portions thereof, or this
title.
   B.   Large Scale Developments: The standards and requirements of this title
may be modified by the commission and board in the case of a plan and program
for a new town, a complete community, or a neighborhood unit, which, in the
judgment of the commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvements
for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract
when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or
other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the
comprehensive plan or portions thereof. The planned unit development provisions
in the Valley County land use and development ordinance provide standards for
large scale developments.
   C.   Mortgages And Trust Deeds: The standards and requirements of this title
may be modified by the commission whenever any lot or parcel of land is brought
within the purview of this title because of mortgages or deeds of trust being
imposed upon said land, upon a satisfactory showing by the owner thereof that
said mortgages or deeds of trust do not accomplish or result in a division of
land, and that no attempt is made to circumvent the provisions of this title.
   D.   Conditions: In granting variances and modifications, the commission may
require such conditions as, in its judgment, will secure substantially the
objectives of the standards of requirements so varied or modified. (Ord. 10-07,
8-26-2010)
10-2-5: APPEALS:
Any person, firm or corporation may appeal in writing the decision of the
commission relative to any matters hereunder decided to the board within ten
(10) days from such decisions, in accordance with the Valley County land use
and development ordinance. Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the
decision of the board to the district court in the same manner and within the
same time as other appeals may be taken from orders of boards of county
commissioners. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-6: AMENDMENTS:
The commission may recommend amendments to this title, and the board, on its
own motion or such recommendation, may amend this title from time to time in
the same manner and follow the same procedures as provided in the Valley County
land use and development ordinance. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-7: VALIDITY:
   A.   Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this title, or any particular application thereof, be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this title.
   B.   If, in any instance, the commission fails to act or carry out its
responsibilities according to the regulations contained herein, the board shall
assume all the duties of the commission as herein specified in relation to the
application concerned. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-2-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Each violation of this title shall be a misdemeanor. Each
violation for each day it shall continue shall constitute a separate offense,
and each violation shall be punishable as provided in Idaho Code section 18-
113.
   B.   Commission To Notify Board Of Violations: Whenever the commission shall
determine that a violation of this title has occurred, or is about to occur, it
shall notify the board of such violation and recommend action that should be
taken. Upon knowledge of violation, whether or not recommendation has been
received from the commission, the board may require the Valley County
prosecuting attorney to commence action, criminal or civil, to correct the
violation and to punish the offender.
   C.   Additional Remedies: In the event any subdivision of land, as defined
in this title, is made in violation of the provisions hereof, the proper
authorities of the county, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful subdivision of land,
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
CHAPTER 3
LAND SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
10-3-1: Determination Of Type Of Plat By Administrator
10-3-2: Preliminary Plat
10-3-2-1: Submission Of Generalized Plans And Data
10-3-2-2: Contents Of Preliminary Application To Plat
10-3-2-3: Contents Of Preliminary Plat
10-3-2-4: Data, Drawings And Studies As Required
10-3-2-5: Filing Fees
10-3-2-6: Departmental And Agency Review Including Time Limits
10-3-2-7: Commission Review And Approval Required
10-3-3: Final Plat
10-3-3-1: Commission Approval; Time Limits
10-3-3-2: Contents
10-3-3-3: Official Signatures And Approvals Required
10-3-3-4: Recording Required
10-3-3-5: Other Requirements Prior To Recording
10-3-4: Amended Plats; Approved Plats Or Condominium Projects
10-3-1: DETERMINATION OF TYPE OF PLAT BY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Discuss Procedure Prior To Submittal: Prior to preparation of submittal
information, the subdivider should discuss the procedure and the subdivision
with the administrator in order to determine if the plat will be an
administrative plat, short plat, or full plat.
   B.   Administrative Plat: An administrative plat can be approved for an
original parcel that is being split into a maximum of four (4) lots. The
administrative plat does not require a public hearing, but agencies and
neighbors will be notified thirty (30) days before recordation in order to
assess impacts. The administrator may determine that a conditional use permit
is required.
      1.   Each lot must meet the land use requirements in regard to lot size,
street frontage, emergency access, Central district health department
requirements, access to utilities, and cannot be on severe topography or have
geographic concerns, such as wetlands, flood prone areas, etc.
      2.   A topographic map must be submitted.
      3.   May be filed with CCRs.
      4.   Shall comply with the requirements in sections
10-3-3-2,
10-3-3-3A,
10-3-3-4, and
10-3-3-5A of this chapter, and chapter 4 of this title.
      5.   Must be signed by the county surveyor, county treasurer, board of
county commissioners, and Central district health.
      6.   The administrator will consult with the county road superintendent
concerning a development agreement for off site road improvements.
      7.   May not be done for properties where an original parcel was
previously subdivided.
   C.   Short Plat: A short plat can be approved for up to ten (10) lots. A
full plat will be required for ten (10) or more lots. A conditional use permit
is required.
      1.   May contain a private or public street.
      2.   Must comply with all sections of this chapter, and chapters 4 and 5
of this title.
      3.   The preliminary and final plat for the short plat can be reviewed
and approved by the planning and zoning commission at one single meeting,
provided all information is in order.
      4.   The planning and zoning commission may require additional
information.
   D.   Full Plat: The full plat must comply with all requirements in this
chapter, and chapters 4 and 5 of this title. A conditional use permit is
required. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
10-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
10-3-2-1: SUBMISSION OF GENERALIZED PLANS AND DATA:
   A.   Preapplication Discussion: Previous to the filing of a preliminary plat
and application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider should submit generalized plans and data and discuss the proposed
application with the administrator. Such discussions should cover the general
objectives of the subdivision, platting procedures and requirements.
   B.   Notice To Subdivider: Within fifteen (15) days, the administrator,
acting as agent for and in behalf of the commission, shall notify the
subdivider that the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do not
meet the objectives of this title. When the administrator determines that plans
and data submitted by the subdivider do not satisfy the requirements of this
title, the administrator should express, in writing, the reasons for this
determination.
   C.   Filing Of Application: Upon developing conclusions on an informal basis
as provided in subsections A and B of this section regarding the general
program, the subdivider shall file the application for preliminary plat or
subdivision approval and prepare or cause to be prepared a preliminary plat,
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
in sections
10-3-2-2, "Contents Of Preliminary Application To Plat", and 10-3-2-3,
"Contents Of Preliminary Plat", of this chapter; and, upon the request of the
administrator, commission or county engineer, supplementary material as
specified in section
10-3-2-4 of this chapter. The application shall not be deemed accepted for
filing, nor the time limits hereinafter set out for action commence to run,
until the preliminary plat and all supplementary material required in sections
 10-3-2-2,
10-3-2-3, and
10-3-2-4 of this chapter have been received by the administrator. When all
required material has been received, the administrator shall sign and date the
application.
   D.   Number Of Application Forms And Maps Required: The applicant shall
furnish the administrator with such number of filled out application forms, and
such number of maps, as are required for referral to those agencies having
jurisdiction or advisory interest as required by law in the proposed
subdivision. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-2: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY APPLICATION TO PLAT:
The preliminary application to plat (conditional use permit) shall comply with
this title and shall have the following form and content:
   A.   Name Of Proposed Subdivision: When a proposed subdivision is an
extension of an existing subdivision and both subdivisions are under the same
ownership, the same name may be used to identify the additional subdivision,
except that two (2) subdivisions shall be distinguished from each other by the
addition of a number in sequence. Otherwise, the proposed name shall not
duplicate nor resemble the name of another subdivision in the city or county.
   B.   Persons Authorized To Appear For Application: Applications may be filed
by persons with a proprietary interest, including the owner, contract buyer, or
option holder, or persons with authority to represent such persons including a
sponsor, engineer, designer, builder, surveyor, or agent.
   C.   Application Review: The administrator shall indicate on the application
form the names of those officials, departments, bodies or agencies that have
legal jurisdiction to review the application in such matters affecting the
health, safety or welfare of the area.
   D.   Land Area; Existing Title Status To Tract: The subdivider shall attach
to one copy of the application, for the commission file only, a statement
setting forth:
      1.   The names and addresses of the owners of record.
      2.   The nature of his interest in the development.
      3.   A copy of any existing easement, deed restriction and zoning
classification applicable to the tract, if any.
      4.   A notation of the nature of any other lien or encumbrance, if any.
      5.   The total acreage of the tract and of any adjacent lands under the
same ownership.
      6.   The subdivider shall provide a current title search report of the
subject property from a licensed title company.
   E.   Land Area; Existing Physical Conditions Of Tract And Vicinity: The
subdivider shall attach to the preliminary application, a statement and drawing
describing the existing physical characteristics of the tract and vicinity with
respect to:
      1.   Terrain.
      2.   Type of soil.
      3.   Location and direction of flow of all watercourses on the tract and
abutting properties.
      4.   The possibilities of the tract being subject to inundation or
stormwater overflow and the approximate high water elevation.
      5.   Any significant natural features such as rock outcropping, marshes
or wooded areas.
      6.   The location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, drainpipes,
and electric conduits or lines proposed to service the property to be
subdivided.
      7.   The location of adjacent streets or existing structures that would
affect the proposed improvement program, including pathways.
      8.   Photographs may be required when, in the opinion of the
administrator, they are needed for supplemental information and may be
submitted in any case.
   F.   Building Program: The subdivider shall indicate the type of subdivision
intended, such as: residential, multi-family residential, commercial/
industrial, or mobile home subdivision/park/trailer court.
   G.   Proposed Street, Utility Or Other Improvements: The subdivider shall
attach to the application an explanation of his program to make the required
improvements and indicate such other improvements, and the financing or
construction of such improvements, he proposes to make in connection with the
proposed subdivision which shall cover the matters of:
      1.   Street dedications and standards of improvement.
      2.   Preliminary irrigation and preliminary drainage plans.
      3.   Proposed sources of potable water as to public system, water
associations or individual water supply.
      4.   Proposed methods of disposing of sanitary waste by public systems or
individual disposal.
      5.   Proposed source of electric power, gas and telephone service.
      6.   Proposed method of solid waste disposal.
      7.   Pathways.
      8.   Any additional corrective or improvement programs.
   H.   Restrictive Covenants: The subdivider shall submit such proposed
restrictive covenants, in outline form as are required to assure continuing
conformance with the standards set forth in this title, including, but not
limited to, building setback lines. If the restrictive covenants are used to
demonstrate compliance with provisions of the Valley County land use and
development ordinance, then they will be enforceable for those matters. If
those portions of the restrictive covenants that demonstrated compliance with
the LUDO are changed, then the applicant must come back for review and approval
with the commission.
   I.   Land Program: The subdivider shall submit information pertaining to the
development program, including proposed stages of development and the program
for the installation of off site improvements; the proposed number of lots,
typical width and depth of lots, typical lot areas, linear feet of street,
average street frontage of lot(s), percentage of area in streets, and maximum
street gradient.
   J.   Legal Description Of Area: A legal description of the area to be
platted in the current stage shall be submitted.
   K.   General Description Of Area: A general description of the location of
the plat shall be submitted. The description must include section, township,
range and sectional fractions (i.e., northwest quarter).
   L.   Signature And Date: Signature of applicant and administrator and date
of acceptance of application and notation that filing fees have been paid shall
be placed on the form. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-3: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary plat shall comply with this title and shall have the following
form and content:
   A.   All mapped information shall be prepared in a neat and legible manner
in pencil or ink. All map data must be submitted in scale but need not be based
upon an actual ground survey, except for the exterior boundary.
   B.   The name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of the subdivider(s) and
land surveyor shall be noted.
   C.   All maps containing data shall contain the name of the person or firm
responsible for the drawing, together with the date drawn and an identification
number, in order that further reference to information contained and
responsibility for same may be easily identified.
   D.   The name of the proposed plat, subdivision or dedication shall be shown
including an appropriate identification clearly stating that the map is a
preliminary plat.
   E.   The date, scale, true north point and section, township and range shall
be shown.
   F.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch
equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'). A smaller scale should be used for a
detailed drawing of the plat, including all information required such as
setback lines, street centerlines, boundary lines and ties to monuments, etc.,
and all other drawings required such as engineering data and contour maps;
provided, that the preliminary plat is also provided in said required scale.
   G.   The initial point and tie shall be to at least two (2) government
corners, or in lieu of government corners, to monuments recognized by the
county surveyor; and also, if required by city or county governing bodies,
coordinates based on the state plane coordinate system, Idaho zone, shall be
shown.
   H.   Descriptions of survey monuments shall be included.
   I.   Proposed street names, and the numbering of lots (with acreages or
square footage) and blocks, together with the layout of proposed street right
of way lines, lot lines, alley and easement lines, and building setback lines,
including all approximate dimensions and any and all proposed street extensions
shall be shown.
   J.   The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within the proposed development and other important features,
such as the general outline of existing buildings, watercourses, power lines,
telephone lines, railroad lines, any existing easements, municipal boundaries
and section lines, shall be shown.
   K.   The tract designation of the immediate adjacent plats, subdivisions,
ownerships, or dedications as shown in the files of the Valley County recorder,
if any.
   L.   Zoning district boundary lines, if any, shall be shown.
   M.   The minimum setbacks for front yards, side yards, side streets, and the
rear yards of buildings to be placed on the property shall be shown or a note
that states: "Setbacks will comply with Valley County standards".
   N.   All parcels of land or interests therein intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use or to be reserved in the deeds for the
common use of property owners of the subdivision, and the purpose, condition,
or limitations of such reservations shall be indicated. In residential plats,
all parcels intended for other than residential use shall be indicated and
appropriately labeled.
   O.   Internal pathways and how they connect with the Valley County pathways
concept master plan should be shown.
   P.   If the subdivider plans a phased development of the area contained in
the preliminary plat, the respective areas of development shall be designated
and shown on the preliminary plat as to area and priority of development. This
shall include a time line of when phases will be recorded.
   Q.   The floodplain shall be shown. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-4: DATA, DRAWINGS AND STUDIES AS REQUIRED:
   A.   The applicant, when so requested by the administrator, shall furnish
the number of copies of drawings, information and data as set forth in this
section, when needed for review by other reviewing authorities and the
commission.
   B.   Soil profiles and water table data when property has potential for high
groundwater.
   C.   The elevations of all corner points on the boundaries of the proposed
plat, subdivision, or dedication.
   D.   Contours with intervals of five feet (5') or less referenced to such
datum acceptable to the county engineer.
   E.   Inclusion on topographical drawings of the course, distance, and
dimensions of the rerouting of drainage course(s) and irrigation facilities as
well as documentary evidence of consent to rerouting by all interested
landowners affected and having rights to and in such facilities.
   F.   Before a final application can be submitted, if sewers, storm drains or
water lines are to be installed, the subdivider shall submit the following,
along with a preliminary plat as required by the county engineer:
      1.   A general layout showing the proposed location and approximate sizes
and grade of sewer lines, catch basins, pumps, and other drainage and sewage
structures.
      2.   A general layout showing the proposed location and approximate size
and grade of water distribution systems, pipes and valves and hydrants.
   G.   A wildland urban interface protection plan shall be submitted in
accordance with chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-5: FILING FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule; Deposit: Every preliminary plat filed with the commission
for review and approval shall be made according to the fee schedule adopted by
the board, including a deposit for engineering review.
   B.   Additional Fees And Charges:
      1.   When the final plat is recorded, additional payment shall be made to
the county clerk for the payment of a recording fee.
      2.   A surveyor fee shall also be made at the time of recording the plat
for the cost of reviewing the plat, reporting the facts and checking the final
plat and computations thereon to determine that the requirements of this title
are met, which fee shall not be refunded.
      3.   Payment for road signs will also be required at the time of
recording the final plat. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-6: DEPARTMENTAL AND AGENCY REVIEW INCLUDING TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Submission To Commission: A minimum of ten (10) copies of the
preliminary application and plat and ten (10) copies of the supplementary
material specified shall be submitted to the commission in accordance with
subsection
9-5H-2A of this code, at which time the material submitted will be reviewed for
the commission's conditional approval.
   B.   Written Recommendations: Written recommendations should be received by
the commission from any department or agency hereinafter referred to within
fifteen (15) days from the date that said applications and preliminary drawings
were sent to such department or agency by the administrator.
   C.   Referral To Officials, Departments And Agencies For Review: Officials,
departments and agencies to which the commission shall refer copies of the
preliminary application and plat prior to the decision of the commission or
board shall include the following:
      1.   The county engineer shall review the preliminary application and
plat for compliance with construction specifications and standards for roads
and streets in Valley County and with all other applicable engineering
standards, rules and practice, including the proper street design, alignment,
grades of streets, access to lots, adaptability of the plat for surface
drainage, the capacity to assure safe and efficient movement of traffic, and
for such utilities as are under his jurisdiction.
      2.   Idaho state department of environmental quality or successor agency
or its designated representative or department of water resources who shall
review the preliminary application and plat for compliance with the standards
for water supply systems and sewer systems, whether individual or public, and
with the current standards for subsurface sewage disposal systems as
established by the department of environmental quality or successor agency or
its designated representative or department of water resources.
      3.   Idaho department of environmental quality or its successor agency or
designated representative who shall review the preliminary application and plat
for compliance with the solid waste control regulations and standards adopted
by the Idaho department of environmental quality or successor agency or
designated representative.
      4.   The county assessor who shall review the preliminary applications
and plat for compliance with regard to legal title, mapping, metes and bounds
description, and as to general datum accompanying each proposed plat. In the
event the assessor recommends disapproval of said plat, a written statement
shall be furnished to the commission as to the reasons for disapproval within
fifteen (15) days of delivery of said plat to the assessor.
   D.   Referral To Municipalities, Officials Or Agencies For Review: When the
circumstances require, the commission shall refer a copy of the preliminary
application and plat and such other data required to the following
municipalities, officials or agencies for their review prior to the decision of
the commission:
      1.   Any incorporated city in the county for its review of the proposal
for compliance with its comprehensive plan, the continuity of its street
pattern, street widths, and drainage provisions, when the proposed subdivision
lies within a distance of one mile of its city limits or established area of
impact.
      2.   The Idaho department of transportation or successor agency for its
review of the proposal for compliance with its standards, specifications and
regulations when the proposed subdivision abuts an existing or proposed highway
under the department's jurisdiction.
      3.   The Idaho department of environmental quality or successor agency
for its review of the proposal for compliance with design and construction
standards, specifications and regulations when it becomes necessary for the
subdivider to dig or drill new wells, tap any other source of water supply or
install facilities which will provide central service of potable water and/or
sewage systems for domestic use of inhabitants of the proposed subdivision.
      4.   The Idaho state department water resources or its successor agency
for its review of the proposal for compliance with its regulations entitled
"Minimum Well Construction Standards" when it becomes necessary for the
subdivider to acquire water rights or dig or drill a new well to provide
potable water to the various inhabitants of the proposed subdivision for
domestic use and/or fire protection.
      5.   A water and sewer district or association for its review of the
proposal in light of the district or association's policies, standards,
specifications, regulations and its feasibility from a district or association
point of view. Such cause for above referral shall exist when the proposed
subdivision lies within the incorporated boundaries of the district or
association, or when the proposed subdivision lies in an area adjacent to said
district or association and is eligible for annexation, and when the subdivider
desires or the local health authority, Idaho department of environmental
quality or its successor agency or designated representative recommends that
the subdivider petition said district or association for service to said
proposed subdivision.
      6.   Any water company authorized by the Idaho state public utility
commission for its review of the proposal in light of its policies, standards,
specifications and regulations when service to the area lying within the
proposed subdivision is desired by the subdivider.
      7.   The fire chief of any existing fire protection district in which the
proposed subdivision lies for review of the proposal in terms of potential fire
hazards and for the possible elimination of such hazards along with the
reliability of the access to the subdivision. The fire chief shall review and
comment on the adequacy of a wildland urban interface protection plan as
defined in chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-2-7: COMMISSION REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Review By Commission: The commission shall review the preliminary
application, plat and other material submitted for conformity to this title,
proper street layout, proper building sites, access to building sites, harmony
with adjacent areas and street patterns, harmony with the Valley County pathway
concept master plan, generally all factors pertaining to the orderly growth of
the county and to the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of
the public, and shall negotiate with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider. If
approved, the commission shall express its approval and state the conditions of
such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its
reasons therefor in writing.
   B.   Review As Conditional Use Permit: The commission shall also review the
preliminary application, plat and other material as a conditional use permit
for conformity with standards in the Valley County land use and development
ordinance (LUDO). Approval of the preliminary plat will be simultaneous with
approval of the conditional use for a change in land use. The conduct of
hearings shall be as outlined in the LUDO.
   C.   Conditional Approval: Conditional approval of the preliminary plat
shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the change in land use and the layout submitted on
the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will
be submitted for approval of the commission and for recording, upon fulfillment
of the requirements of this title and the conditions of the approval, if any.
(Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
10-3-3-1: COMMISSION APPROVAL; TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Conformance With Preliminary Plat: The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute the entire preliminary plat or any portion
thereof; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of
this title.
   B.   Submittal Of Application: Application for approval of the final plat
shall be submitted in writing to the commission at least thirty (30) days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The application shall not be
deemed accepted for recording, nor the time hereinafter set out for action
commence to run, until the final plat and all supplementary material required
in sections
10-3-3-2 and
10-3-3-3 of this chapter have been received by the administrator.
   C.   Time Limitation For Filing: File copies of the final plat, as required,
and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in
sections
10-3-3-2 and
10-3-3-3 of this chapter, and shall be submitted to the commission within
twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary plat, unless specifically
approved for a longer period of time; otherwise, such conditional approval
shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and
granted by the commission. Provided, however, that where development is made in
successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, without
changes or departures from the preliminary plat, such segments, if submitted
within successive intervals of twelve (12) months or according to an approved
phasing plan, may be considered for final approval without resubmissions for
conditional approval.
   D.   Action By Commission: Within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
final plat, the commission shall act upon the application and shall either
approve or disapprove. If the plat is disapproved, the commission shall state
in writing the reasons for disapproval. If the plat is approved, the final plat
shall be signed by an authorized agent of the commission.
   E.   Secure Approval And Signatures From Other Officials: Within the said
forty five (45) days, the commission shall also attempt to secure the approval
and signatures of such other officials as required by section
10-3-3-3 of this chapter and Idaho Code. If any official deems fit to
disapprove said plat, the administrator shall secure or attempt to secure a
written statement from the official as to the reasons for disapproval and shall
pass copies of such statement to the subdivider.
   F.   Board Review: Said final plat, properly certified by all officials as
required by law and set forth in this title, together with all recommendations
of the commission and financial sureties, shall be presented to the board by
the administrator. The board shall review said plat and recommendations and
cause a development agreement to be entered into with the subdivider. The
board, after review, may accept or modify the recommendations of the
commission. When approved by the board, said plat shall be signed by the
chairman of the board, in the appropriate place provided, and a notation made
in the minutes of the board along with any exceptions or conditions relating to
said approval.
   G.   Filing With County Recorder: Approved final plat and covenants shall be
recorded with the Valley County recorder within one year after approval by the
commission; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an
extension of time is applied for and granted by the commission. When deemed
necessary by the commission, a longer period of time can be granted. At the
time of recording of the plat, all improvements are required to be in place or
bonded for or secured by an irrevocable letter of credit, or some other
financial surety, prior to recording, unless specifically approved by the
board. No plat, subdivision, or dedication, or any instrument passing title to
any portion thereof shall be accepted for recording unless approved prior
thereto in accordance with this title; however, this clause shall not be
interpreted as a waiver of any other standard or requirement of this title.
(Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-3-2: CONTENTS:
   A.   The area covered by the final plat shall be surveyed, staked, and
monumented in accordance with the provisions contained in Idaho Code section
50-1303.
   B.   All plats shall conform with Idaho Code sections 50-1304, 50-1307, and
50-1309.
   C.   The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be represented on the
plat to scale showing surveyed bearings and distances and dates of survey,
including municipal boundaries and section lines, where applicable.
   D.   The initial point and tie shall be to at least two (2) government
corners, or in lieu of government corners, to monuments recognized by the
county surveyor; and also, if required by city or county governing bodies,
coordinates based on the state plane coordinate system, Idaho zone, shall be
shown.
   E.   Descriptions of survey monuments shall be included.
   F.   All plats shall show the following:
      1.   The scale, north arrow and date.
      2.   The name of the subdivision and of the respective streets therein
dedicated, including the location of the plat with respect to portion of
section, section, township and range.
      3.   Where more than one type of land use is provided, sites to be used
other than for one-family detached dwellings shall be shaded or crosshatched
and the uses shall be used as indicated. Where sites for one-family detached
dwellings are not included, such requirements shall apply to all uses other
than the most substantial in the area.
      4.   The portions of the subdivision reserved for utility, irrigation,
other classes of easements, approved drainfields, wetland areas, floodplains,
and building envelopes shall be clearly shown, together with a legend setting
forth the purpose of said easements.
      5.   A provision setting forth the book, page and instrument number where
the protective covenants governing the subdivision are recorded shall be noted
and shown on the plat.
      6.   In the event that private roads, streets or ways are so plainly
marked as such on the face of such subdivision plat, the dedication shall
plainly state that such roads, streets and ways are private and that the county
has no responsibility in connection therewith.
      7.   The surveyor making the survey shall certify the correctness of said
plat and place his seal thereon. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
      8.   In the notes on the face of the plat, any characteristics specific
to the site or surrounding land uses shall be listed, i.e., gravel pits,
grandfathered uses, unsafe topographic features, future approved land uses from
adopted county plans, etc. The note shall also state, "Surrounding land uses
are subject to change". (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
10-3-3-3: OFFICIAL SIGNATURES AND APPROVALS REQUIRED:
Sufficient space shall be reserved for the signatures and acknowledgments of
the respective officials and bodies required to review and approve the final
plat:
   A.   Review By Surveyor Or Engineer: The legally qualified surveyor selected
by the board for this purpose shall review the final plat for compliance with
all standards as required by law and with applicable rules and surveying
practice, including, among other things, review of the form completeness,
clarity and accuracy of the drawing, the inclusion of all necessary data,
notes, and titles. The county engineer shall review the provision for
installation of improvements required hereinafter. Upon finding the final plat
to be in order, said official shall transmit the plat to the commission. Said
official will sign the final plat after returned to the administrator with all
other signatures prior to presentation to the board for review.
   B.   Land Within One Mile Of Incorporated City: In such cases where the land
to be platted lies within one mile of the limits of an incorporated city, the
commission shall transmit said plat to the council of said city. The council
shall review the final plat for compliance with the city comprehensive plan and
street and drainage patterns. A signature from the city is not required.
   C.   Review For Compliance: The commission shall review said plat at its
next meeting following the return of the plat from the council; provided, that
the plat is returned at least five (5) business days prior to said meeting; and
otherwise, at the next following meeting for compliance with the decisions
arrived at, the review of the preliminary plat, and agreements subsequent
thereto; and if in order, shall approve by motion and transmit the final plat
and a copy of said minutes noting approval and reasons for same to the board.
   D.   Property Taxes: The Valley County treasurer shall determine if the
property taxes are paid to date and, if so, shall sign the plat. The signature
is only valid for thirty (30) days.
   E.   Acceptance By Board: The board shall then review the plat and
associated documents, and if approved, shall signify the approval and
acceptance of the final plat in writing which shall include the date of
acceptance and bear the signature of the chairman of the board. A motion by the
board accepting said plat shall be duly filed in the commissioner's minute
book. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-3-4: RECORDING REQUIRED:
The approved final plat and companion set of restrictive covenants, if any,
shall forthwith be submitted to the administrator who, along with the
subdivider, submits the approved package to the county recorder for recording.
At the time of recording, the following package shall be submitted and
distributed as listed:
   A.   Two (2) sets of mylars (Idaho Code section 50-1310): original to
clerk's office, duplicate to administrator.
   B.   Restrictive covenants with original signatures.
   C.   Association documents (if applicable) with original signatures.
   D.   Three (3) copies (blue lines) of plat: two (2) copies to assessor, one
copy to county road department.
   E.   Sanitary release from Central district health to be recorded with
original signatures.
   F.   Declaration of private roads, if required.
   G.   Declaration of installation of utilities, if required.
   H.   Development agreement, if required.
   I.   Eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") copy of plat.
   J.   All plat data in digital form, as specified by the administrator. (Ord.
10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-3-5: OTHER REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO RECORDING:
   A.   Verification Required: The subdivider shall cause the property to be
surveyed, monumented and a plat thereof prepared, all in accordance with the
provisions recited in Idaho Code sections 50-1302 through 50-1305, 50-1307, 50-
1309, 50-1326, and 50-1334, before the final plat is accepted for filing. Any
work required to be performed on the property to meet such requirements shall
be verified by the county engineer and a certificate of the completion of such
work given by him. The provisions of such sections as to monuments, stakes and
other markings shall be considered minimum requirements, and the county
surveyor may establish higher reasonable requirements by filing a written
specification under this section with the county commissioners. Said written
specifications shall become effective under this title only when approved by
the board and duly filed in the minutes of the proceedings of the board.
   B.   Certificate By County Engineer: A certificate (or letter) by the county
engineer submitted to the administrator certifying that the subdivider has
complied with one of the following alternatives:
      1.   All public improvements have been installed in accordance with the
requirements of this title and with the action of the commission giving
conditional approval of the preliminary plat; or
      2.   An acceptable surety arrangement has been posted which is available
to the county, and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all
required improvements; or
      3.   In the event the final plat is submitted for preliminary plat
approval provided for in subsection
10-3-2-4A of this chapter, or variations between the final plat and the
preliminary plat, as approved, have arisen, or the subdivider gives notice to
the administrator that he so desires to proceed by this method, said final plat
may be considered, together with the other requirements herein, without the
certificate of the county engineer; but such consideration and approval shall
be specifically conditioned upon said certificate being delivered to the
commission within thirty (30) days of said conditional approval, and the final
plat, together with the final restrictive covenants and all documents submitted
for the conditional approval.
   C.   Protective Covenants: One copy of protective covenants in form for
recording, and necessary and required copies of the surety agreements and
surety deposits, if required, shall be provided.
   D.   Other Certificates, Affidavits, Endorsements Or Deductions: Such other
certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or deductions as may be required by the
commission in the enforcement of this title, shall be provided.
   E.   Evidence Of Ownership: The subdivider shall submit to the commission
for inspection and examination, evidence of ownership in the land to be
subdivided. Evidence acceptable to the commission shall be a certified abstract
extended to date, or a current title report.
   F.   Private Roads, Streets And Ways:
      1.   In the event that private roads, streets and ways are designated on
such subdivision plat, the subdivider shall record, with the recorder of Valley
County, a separate declaration duly acknowledged by him that such roads,
streets and ways are private and that Valley County has no responsibility in
connection therewith, including the construction and maintenance of said
private roads. The construction of said private roads shall be to the minimum
standards as required by the "Valley County Minimum Standards For Private Road
Design And Construction". The declaration shall be titled "declaration of
private roads".
      2.   In addition thereto, the subdivider shall, at the time of recording
said final plat, record with the recorder of Valley County articles for the
formation of a property owner's association or corporation who shall be
responsible for the maintenance of such private roads, streets and ways.
   G.   Utilities: The subdivider shall record, with the recorder of Valley
County, a separate declaration duly acknowledged by him, stating the type,
manner, and schedule for the installation of utilities. The declaration shall
be titled "declaration of installation of utilities", and the instrument number
of the declaration shall be noted on the face of the plat. A note shall be
placed on the face of the plat that states: "Utilities have not been installed
at the time of recordation of this plat". (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-3-4: AMENDED PLATS; APPROVED PLATS OR CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS:
   A.   Minor Amendments: Minor amendments, for example, consist of correcting
a scrivener's error in one bearing and one distance, per sheet of the plat;
changes to one line of text per sheet of the plat; when amendments have been
requested administratively from a reviewing agency within one month after the
original filing, and said changes should have been requested prior to original
filing.
      1.   May be accomplished by filing a notarized affidavit, prepared by the
appropriate responsible party, and duly recorded with Valley County as a
miscellaneous document.
      2.   A conformed copy of said affidavit must be provided to the county
surveyor, county assessor, and Valley County planning and zoning office.
      3.   Assessor should make a notation of the instrument number of the
affidavit upon the appropriate assessor's plat.
      4.   No marks or attachments should be made upon the original plat.
   B.   Major Amendments: Major amendments, for example, consist of numerous
changes in bearings, distances, and lot lines; numerous changes in text or
other plat elements; addition of common areas into the plat.
      1.   Cannot involve the creation of any new lots, units, or roads.
      2.   Must be titled "Amended Plat".
      3.   Must obtain final plat approval from the planning and zoning
commission and board of county commissioners. All requirements of a final plat
must be met.
      4.   For addition of common area, an officer of the homeowners'
association may sign for all owners with an interest. Plat notes shall include
instrument number of affidavit filed certifying the vote count of the HOA and
percentage ownership; citation of the instrument number, title and relevant
paragraph in the articles or bylaws from which the authority flows.
      5.   Planning and zoning administrator may recommend a public hearing, if
it constitutes land use changes. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Design Standards In General
10-4-2: Blocks
10-4-3: Lots
10-4-4: Streets
10-4-5: Alleys
10-4-6: Easements
10-4-7: Pathways
10-4-1: DESIGN STANDARDS IN GENERAL:
The following design standards shall be incorporated in any plat, subdivision
or dedication, and each of the requirements hereinafter set forth shall be
considered mandatory unless the particular provision indicates to the contrary:
   A.   Land Unsuitable For Subdivision: Land which the commission has found to
be unsuitable for subdivision because of flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes,
rock formations, high groundwater, or other features likely to be harmful to
the safety and general health of the future residents and which the commission
considers inappropriate for subdivision shall not be subdivided, unless
adequate methods approved by the county engineer are planned for overcoming
these conditions.
   B.   Topographical Slopes: Those areas of the county where topographical
slopes are ten percent (10%) or more may be subdivided in conformance with such
additional requirements as the commission requires. The commission shall
provide such additional requirements to any subdivider within ten (10) days
after its decision imposing such requirements. Such additional requirements
shall be secured from the appropriate departments by the commission or its
administrator. Such additional requirements shall only relate to matters set
forth in chapters 5 and 6 of this title, shall be applied uniformly throughout
the county under similar circumstances, and shall be reasonable under the
circumstances. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-4-2: BLOCKS:
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to:
   A.   Building Sites: Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the type of use contemplated, including the zone requirements
as to lot sizes and dimensions.
   B.   Width: Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers
of lots, unless prohibited by topography.
   C.   Access, Circulation, Control And Safety Of Street Traffic: Needs for
convenient access, circulations, control and safety of street traffic. The
number of intersecting streets with arterials of all classes shall be held to a
minimum.
   D.   Topography: The limitations and opportunities of topography.
   E.   Length: Residential block lengths shall be between four hundred feet
(400') and nine hundred feet (900'), provided block lengths may be a greater
length upon showing of cause.
   F.   Pedestrian Crosswalks: Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet
(10') wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other
community facilities, and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
and specifications prescribed in the manual containing the road standards and
specifications adopted by Valley County. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-4-3: LOTS:
   A.   Size, Depth, Shape, Orientation And Setback Lines: The lot size, width,
depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
and use contemplated. Every lot shall abut upon a street. Corner lots for
residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setbacks
from, and orientation to, both streets.
   B.   Double Frontage And Reverse Frontage Lots: Double frontage, and reverse
frontage lots, shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation
of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation. A screening easement of at least
ten feet (10'), and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
disadvantageous use.
   C.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be within twenty degrees (20o) of
right angles or radial to street lines.
   D.   Minimum Lot Sizes And Densities: Minimum lot sizes and densities shall
be in accordance with the Valley County land use and development ordinance.
   E.   Required Information: The subdivider shall provide the commission with
the following information, or such portion thereof as the commission deems
necessary:
      1.   Data setting forth the highest known water tables for the proposed
subdivision.
      2.   The strata formation of the proposed subdivision for a depth of
sixteen feet (16') when needed for engineering review.
      3.   The known well logs of wells located in surrounding contiguous
property.
      4.   The location of all existing or proposed irrigation ditches,
streams, drainage ditches, or known underground watercourses.
      5.   A statement of policy to be included in the recorded subdivision
covenants, if animals are permitted, regulating and restricting the area
against use by animals for a radius of fifty feet (50') from any well site.
      6.   The minimum size of the lot in all instances shall be adequate to
provide for the installation of two (2) sewage disposal areas commensurate with
sewage disposal demands in addition to providing adequate space for typical
structures to be erected thereon.
      7.   If, upon consideration of such information, the commission finds
that by reason of the factual situation and circumstances concerning the
subdivision in question, the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the subdivision and the aquifers and streams in question would not suffer from
pollution, the commission, upon review of such information, may limit the
number of large animals. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-4-4: STREETS:
Any parcel of land that is intended to be used, or is actually used, to provide
vehicular access to more than one building site, whether said street is public
or private and whether the parcel is set aside by deed, easement, or other
means, unless an administrative variance is allowed for a shared driveway to
adjacent properties, all having the required frontage on an existing street if
in a platted subdivision or a legal parcel, is in the best interest of all
parties involved due to unusual circumstances or topographic reasons, as
determined by the administrator. Administrative variances cannot be given for
more than three (3) building sites and shall at a minimum require the shared
driveway to be built to the satisfaction of the fire department and have a
shared driveway agreement.
   A.   Conformance With Adopted Standards And Policies: The classification,
ownership, design and location of all streets shall conform to adopted
standards and policies, and shall be considered in their relation to existing
and planned streets, topographic conditions, to public convenience or safety,
and in their appropriate relation to the projected traffic demand of the land
to be served by such streets.
   B.   Arrangement Of Streets: The arrangement of streets in a subdivision
shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
streets in surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
commission to meet a particular traffic, circulation or topographic condition.
   C.   Arterial Or Major Collector Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial or major collector street, the
commission may require frontage streets, backage streets or similar treatment
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and control of
access.
   D.   Railroad Or Limited Access Highway Right Of Way: Where a subdivision
borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited access highway right
of way, the commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of such right of way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use
of the intervening land.
   E.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited, except where their control is placed in the county under conditions
approved by the commission.
   F.   Street Layout: Street layout shall provide for reasonable development
of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood, and shall provide for the
following:
      1.   Adequate access within a public right of way to adjoining lands when
there may be future development.
      2.   Streets intersecting at right angles, or as nearly as possible, to
meet the requirements of the county road standards.
      3.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this title, and where the planning commission finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. In all other instances where a half street is adjacent
to an undeveloped tract, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.
      4.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or may be
confused with the names of existing streets in any city or in the county area.
Street names shall be subject to the approval of the commission.
      5.   If street trees are to be installed, the minimum standard shall be
forty feet (40') to sixty feet (60') apart. No shrubbery, fencing, or other
obstruction exceeding three feet (3') in height will be allowed within a forty
foot (40') sight distance triangle at the street corner, except for traffic
control signs and street lighting, unless specifically authorized by the board.
      6.   Cul-de-sac streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be
longer than nine hundred feet (900') unless specifically approved by the
commission and board and shall be provided with a turnaround with a right of
way radius of at least sixty feet (60').
   G.   Property Lines: Property lines at street intersections shall be
chamfered at approximately a forty five degree (45o) angle with a minimum
chamfer leg of twenty feet (20') or rounded with a minimum radius of twenty
feet (20'). A greater radius or chamfer leg length may be required for
collector streets or where the commission deems it desirable, or upon
recommendations by the county engineer.
   H.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') should be avoided.
   I.   Driveways: Driveways on local streets should be offset a minimum
distance of fifty feet (50') from intersections with collector or external
streets. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
10-4-5: ALLEYS:
   A.   Commercial And Industrial Districts: Alleys shall be provided in
commercial and industrial districts, except that the commission may waive this
requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service
access, such as off street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
   B.   Width: The width of an alley shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Intersections And Sharp Changes In Alignment: Alley intersections and
sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall
be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement.
   D.   Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but
if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
dead end, as determined by the commission. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-4-6: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility Easements: There shall be provided easements for the utilities
upon and across the front of lots of a width of a minimum of twelve feet (12')
(except for entrance service) or as and where considered necessary by the
commission. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013)
   B.   Stormwater Easement Or Drainage Right Of Way: Where a subdivision is
crossed or bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, irrigation ditch, or
stream there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right of way
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further
width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
   C.   Drainage: Provisions for adequate drainage shall be made by the
subdivider as prescribed by the county engineer in accordance with the manual
containing the drainage standards and specifications as adopted by Valley
County.
   D.   Existing Easements: All existing easements must be shown on the
subdivision plat. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-4-7: PATHWAYS:
   A.   Rights Of Way Or Easements: New developments shall show pathway rights
of way or easements where development overlies key pathway corridors, as
identified in the Valley County pathways concept master plan.
   B.   Safe Pedestrian Travel: In new development areas where potential links
to the regional valleywide pathway system can be established, developers should
create neighborhood pathways, bike lanes, and/or sidewalks to encourage and
accommodate safe pedestrian travel to regional pathways. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-
2010)
CHAPTER 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Street And Utility Improvements
10-5-2: Other Off Site Improvements
10-5-3: Deposit For Completion Of Improvements
10-5-4: Due Notice Of Installation Of Improvements
10-5-5: Return Of Surety Upon Approval Of Improvements
10-5-1: STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Installation Required: Public street, utility, conduit for fiber
optics, and other off site improvements, as hereinafter listed, shall be
installed in each new subdivision at the subdivider's expense or at the expense
of the party agreeing to install the same, in accordance with the minimum
standards set forth below prior to the acceptance of any final plat for
recordation, except as provided in subsections C and D of this section. A right
of way permit will be required (see section
5-7-2 of this code).
   B.   Acceptance By County: The county shall not accept the dedication of any
public rights of way and any easements shown on the plat, together with
appurtenant facilities lying therein which the county would have a duty to
maintain after dedication, which are not improved, or construction thereof
guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of this title or with the
policies, standards, designs and specifications set forth in the road and
street specifications adopted by Valley County. The Valley County Board of
Commissioners have the sole discretion to set the level of service for any
public road; the level of service can be changed. All plats shall contain in
their notes this statement: "The Valley County Board of Commissioners have the
sole discretion to set the level of service for any public road; the level of
service can be changed."
   Dedication of public rights-of-way does not guarantee that the public road
will be maintained by Valley County. Public rights of way are allowed with
roads that are maintained by homeowners. Public rights of way shall be provided
through properties to adjacent lands for the purpose of circulation, when
reasonable.
   C.   Private Road Declaration: In the event that private roads, streets and
ways are shown on a subdivision plat, the width of the right of way must meet
specifications set forth in road and street specifications adopted by the board
of county commissioners. A private road declaration shall be recorded and state
that the county will have no responsibility for the installation or maintenance
of the private roads, shall describe who is responsible for maintenance of the
private roads, and describe the construction schedule for the private roads.
Construction of private roads shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and
shall be constructed to the minimum standards as set forth in the road and
street specifications for private roads adopted by the county.
   D.   Declaration Of Installation Of Utilities: A declaration of installation
of utilities shall also be recorded. The declaration shall describe the
utilities that will be placed by the subdivider, verify when the utilities will
be installed and state that Valley County will have no responsibility for the
installation or maintenance of utilities. If all utilities are not installed
prior to recordation of the plat, a note shall be placed on the face of the
plat that states: "Utilities have not been installed at the time of recordation
of this plat".
   E.   Connection To Public Road Required: The county shall not accept any new
subdivision unless the streets within the subdivision, whether public or
private, are connected directly to an existing public road. In the event the
subdivision is not connected to a public road with an approved minimum standard
as determined by the Valley County Road Director, then the subdivider shall
construct, or guarantee the construction as provided by this title, a connector
road to county standards, either private roads or public roads, which shall
provide access to the subdivision. All subdivisions shall be required to be
accessed by a road system that meets the minimum standard as determined by the
Valley County Road Director. When access has historically been provided through
the subdivision to other ownerships, the subdivider shall provide for
continuation of the public right of way. (Ord. 13-5, 9-16-2013; amd Ord. 21-08,
6-28-2021)
10-5-2: OTHER OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Potable Water Systems: The minimum standards and specifications for
public potable water systems shall comply with the current standards of the
Idaho department of environmental quality or successor agency.
   B.   New Wells: The minimum standards and specifications for construction of
new wells shall comply with current minimum well construction standards as
adopted by the Idaho department of water resources or successor agency.
   C.   Public Or Private Facilities For Sewage And/Or Potable Water: The
minimum standards and specifications for the installation of public or private
facilities for sewage and/or potable water shall be as set forth by the local
health agency of competent jurisdiction or the Idaho department of
environmental quality or successor agency, as applicable.
   D.   Solid Wastes And Refuse: The minimum standards and specifications to be
followed in the control and disposition of solid wastes and refuse shall be as
set forth in the current standards of the Idaho department of environmental
quality or successor agency.
   E.   Pathways: Development of pathways should be negotiated with the
planning and zoning commission and the Valley County pathways committee. (Ord.
10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-5-3: DEPOSIT FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Surety Agreement: A subdivider or other interested party, in lieu of
completion of the required minimum street and other improvements required by
section
10-5-1 of this chapter and in compliance with the schedules of required street,
utility, and other improvements set forth in section
10-5-2 of this chapter, or any portion thereof, may deposit with the county
clerk, a surety bond or performance bond, or a certified check or cashier's
check drawn on a bank qualified to do business in the state, or a cash deposit,
or a letter of credit, or assignment of funds on deposit in a bank or building
and loan association, qualified to do business in the state, and only when such
financial institutions have received a copy of the surety arrangements and have
agreed in writing to abide by the conditions set forth therein and the amount
of such surety called for to be equal to not less than one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the cost of required improvements according to the estimate
made by the subdivider and verified by the Valley County engineer; and in all
cases such surety shall be drawn in favor of, and payable to the order of,
Valley County, in accordance with the provisions contained in the surety
agreement by and between the guarantor and Valley County. Such surety agreement
shall contain suitable provisions requiring the subdivider to construct all
improvements in accordance with Valley County standards and specifications,
subject to inspection and approval by the Valley County engineer and for
completion within one year from date of recording of said plat.
   B.   Right To Extend Period Of Construction: The county shall reserve the
right to extend the period of construction for a year, or to construct the
required improvements with county forces (or with contracted forces) and charge
the sureties posted for such work.
   C.   Correction Of Deficiencies At Later Date: In order to guarantee that
the construction of the improvements will stand the test of time and to assure
the public of a near maintenance free facility, the county shall retain a
surety in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the original surety for a
period of two (2) years after the original construction has been accepted. If,
during this two (2) year period, it is discovered that the original
construction was deficient due to drainage, settling, defective or insufficient
materials or other unforeseen circumstances, then the county engineer shall
notify the subdivider to correct these deficiencies in the construction and
repair the facility back to county standards. If deficiencies are not corrected
within thirty (30) days, or such additional time as deemed reasonable by the
county engineer, the county engineer may cause such deficiencies to be remedied
and use the subdivider's surety funds to pay for such remediation upon approval
of the board. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-5-4: DUE NOTICE OF INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall be required to give the Valley County engineer five (5)
business days' notice prior to the beginning of any and all construction of
required improvements to be dedicated to the public and secure a permit from
the Valley County engineer for such work. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-5-5: RETURN OF SURETY UPON APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Where an acceptable surety arrangement is deposited as provided in section
10-5-3 of this chapter, and the work thereby guaranteed has been completed,
notice in writing of such completion, together with sets of prints of the plans
and specifications for all improvements, as built, and requests for the return
of the surety arrangement shall be given in duplicate to the administrator, who
shall immediately give one copy thereof to the Valley County engineer for
verification and certification of completion of work. Upon the administrator
receiving said certificate, as provided in section
10-3-3-5 of this title, the administrator shall give notice to the county clerk
to release the sureties heretofore deposited with said county clerk in the
manner and to the extent as provided for in the surety agreement referred to in
section
10-5-3 of this chapter and commensurate to the extent of the acceptance by the
Valley County engineer of the improvements called for in exhibit A of the said
surety agreement. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
CHAPTER 6
APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
10-6-1: Street Dedications; Grant Of Rights Of Way Or Easements
10-6-2: Vacations Of Plats, Public Rights Of Way Or Easements
10-6-1: STREET DEDICATIONS; GRANT OF RIGHTS OF WAY OR EASEMENTS:
   A.   Filing Of Application Required: Any person wishing to dedicate a
street, right of way or easement for the benefit of the public within the
unincorporated area of Valley County shall complete and file with the
administrator an "application for dedication of street, or grant of right of
way or easement".
   B.   Placement On Commission Agenda: Upon receipt of the completed
application and such other information as he may require, the administrator
shall place said application on the agenda of the commission to be considered
at its next regular meeting. The application shall be subject to the same time
limits prescribed for preliminary plat application.
   C.   Proposed Dedication Within One Mile Of Incorporated City: Where such
proposed dedication lies within one mile of the incorporated limits of any
city, village or town, the application shall be submitted to the proper
officials of said city, village or town for their review.
   D.   Commission Review: The commission shall review the proposed dedication
for conformance with the comprehensive plan and neighborhood plan and shall
consider its relationship to all existing and proposed streets and other
developments.
   E.   Improvement Plans: Improvement plans shall be in conformance with
Valley County specifications for pedestrian pathways, roads and streets and
shall be subject to the approval of the county engineer.
   F.   Commission Recommendations: The commission shall make recommendations
concerning the application to the board who may accept or reject the proposed
dedication and improvements.
   G.   Acceptance By Board: When the board accepts a dedication of land, such
acceptance shall be noted in the official minute book of the board, and a deed
describing and conveying such lands to Valley County for rights of way or other
purposes shall be filed with the county recorder by the applicant. (Ord. 10-07,
8-26-2010)
10-6-2: VACATIONS OF PLATS, PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY OR EASEMENTS:
   A.   Filing Of Application Required: An applicant wishing to vacate an
existing subdivision, portion thereof, public right of way, or easement shall
complete and file with the administrator an "application for total or partial
vacation of an existing subdivision or other public right of way". This action
shall be supplemental to, and in no way in conflict with, the applicant's
obligation to comply with the provisions contained in Idaho Code sections 50-
1317 through 50-1325.
   B.   Placement On Commission Agenda: Upon receipt of the completed
application, the administrator shall place said application on the agenda of
the commission to be considered at its next regular meeting, subject to the
same time limits prescribed for preliminary plat applications.
   C.   Commission Review: The commission shall review the proposed vacation
with regard to future development of the neighborhood. The commission shall
also take into consideration the interests of adjacent property owners, of
utilities, and of various public agencies where pertinent to the application.
   D.   Commission Recommendation: Within ten (10) days, the commission shall
make its recommendation concerning the application to the board who shall hold
a public hearing and give such public notice as required by law.
   E.   Board Action: The board may approve, deny or modify the application and
shall record its action in the official minute book of the meetings of the
board. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated, the board shall
provide adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed, as prepared by the
applicant, for said vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed
by law. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
CHAPTER 7
WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE FIRE PROTECTION PLAN
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Definitions
10-7-3: Basis For Recommendation
10-7-4: Submission Requirements
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
Valley County's community wildfire protection plan acknowledges that wildfire
hazard areas exist throughout the county. Therefore, wildfire mitigation
actions are prudent to enable safe habitation in these fire environments. The
Valley County fire working group recommends that a requirement for the
development and approval of a wildland urban interface fire protection plan be
added as an addendum to the Valley County subdivision regulations ordinance.
The existence of said plan will assist the Valley County planning and zoning
commission and the structural fire districts in satisfying the current
subdivision regulation, subsection
10-3-2-6D7 of this title. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   APPROVED: Refers to approval as the result of review, inspection or tests by
reason of accepted principles.
   ASPECT: Generally refers to the direction to which a mountain slope faces.
For example: A slope that faces the sun in the afternoon has a westerly aspect
or is a west facing slope.
   DEFENSIBLE SPACE: Refers to that area between a building and an oncoming
wildfire where the vegetation has been modified to reduce the wildfire threat
and to provide an opportunity for firefighters to effectively defend the
building.
   FORESTED: Idaho Code title 38, chapter 1 (Idaho forestry act) defines
"forestland" as meaning "any land which has upon it sufficient brush or
flammable forest growth of any kind or size, living or dead, standing or down,
including debris or growth following a fire or removal of forest products, to
constitute a fire menace to life (including animal) or property".
   FUEL BREAK: An area, strategically located for fighting anticipated
wildfires, where the vegetation has been modified or removed so that fires
burning into it can be more easily controlled. Fuel breaks may divide fire
prone areas into smaller areas for easier fire control and to provide access
for firefighting.
   PROFESSIONAL: Can include qualified professional forester, fire ecologist,
or comparable experience. Professionals can be prequalified by the commission
or recommended by the Valley County fire working group and kept on record at
the planning and zoning office.
   PROFESSIONAL FORESTER: An individual holding at least a bachelor of science
degree in forestry from an accredited four (4) year institution. (This is
consistent with Idaho state tax commission rule 960 of the Idaho administrative
code, Idaho state tax commission, PDAPA 35.01.03, section 04.)
   SLOPE: The variation of terrain from the horizontal; the number of feet of
rise or fall per one hundred feet (100') measured horizontally, expressed as a
percentage.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed or parts joined
together in some manner.
   VALLEY COUNTY FIRE WORKING GROUP: This group is given charter by the Valley
County board of commissioners and is tasked with oversight of the community
wildfire protection plan. This group is represented by local fire departments,
SITPA, public land managers (USFS, IDL, BOR), bureau of homeland security, West
Central Highlands RC&D, Valley County Natural Resource Consultants, etc.
   WILDFIRE: An uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels, exposing
and possibly consuming structures.
   WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE AREA: That geographical area where structures and
other human development meets or intermingles with wildland or vegetative
fuels. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-7-3: BASIS FOR RECOMMENDATION:
Valley County adopted the 2006 international fire code, which references the
international wildland urban interface when dealing with wildlands. The
following addendum's structure set out in section
10-7-4 of this chapter is based on the 2006 wildland urban interface area
requirements section 405. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
10-7-4: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: All developers of proposed subdivisions shall provide a
wildland urban interface fire protection plan (the plan) for review and
approval by the planning and zoning commission with their preliminary plat
application or planned unit development submittal.
   B.   Content: The plan shall be based upon a site specific wildfire risk
assessment that includes consideration of location, topography, aspect,
flammable vegetation, climatic conditions and fire history. The plan shall
address water supply, access, fire protection systems and equipment, defensible
space, and vegetation management.
      1.   Preparation: The plan shall be developed by a "professional" (see
definition in section
10-7-2 of this chapter). Professionals can be prequalified by the commission
and a list will be maintained at the Valley County planning and zoning office.
      2.   Format: The plan shall consist of two (2) sections:
         a.   Wildfire Risk Assessment: This portion of the plan includes a map
and narrative describing the current status of the land to be developed. As a
minimum, the following must be included:
            (1)   Topographic map.
            (2)   Site description including discussion of slope(s), aspect(s),
and significant topographic features.
            (3)   Narrative describing existing vegetation and fuel hazards,
distribution and continuity.
            (4)   Fire history, including historical occurrence, causes,
typical wind and climatic conditions which influence fire behavior.
            (5)   Existing roads and bridges, including a description of
widths, grade percentages and weight limits.
            (6)   Location of existing structures and an estimate of the
proposed density, types and sizes of planned structures.
            (7)   Infrastructure that may affect wildland fire risk (i.e.,
existing power lines, railroad lines, propane tanks, etc.).
            (8)   Description of existing features that may assist in
controlling a wildfire (i.e., fuel breaks, water sources, etc.).
            (9)   Current structural and wildland fire jurisdictional agencies.
            (10)   Effect of proposed development on current wildland fire risk
within the development area and to adjacent landowners.
         b.   Wildfire Risk Mitigation: This portion of the plan includes a map
(s) and narrative detailing planned wildfire hazard mitigation actions to be
taken by the developer prior to individual lot development to mitigate risks to
life and property from wildland fire. Specific items to be addressed include:
            (1)   Access - planned ingress and egress routes.
            (2)   Water supply for structural and wildland fire response.
            (3)   Estimated response time and distances for jurisdictional fire
agencies.
            (4)   Planned internal fire protection systems and/or equipment,
including buried tanks, wells, hydrants, drylines, etc., along with protective
measures for systems and/or equipment.
            (5)   Proposed infrastructure, including bridge standards, road
widths, grades, signage, aboveground/belowground power lines, etc.
            (6)   Safety zone locations.
            (7)   Planned live and dead fuel treatment actions, including
modification through thinning, pruning, piling, chipping, and fuel break
construction; and removal through commercial harvest, chipping and hauling or
prescribed burning.
            (8)   Long term maintenance schedule to sustain fuel treatment
effectiveness.
            (9)   Analysis of the overall change in wildland fire risk within
the development and to adjacent landowners once the planned mitigation actions
are implemented.
      3.   Submittal, Implementation And Verification:
         a.   The plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application
to the Valley County planning and zoning office.
         b.   Planned mitigation work must be completed or financially
guaranteed prior to the recordation of the final plat. A schedule for the
phased completion of mitigation work may be approved in conjunction with
recordation of final plats.
         c.   Verification of completed implementation of mitigation actions
will be the responsibility of the jurisdictional structural fire district.
Where no structural fire district exists, the Valley County sheriff shall
appoint a county representative.
      4.   Exceptions: Proposed administrative plats of less than five (5) lots
and proposed subdivisions with lands less than twenty percent (20%) "forested"
(see definition in section
10-7-2 of this chapter) are exempt from the professional requirement. For
proposed subdivisions fitting these descriptions, the developer may complete
the plan (see the fire protection form). The plan for an administrative plat
can be approved by the administrator upon receiving an approval letter from the
fire district.
      5.   Cost: The cost and implementation of the plan preparation shall be
the responsibility of the applicant.
      6.   Plan Retention: The approved plan shall be retained at the Valley
County planning and zoning office and the jurisdictional fire district or
designated agency where no fire district exists. (Ord. 10-07, 8-26-2010)
TITLE 11
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: General Provisions
11-1-4: Administration
11-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
11-1-6: Legal Status Provisions
11-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authority:
      1.   The legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code
sections 46-1020, 46-1023, and 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt
floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum
floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human
life, health, and property. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Valley
County, Idaho, does hereby ordain the following provisions.
      2.   Section
9-6-2, "Flood Prone Areas", of this Code contains an overlay that should be
used in conjunction with this title.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of Valley County are subject to periodic
inundation that results in:
         a.   Loss of life and property;
         b.   Health and safety hazards;
         c.   Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
         d.   Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and
protection; and
         e.   Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      3.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life, health, and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      7.   Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
      8.   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
   D.   Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish
its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:
      1.   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
      3.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
      4.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
      5.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters. (Ord. 19-03, 1-
7-2019)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or
parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate
to the principal structure.
   ADDITION (To An Existing Building): An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL: A request for review of the Floodplain Coordinator's interpretation
of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet
(3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the Federal Insurance
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area,
it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or
other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation,
when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: See definition of structure.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities
or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation,
police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the
flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment
plant.
   DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points)
from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the Federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
   DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as: the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial
improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and
pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
   ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The Elevation Certificate is an important
administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood
insurance premium rate; it is used to document elevation information; and it
may be used to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter
of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F).
   ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area
formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or
partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below
the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
   ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
   EXISTING STRUCTURES: See definition of existing construction.
   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION: See definition of base flood elevation (BFE).
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: See definition of Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map
(DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations;
or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
      3.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding
as defined in subsection A2 of this definition and are similar to a river of
liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when
earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
   B.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in subsection A1 of this definition.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard.
   A.   In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations (BFEs) have
been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet (2') of
freeboard; and
   B.   In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been established, this
elevation shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area, and applicable
insurance rate.
   FLOODPLAIN COORDINATOR: The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations. Also referred to as "Administrator".
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, Building Codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control
ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes such
State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
   FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation
(BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE).
Freeboard shall be two feet (2').
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic
District or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered Historic District;
   C.   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1.   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or
      2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F).
      Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment
as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies
with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon
submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building
permits and/or flood development permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR,
because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
      Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to an
effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a
property's or structure's location in relation to the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property or structure has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high
ground above the base flood elevation.
      Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of
physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a
flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory
floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood
hazard area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when
appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally
accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM or FIS
report.
      Letter Of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The
LOMR-F does not change the FIRM or FIS report.
   LEVEE: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to
the structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to
building elevation information.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3 and this
chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which base flood elevations
(BFEs) shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): Describes a condition where there is a river,
flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the
mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a Federal program
created by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound,
community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to
affordable, Federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
Any construction started after September 5, 1990, and before the effective
start date of this chapter is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time
the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
   POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before September 5, 1990, the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis, and
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, and
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See definition of floodway.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE: A NFIP-insured structure that has had at least
two (2) paid flood losses of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each in
any 10-year period since 1978.
   RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard
area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVISION: Any division of land.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
See definition of "substantial improvement".
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure" and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS: FEMA publications that
provide guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP,
which are contained in title 44 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations section
60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by State and
local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and
by members of the development community, such as design professionals and
builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued
periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create regulations. Rather they
provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of
existing NFIP regulations.
It should be noted that technical bulletins and technical fact sheets provide
guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
restrictive State or local regulations apply to the building or site in
question. All applicable standards of the State or local Building Code must
also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
   TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED: Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Governing Body from a requirement of this
chapter.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur. (Ord. 19-03, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
11-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of Valley County, Idaho,
except for the City of McCall Impact Area. Nothing in this chapter is intended
to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning
ordinance.
   B.   Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator, a scientific and engineering
report titled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Valley County, Idaho and
Incorporated Areas", dated February 1, 2019, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs), and other
supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter.
The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the Valley County Planning and Zoning
Office located at 219 N. Main, Cascade, Idaho.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities within special
flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-1-4B of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter shall not in any way
repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions,
etcetera. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of Valley County, Idaho, or by
any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   H.   Penalties For Violation: No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Valley County, Idaho
from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 19-03, 1-7-2019)
11-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Administrator: The Planning and Zoning Administrator,
hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain Coordinator", is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Coordinator: The
Floodplain Coordinator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following
duties:
      1.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, State, and Federal permits have been received,
including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 USC 1334.
      3.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water
Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA). (This is the
LOMC procedure.)
      4.   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      5.   Prevent encroachments into floodways unless the certification and
flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection
11-1-5E of this chapter are met.
      6.   Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
subsection C3 of this section.
      7.   Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this
section.
      8.   Review plans to verify all public utilities reconstructed in
accordance with the provisions of subsections
11-1-5A5 through A7 of this chapter.
      9.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
and maintain certifications from a registered professional engineer or
architect in accordance with the provisions of subsections C3 of this section
and
11-1-5B2 of this chapter.
      10.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, or floodways (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this section.
      11.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data,
along with floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source,
including data developed pursuant to subsection
11-1-5C2 of this chapter, in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
      12.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter require that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
community. (This is a Hydraulic and Hydrology Analysis.)
      13.   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure
or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area
(SFHA) is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of
the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a
copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
      14.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration
of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
      15.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant
to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Coordinator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Coordinator has a
right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within
the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
      16.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Coordinator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
      17.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Coordinator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may
also be revoked.
      18.   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Coordinator and each
member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      19.   Follow through with corrective procedures of subsection D of this
section.
      20.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
      21.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including Letters of
Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of the
community's mapping needs.
      22.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
      23.   A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease
resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as
practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator
(FIA) of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance
with this chapter. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
      24.   Upon occurrence, notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA)
in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all FHBMs and FIRMs accurately represent the community's boundaries,
include within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for
reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for
which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
      25.   Determine if Valley County should hire a licensed engineer to
review any information provided. If a licensed engineer is required it shall be
at the expense of the applicant.
   C.   Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification
Requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Coordinator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Coordinator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
         a.   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
            (1)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area
of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
            (2)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated
on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter, or a statement that the entire lot is within the
special flood hazard area;
            (3)   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development
area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter;
            (4)   The boundary of the floodway(s) as determined in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter;
            (5)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
subsection
11-1-3B, C, or
11-1-5C of this chapter;
            (6)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
            (7)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer.
         b.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within
a special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
            (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
            (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
            (3)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility equipment and machinery will be elevated or floodproofed.
         c.   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-
33) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise,
and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
         d.   A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
            (1)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation,
or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
            (2)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection
11-1-5A8 of this chapter when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30.
         e.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
         f.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
         g.   Certification that all other local, State, and Federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
         h.   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
subsections
11-1-5B5 and B6 of this chapter are met.
         i.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and
            (1)   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
      2.   Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall
include, but not be limited to:
         a.   A complete description of all the development to be permitted
under the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic,
bulkhead, cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials, etcetera).
         b.   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter.
         c.   The flood protection elevation required for the lowest floor and
all attendant utilities.
         d.   The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all
utility equipment and machinery.
         e.   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
         f.   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway area of any watercourse, as applicable.
         g.   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or
A1-30.
         h.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A
floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the start of
construction definition.
         i.   A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if
applicable (i.e., parking, building access and storage only).
         j.   A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood
resistant materials.
      3.   Certification Requirements:
         a.   Elevation Certificates:
            (1)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required
prior to the actual start of any new construction if the structure is within
three hundred feet (300') of the mapped area at the request of the Floodplain
Coordinator. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Coordinator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in
relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain Coordinator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure
to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
            (2)   A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate
(FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Coordinator a certification of final
as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Coordinator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as- built construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of
a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
The Finished Construction Elevation Certificate certifier shall provide at
least two (2) photographs showing the front and rear of the building taken
within ninety (90) days from the date of certification. The photographs must be
taken with views confirming the building description and diagram number
provided in subsection A of the elevation certificate. To the extent possible,
these photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the
building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two (2)
additional photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when
applicable, provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative
example of the flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and
measure at least 3" x 3". Digital photographs are acceptable.
         b.   Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is
used to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a Floodproofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan,
and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Coordinator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Coordinator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan,
and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit
the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with
the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate
of Compliance/Occupancy.
         c.   Manufactured Home: If a manufactured home is placed within Zone
A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty
six inches (36") in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification
is required in accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-1-5B3b of this chapter.
         d.   Watercourse Alteration Or Relocation: If a watercourse is to be
altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit
applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
            (1)   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
            (2)   A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
            (3)   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation; and
            (4)   An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval shall be
provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Coordinator.
         e.   Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/
floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections C3a and C3b
of this section:
            (1)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection
11-1-5B5 of this chapter;
            (2)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection
11-1-5B6 of this chapter; and
            (3)   Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet
meeting requirements of subsection
11-1-5B7 of this chapter.
      4.   Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, improvements, repairs of
damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures,
the Floodplain Coordinator, in coordination with the building official, shall:
         a.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
         b.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
         c.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
         d.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted
Idaho Building Code and this chapter is required.
   D.   Corrective Procedures:
      1.   Violations To Be Corrected: When the Floodplain Coordinator finds
violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
      2.   Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner
of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Coordinator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
         a.   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
         b.   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Coordinator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
         c.   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Coordinator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
      3.   Order To Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Coordinator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor
more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Coordinator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
      4.   Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective
action may appeal the order to the local elected Governing Body by giving
notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Coordinator and the Clerk within
ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an
appeal, the order of the Floodplain Coordinator shall be final. The local
Governing Body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
      5.   Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the Governing Body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
   E.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   The Valley County Board of Commissioners as established by Valley
County, hereinafter referred to as the "Appeal Board", shall hear and decide
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Variances may be issued for:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
         b.   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition as stated in section
11-1-2 of this chapter, provided provisions of subsections E9b, E9c, and E9d of
this section, have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety; or
         c.   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
      3.   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under section
11-1-2 of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      4.   The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the
factors in subsections E3a through E3k of this section with their application
for a variance.
      5.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
      6.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
      7.   The Floodplain Coordinator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of Idaho upon request.
      8.   Conditions for variances:
         a.   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
         b.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge.
         c.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         d.   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
         e.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      9.   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or
sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that
all of the following conditions are met.
         a.   The use serves a critical need in the community.
         b.   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
         c.   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the flood protection elevation.
         d.   The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and
local laws.
      10.   The Valley County Floodplain Coordinator will notify the State NFIP
Coordinator of the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to
grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the
variance.
      11.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535. (Ord. 19-03, 1-
7-2019)
11-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all special flood hazard areas the following
provisions are required:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in
accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      3.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
      4.   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      6.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      7.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      8.   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially
improved structures, and used solely for parking, access or storage, which is
below the lowest floor shall:
         a.   Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to
the flood protection elevation; and
         b.   Include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of
each enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (2)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (3)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
            (4)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
            (5)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions; and
            (6)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      9.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
      10.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date hereof
and located totally or partially within the floodway, or stream setback,
provided there is no additional encroachment below the flood protection
elevation in the floodway, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
chapter.
      11.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection
11-1-4E9 of this chapter. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage
incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or
wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area
only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least
the flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions
of subsection
11-1-4C3 of this chapter.
      12.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      13.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      14.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      15.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
      16.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals greater
than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include
within such proposals base flood elevation data.
      17.   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
      18.   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
      19.   Fill is prohibited in the SFHA, including construction of buildings
on fill. However, it does not include construction of bridges and/or other
necessary structures for transportation from one side of the floodplain to the
other so long as there is no adverse impact to adjacent properties. This
includes not approving Conditional Letters or Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR-
F or LOMR-F).
   B.   Specific Standards: In all special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter, or subsection D of this section, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, are
required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than the flood
protection elevation, as defined in section
11-1-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Non-Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non- residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than the
flood protection elevation, as defined in section
11-1-2 of this chapter. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30
may be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation
provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, below the flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing
elevation shall be in accordance with subsection F2 of this section. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Coordinator as set forth in subsection
11-1-4C3 of this chapter, along with the operational plan and the inspection
and maintenance plan.
      3.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than the flood protection
elevation, as defined in section
11-1-2 of this chapter.
         b.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho Manufactured
Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2).
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty six inches (36") in height, an engineering
certification is required.
         c.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of subsection B4 of this section.
         d.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Coordinator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
      4.   Additions/Improvements:
         a.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            (1)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more non-conforming than the existing structure; or
            (2)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         b.   Additions to non-compliant post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other
than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to
comply with the standards for new construction.
         c.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM non-compliant
structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any
interior modifications to the existing structure are:
            (1)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
            (2)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         d.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a ten
(10) year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building
or structure, the ten (10) year period begins on the date of the first
improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective
date hereof. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
            (1)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
            (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be for temporary
placement only. Temporary placement shall be on site for fewer than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days, between May 1 and November 30 each year, and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached
additions).
      6.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Coordinator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Coordinator for review and written approval:
         a.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one
year;
         b.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
         c.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
         d.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
         e.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
      7.   Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.), used solely for parking or storage, are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all accessory structures in accordance with subsection
11-1-4C3 of this chapter, and the following criteria shall be met:
         a.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
         b.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         c.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         d.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         e.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of subsection A1 of this section;
         f.   All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of subsection A4 of this section; and
         g.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of subsection A8 of this section.
         h.   Shall obtain a floodplain permit from the Floodplain Coordinator.
An accessory structure with a footprint less than two hundred (200) square feet
and is a minimal investment of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00)
or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in subsections B7a through B7g of
this section is not required to provide the elevation certificate per
subsection
11-1-4C3 of this chapter.
      8.   Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         a.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the
effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
         b.   Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be
attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
         c.   Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation
requirements of subsection B2 of this section shall be permitted in flood
hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and
constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of
flood-borne debris.
         d.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
            (1)   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with
covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents
of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
            (2)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
      9.   Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
         a.   The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and
must not be more than two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent grade
(LAG).
         b.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall,
must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
         c.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
         d.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five
feet (5') per second for any crawlspace.
See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information.
Caution: Buildings that have below-grade crawlspaces will have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace
construction, with the interior elevation of the crawlspace soil at or above
the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
      10.   Other Development In Regulated Floodways:
         a.   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
         b.   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve
the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of
subsection E of this section.
         c.   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into
regulated floodways, shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this
section.
         d.   Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage
tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
         e.   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection E of
this section.
      11.   Subdivision Plats; Flood Zones:
         a.   A note must be provided on the final plat documenting the current
flood zone in which the property or properties are located. The boundary line
must be drawn on the plat in situations where two (2) or more flood zones
intersect over the property or properties being surveyed.
         b.   FEMA FIRM panel(s): #160xxxxxxC, & 160xxxxxxE, etc.
            FIRM effective date(s): mm/dd/year
            Flood Zone(s): Zone X, Zone A, Zone AE, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone D,
etc.
            Base Flood Elevation(s): AE ____.0 ft., etc.
            Flood zones are subject to change by FEMA and all land within a
floodway or floodplain is regulated by title 9 of this Code and this title.
   C.   Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations:
Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A (also known as
unnumbered A Zones) and established in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been
provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
subsection A of this section, shall apply.
The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be
determined based on the following criteria:
      1.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in subsections A and B of
this section.
      2.   When floodway data is available from a Federal, State, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of subsections B and E of this section.
      3.   Any division of land including all subdivisions, manufactured home
parks, and other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE)
data if development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50)
lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be
adopted by reference in accordance with subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter and utilized in implementing this chapter. The
applicant/developer shall submit an application for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision (CLOMR) prior to preliminary plat approval and have obtained a Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR) prior to any building permits for structures being
issued.
See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265 for further information.
      4.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be
elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to two feet (2.0') above the highest
adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection elevation
(FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in section
11-1-2 of this chapter. All other applicable provisions of subsection B of this
section shall also apply.
   D.   Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But
Without Established Floodways: Along rivers and streams where base flood
elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source
but floodways are not identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or
in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development
within such areas:
      1.   Standards of subsections A and B of this section; and
      2.   Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical
data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
community.
   E.   Standards For Floodways: Areas designated as floodways are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection
11-1-3B of this chapter. The floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in subsections A and B of this section, shall apply to all development
within such areas:
      1.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         a.   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Coordinator prior
to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         b.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six (6)
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following
provisions are met:
         a.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection B3 of
this section; and
         b.   The encroachment standards of subsection E1 of this section.
   F.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, Or AR/AH):
Areas designated as shallow flooding areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to subsections A and B of this
section, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet (2'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four
feet (4') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      2.   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in subsection F1 of this section so
that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required in accordance with subsection
11-1-4C3 of this chapter, and subsection B2 of this section.
      3.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 19-
03, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord. 21-08, 6-28-2021)
11-1-6: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance: This chapter, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted August
27, 1990, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-
enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions,
so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved
and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action,
suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage
prevention ordinance of Valley County enacted on August 27, 1990, as amended,
which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
   B.   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain
development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Coordinator or his or her
authorized agents before the time of passage hereof. Provided, however, that
when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of
one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date of issuance of the
outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03, 1-7-2019)
TITLE 12
MOBILE HOMES
CHAPTER 1
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS AND PARKS; TRAVEL TRAILER COURTS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Definitions
12-1-2: Scope
12-1-3: Minimum Criteria Standards For Site Approval
12-1-4: General Design Requirements
12-1-5: Circulation Development
12-1-6: Individual Mobile Home Lots And Trailer Spaces
12-1-7: Water Supply
12-1-8: Sewage Disposal
12-1-9: Electrical Distribution System
12-1-10: Service Buildings And Other Community Service Facilities
12-1-11: Refuse Handling
12-1-12: Insect And Rodent Control
12-1-13: Fuel Supply And Storage
12-1-14: Fire Protection
12-1-15: Compliance With Health Practices
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Ordinary Words: No attempt is made to define ordinary words which are
used in accordance with their established dictionary meaning except where the
word has been loosely used and it is necessary to define its meaning as used in
this code to avoid misunderstanding.
   B.   Arrangement: Because the primary purpose is to define terms rather than
words, the definitions are arranged alphabetically according to the first word
of the term rather than the noun.
   C.   General Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meaning indicated in this section:
   BOARD: The board of county commissioners of Valley County, Idaho.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The official or other person, charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as it relates
to the enforcement of any health regulations, setback regulations, land use or
building codes which have been or shall be adopted by the board.
   COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of Valley County, Idaho.
   CONDITIONAL USE: Use or occupancy of a structure or use of land permitted
only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations
and conditions specified therein. A conditional use permit for a use in any
district which is listed in the district regulations as a conditional use for
the class of district shall be authorized only in accordance with the
regulations of such section.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY: The legally designated health authority or its authorized
representative of the political subdivision concerned.
   MOBILE HOME: A transportable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year
round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, and
electrical conveniences as immobile housing.
   MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home
and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use.
   MOBILE HOME STAND: Part of an individual lot which has been reserved for
placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures, or additions.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS: A parcel of land subdivided into lots, each lot
individually owned and utilized as the site for placement of a single mobile
home and its facilities.
   OCCUPANCY PERMIT: A permit issued by a duly designated zoning official or
building official authorizing the occupancy and use of completed buildings,
structures, facilities and premises after all conditions specified have been
met and approvals required on the zoning permit have been secured.
   PERSON: Any individual firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation.
   SANITARY STATION: A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from
trailer holding tanks.
   SERVICE BUILDING: A structure housing toilet, lavatory, and such other
facilities as may be required by this chapter.
   SERVICE SINK: A slop sink with a flushing rim for the disposal of liquid
wastes from trailers.
   SETBACK AREA: The space on a lot required to be left open either by the
front, side or rear yard requirements of this chapter or by delineation on a
recorded subdivision map or recorded covenants.
   SEWER CONNECTION: The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the drain outlets of the mobile home or trailer to the inlet
of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile
homes or trailer housing area.
   SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically
to the ground elevation and terminates at each trailer space or mobile home
lot.
   STREET, COLLECTOR: Collector streets are thoroughfares used primarily for
carrying traffic from minor streets to arterials when designated as such by the
board.
   STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street providing access to abutting properties.
   STREET, HIGHWAY: A street so designated as a state or federal highway by the
state or federal agency responsible therefor.
   STREET, LINE: A line separating an abutting lot, or parcel from a street.
   STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL: A major arterial is a thoroughfare as defined in
section
 10-1-6 of this code.
   STREET, MINOR: A street used exclusively for access to abutting properties.
   STREET, PRIVATE: Any parcel of land used for a street, road, lane or way or
similar designation which has not been maintained by the county for a
continuous period of five (5) years, or has not been officially accepted by the
board for perpetual maintenance in behalf of the public and the acceptance
thereof entered into the minute book of the board, or having been improved to
meet the county road standards, has not been dedicated to the county and so
accepted by the board, and the dedication and acceptance thereof made a matter
of record with the county.
   TRAILER: Any of the following:
    Camper Or Pickup Coach: A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
    Camping Trailer: A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
    Dependent Trailer: A trailer which is dependent upon a service building for
toilet and lavatory facilities.
    Motor Home: A portable temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation
and vacation constructed as a integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
    Self-Contained Trailer: A trailer which can operate independent of
connections to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains a water flushed
toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water
storage and sewage holding tanks located within the trailer.
    Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of
the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width
not exceeding eight feet (8'), and a body length not exceeding thirty two feet
(32').
   TRAILER SPACE: A parcel of land in a travel trailer parking area for the
placement of a single trailer and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   TRAILER STAND: That part of an individual trailer space which has been
reserved for the placement of a single trailer and its accessory structures.
   TRAVEL TRAILER COURT: Any area, tract, plot, site or parcel of land
whereupon two (2) or more trailers are maintained for dwelling purposes only,
the tenure being on a short time basis for which a rental fee is paid or made
collectible to the person holding the land, and is located on a highway or
major county road in order to serve transient traffic.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any area, tract, plot, site or parcel of land whereupon
two (2) or more trailers are placed for dwelling purposes only, the tenure
being for a short seasonable time basis, for which a rental fee is paid or made
collectible to the person holding the land, and is located on a route to, or
adjacent to, a recreational area.
   WATER CONNECTION: The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home or trailer.
   WATER RISER PIPE: That portion of the water supply system serving the travel
trailer parking area which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home stand or trailer space.
   WATERING STATION: A facility for supplying water storage tanks of trailers
with portable water.
   ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by a duly designated zoning official which
is for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of the county
zoning ordinance. (Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-2: SCOPE:
   A.   Compliance With Minimum Standards: All classifications of developments
designed to house mobile homes or trailers, as herein defined, shall comply
with the minimum standards hereby established for the selection of approved
sites for development and for required improvements thereon and appurtenant
thereto.
   B.   Types Of Development: It is hereby recognized that there are two (2)
distinct basic types of developments for the permanent housing of mobile homes
and two (2) distinct types of developments for the housing of trailers.
      1.   Mobile Home Subdivision; Mobile Home Park: The mobile home
subdivision is for sale of individual lots to owner occupants, the mobile home
park is for occupancy made available to owners of mobile homes on a rental
basis.
      2.   Trailer Court: The trailer court is located on a highway and
oriented to serve owners of trailers en route to other places. The trailer park
being a destination point for a relative short time stay for recreationists and
vacationers with trailers.
   C.   Site Classifications: With this in view, the standards containing
approved criteria for site selection, required improvements thereto, and
standards for improvements thereon, are set forth under four (4) site
classifications:
      Standard MHS-1 for mobile home subdivisions
      Standard MHP-2 for mobile home parks
      Standard TTC-3 for travel trailer courts
      Standard TTP-4 for travel trailer parks
   (Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-3: MINIMUM CRITERIA STANDARDS FOR SITE APPROVAL:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Access To Site:
A. Character Of Access Street: Direct vehicular access
to the court shall be provided by means of an abutting
improved public street or way or improved and           X     X     X     X
permanently maintained private street or way which is
protected by a permanent easement. Sole vehicular
access shall not be by an alley.
B. Street Width And Construction: Street width and
construction of the access streets or ways shall be     X     X     X     X
suitable for the vehicular traffic requirements of the
properties served.
C. Frontage On Access Street: The site shall have       X     X     X     X
reasonable frontage on the required access street.
Accessibility: It is essential that a site providing
permanent occupancy for mobile homes be readily
accessible the year round to essential community        X     X
facilities and services such as employment centers,
shopping centers, schools and recreational areas.
Buffers, Screening Or Separation Areas: It is
recognized that mobile homes and trailers differ in
appearance from conventional homes. Therefore, it is
deemed advisable that mobile homes and trailers shall   X     X     X     X
not be interspersed with conventional homes; and that
adequate buffers, screening or separation areas should
be provided between developments housing mobile homes
or trailers and the other areas.
Location: Such sites should not be located near swamps,
marshes or other breeding places for insects and
rodents, or near heavy industrial districts with        X     X     X     X
objectionable odors or noise, nor be subject to the
probability of flood or erosion.
Soil, Groundwater Level, Drainage, Rock Formations And
Topography: The condition of soil, groundwater level,
drainage, rock formations, and topography shall be such X     X     X     X
as not to create hazards to the property or to the
health and safety of occupants.
Temporary Or Seasonable Occupancy: It is essential that
sites providing for only temporary or seasonable
occupancy for trailers be either located to serve
transient traffic and their travel related needs or be              X     X
located along routes to, or be adjacent to,
recreational or vacation areas, to serve as a stopping
place and serve vacationist recreational and daily
needs.
Water; Sewer: The availability of an adequate water
supply and satisfactory means of sewage disposal are    X     X     X     X
basic considerations in selecting a suitable site.
Well Drained; Free From Hindrances Or Unfavorable
Conditions: Sites selected for mobile home and trailer
occupancy shall be well drained and free from           X     X     X     X
topographical or geological hindrances or other
conditions unfavorable to proper enjoyment by user.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-4: GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Adaptation To Site Assets: The mobile home or trailer
unit shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum
disturbance of the land. Existing trees, rock           X     X     X     X
formations, and other natural site features shall be
reserved to the extent practicable. Favorable views or
outlooks should be emphasized by the plan.
Arrangements Of Structures And Facilities: The site,
including mobile home or trailer stands, patios,
structures, and all site improvements shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to
topography, the shape of the plot, and the shape, size  X     X     X     X
and position of structures and common facilities and
with full regard to use, appearance and livability.
Special attention should be given to new mobile home
and trailer designs and the common appurtenances that
are available.
Community Facilities: Community facilities and other
needed uses not classified as a residential use should
be appropriately located with respect to the population
to be served. Residential units should be separated or  X     X     O     O
insulated from areas of heavy traffic noise, commercial
and industrial activities and should merge with parks
and other suitable open areas and community facilities.
Drives, Carports And/Or General Parking Areas: Location
of drives, carports and/or general parking areas should
be appropriately related to the unit and other areas of
the lot. Ease and safety of ingress and egress to each
lot and convenience of access to the mobile home or     X     X     X     X
trailer must be considered. Desirable views from the
unit should not be blocked by drives or parking spaces,
nor should drives and parking spaces break up important
use areas of the lot or adjoining lots.
General: Site planning should adapt to individual site
conditions, type of market to be served, reflect
advances in site planning techniques and be adaptable
to the trends in design of the mobile home or trailer,  X     X     X     X
itself. An informal park type of site planning which
conforms to the natural terrain, existing trees and
shrubs and rock formations is preferred. Adoption of a
stylized pattern should be avoided.
Groupings Or Clusters: Groupings or clusters of units
which fit well together and provide neighborliness and  X     X           
attractive interior areas but yet provide a
separateness about each unit should be encouraged.
Methods Of Groupings: Blocks, cul-de-sacs, clusters,
loop streets and other methods of groupings should be   X     X           
so designed and oriented to provide a substantial
number of lots of desirable widths and depths.
Movement On And Off Lot: Consideration must be given to
the movement of the mobile home and trailer unit onto
and off the lot. However, in the case of mobile home    X     X     X     X
subdivisions, the amount of movement is limited; hence,
a more desirable and proper orientation of the unit on
the lot is more important than the ease of access.
Objective: Site planning and improvements shall provide
for a) facilities and amenities appropriate to the
needs of the occupants, b) safe, comfortable and        X     X     X     X
sanitary use by the occupants under all weather
conditions, and c) practical and efficient operation
and maintenance of all facilities at reasonable costs.
Open Areas: The mobile home and trailer lot should
provide usable, open and private areas which are        X     X     X     X
appropriately related to functional areas of the mobile
home and trailer unit.
Open Areas On Lot Complement Adjacent Lots: The mobile
home, trailers and open areas on one lot should
complement and supplement those on adjacent lots. Open  X     X     X     X
areas should flow together creating openness and
enhancing primary views.
Periphery Screen; Entrance: Mobile home subdivisions
and parks should be designed with a periphery screen
consisting of a wall, fence or tree and shrub border    X     X           
and they should have an attractively designed entrance
over which the manager can exercise close control.
Protection From Adverse Influences:                                     
A. Adequate protection shall be provided from
undesirable off site views of any adverse influence     X     X     X     X
from adjoining streets and areas.
B. Park facilities shall be arranged to create a
homelike atmosphere. This objective is achieved by      X     X     X     X
variations in the street pattern, block shapes and                      
location of mobile home stands. Excessive repetition of
the principal elements of the plan is not acceptable.
Scale And Shape: Lots should be so scaled and shaped
that a reasonable variety of mobile homes and additions X     X           
can be placed on the lot.
Street Design Pattern: The general street design
pattern should fit the topography and at the same time
provide a circulation system which effectively and
safely serves each lot. Land devoted to streets should  X     X     X     X
be held to a minimum and through traffic should be
discouraged. Minor streets should be appropriately
designed so that they safely fit into a collector and
major street system.
Suitability Of Site Improvements: All site improvements
shall be appropriate to the type of development and     X     X     X     X
durable under the use and maintenance contemplated.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-5: CIRCULATION DEVELOPMENT:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Accessway To Mobile Home Stand:                         X     X     X     X
A. Objective: Convenient access shall be provided to
each mobile or trailer home stand by means of an
accessway reserved for maneuvering a mobile home or                     
trailer into position and kept free from trees and
other immovable obstructions.
B. Width: Minimum width of accessway shall be 12 feet,
plus extra width as necessary for maneuvering a mobile  X     X     X     X
home on a curve, and as required by newer mobile home
models.
Block Size And Shape: The street system shall be
designed with blocks of proper size and shape to
provide desirable mobile home lots and to reduce        X     X           
excessive length of street construction without
impairing convenient circulation and access.
Circulation: The street system shall provide convenient
circulation by means of minor streets and properly
located by collector streets. Closed ends of dead end   X     X           
streets shall be provided with adequate paved vehicular
turning or backing space. A turning circle shall be at
least 80 feet diameter.
Driveways:                                              X     X     X     X
A. Extent: Driveways shall be provided on the site
where necessary for convenient access to service
entrances of buildings, to delivery and collection      X     X     X     X
points for coal, refuse and other material, and
elsewhere as needed.
B. Width: Driveway serving a single facility or single
mobile home lot: full width driveway: minimum 8 feet;   X     X     X     X
where used as walk, minimum 10 feet.
Extent Of Improvements: The street improvements shall
extend continuously from the existing improved street
system to provide suitable access to the mobile home
stands and other important facilities on the property,  X     X           
to provide adequate connections to existing or future
streets at the boundaries of the property and to
provide convenient circulation for vehicles.
General: Streets shall be provided on the site where
necessary to furnish principal trafficways for
convenient access to the mobile home or trailer stands  X     X     X     X
and other important facilities on the property. Streets
shall be privately owned except in mobile home
subdivisions.
Pavements And Surfacings Other Than Cement: Pavements
and surfacings other than cement concrete shall be
protected at the edges by curbs, gutters or other       X     X     X     X
suitable edging where necessary to prevent raveling of
the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base.
Recognition Of Existing Facilities: The street system
shall be designed: a) to recognize existing easements,
utility lines, etc., which are to be preserved; and b)  X     X     X     X
to permit connection to existing facilities where
necessary for the proper functioning of the drainage
and utility systems.
Required Off Street Parking Areas:                                      
A. Off street parking areas shall be provided in all
mobile home parks for the use of park occupants and     X     X     X     X
guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at
least 1.25 car spaces for each mobile home lot.
B. Required car parking spaces shall be so located as
to provide convenient access to the mobile home, but    X     X           
shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the mobile
home that it is intended to serve.
Street System:                                                          
A. General Requirements: All mobile home subdivisions
and parks shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads  X     X     O     O
to each mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient shall
be properly adapted to topography.
B. Access: Access to mobile home subdivisions and parks
shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at
the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic
on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the
park streets with a public street or road shall have a
minimum road pavement width of 34 feet where parking is
permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement     X     X     O     O
width of 27 feet where parking is limited to 1 side.
Where the primary entrance road is more than 100 feet
long and does not provide access to abutting mobile
home lots within such distance, the minimum road
pavement width may be 24 feet, provided parking is
prohibited at both sides.
C. Internal Streets: Surfaced roadways shall be of
adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic; and,                 
in any case, shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
1. All streets except minor streets - 24 feet                           
2. Minor streets, no parking - 18 feet (Acceptable only
if less than 500 feet long and serving less than 25                     
mobile homes or of any length if one-way and providing
access to abutting mobile home lots on 1 side only.)
3. Cul-de-sac streets shall be limited in length to
1,000 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with                 
a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at
least 80 feet.
D. Required Illumination Of Park Street Systems: All
parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced
and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting    X     X     X     X
heights as will provide the following average
maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement
of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
1. All parts of the park street systems: 0.6 foot-      X     X     X     X
candle with a minimum of 0.1 foot-candle.
2. Potentially hazardous locations such as major street
intersections and steps or stepped ramps: individually  X     X     X     X
illuminated with a minimum of 0.3 foot-candle.
E. Street Construction And Design Standards:                            
1. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard
and dense surface which shall be durable and well
drained under normal use and weather conditions.
Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling   X     X     X     X
of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement
base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of
cracks, holes and other hazards.
2. Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to
ensure adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more
than 8 percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of 12   X     X     X     X
percent may be permitted, provided traffic safety is
assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas
and avoidance of lateral curves.
3. Intersections: Within 100 feet of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles. A
distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained       X     X     X     X
between centerlines of offset intersecting streets.
Intersections of more than 2 streets at 1 point shall
be avoided.
Street System For Trailers Only:                                        
A. General Requirements: All parking areas shall be
provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from
abutting public streets or roads to each trailer space.
Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to               X     X
topography. Surfacing and maintenance shall provide a
smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be well
drained.
B. Access: Access to travel trailer parking areas shall
be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at their
entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on            X     X
adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of the
parking areas shall be through such entrances and
exits.
C. Internal Streets: Surfaced roadways shall be of
adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic and,
in any case, shall meet the following minimum
requirements:                                                     X     X
 
One-way, no parking - 11 feet (acceptable only if less
than 500 feet total length and serving less than 25
trailer spaces)
One-way, parking on 1 side only, or two-way, no parking
- 18 feet (acceptable only if serving less than 50                      
trailer spaces).
Two-way, no parking - 24 feet                                           
Two-way, parking on 1 side only - 27 feet                               
Two-way, parking on both sides - 34 feet                                
D. Off Street Parking And Maneuvering Space: Each
travel trailer parking area shall provide sufficient
parking and maneuvering space so that the parking,
loading, or maneuvering of trailers incidental to                 X     X
parking shall not necessitate the use of any public
street, sidewalk or right of way or any private grounds
not part of the travel trailer parking area.
Walks, General:                                                         
A. General Requirements: All parks shall be provided
with safe, convenient all season pedestrian access of
adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient
to maintain between individual mobile homes, the park   X     X     O     O
streets and all community facilities provided for park
residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient
shall be avoided.
B. Common Walk System: A common walk system shall be
provided and maintained between locations where         X     X     X     X
pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks
shall have a minimum width of 31/2 feet.
C. Individual Walks: All mobile home stands shall be
connected to common walks, to paved streets, or to
paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved X     X     O     O
street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum
width of 2 feet.
Walks, Specifications:                                                  
A. Objective: Safe, convenient all season pedestrian
access; of adequate width for intended use, durable and X     X     O     O
convenient to maintain.
B. Extent: Individual walks to each mobile home stand
from a paved street or from a paved driveway or parking X     X     O     O
space connecting to a paved street.
C. Common Walks: In locations where pedestrian traffic
is concentrated; for example, at the court entrance,
and to the court office and other important facilities. X     X     O     O
Common walks should preferably be through interior
areas removed from the vicinity of streets.
D. Width, Alignment And Gradient: Width, alignment and
gradient of walks shall be appropriate for safety,
convenience and appearance and shall be suitable for    X     X     X     X
use both by pedestrians and for the circulation of
small wheeled vehicles such as baby carriages and
service carts.
E. Width: Width shall generally be at least 11/2 feet
for walks on individual lots and at least 3 feet for    X     X     O     O
common walks.
F. Changes: Sudden changes in alignment and gradient    X     X     X     X
shall be avoided.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-6: INDIVIDUAL MOBILE HOME LOTS AND TRAILER SPACES:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Individual Services And Facilities: The following shall                 
be provided for each mobile home or trailer space:
A. A continuing supply of safe and potable water.       X     X     X     X
B. Sanitary facilities and a safe method of sewage      X     X     X     X
disposal.
C. Electricity for artificial lighting and to serve     X     X     X     X
electrical equipment used in the mobile home.
Lot Markers:                                                            
A. The limits of each lot in a mobile home subdivision
shall be surveyed by a registered engineer or land                      
surveyor and its boundaries staked in accordance with
the provisions contained in Idaho Code section 50-1303.
B. The limits of each lot lying within a mobile home
park, travel trailer court or travel trailer park shall      X     X     X
be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush
stakes, markers or other suitable means.
C. The location of lot limits on the grounds of mobile
home parks, travel trailer courts, or travel trailer
parks shall be approximately the same as shown on the
accepted plans. The degree of accuracy obtained by
working with a scale on the plan and then a tape on the      X     X     X
ground is acceptable. Except for the need to survey the
perimeter of parks and courts herein referred to, the
precise engineering of lot limits is not required
either on the plans or on the ground.
Lot Size: The minimal dimensions required for mobile
home lots served by public water and public sewer and
accommodating mobile homes up to and including overall  X     X           
dimensions of 60 x 35 feet, shall be 6,000 square feet
with a width of 60 feet and depth of 100 feet.
In case of mobile home subdivisions or mobile home
parks served with individual subsurface sewage disposal
facilities, the minimum lot dimensions shall be
increased to the extent of additional land needed for
compliance with bulletin no. 6 "Standards For Sub-      X     X           
Surface Sewage Disposal Systems" as duly adopted or
amended by the Idaho state department of health and is
as also needed to provide an alternate space for the
development of a subsurface sewage disposal system on
each lot.
Minimum Setbacks For Mobile Homes: Only 1 mobile home
shall be permitted per lot for occupancy, and shall be  X     X           
so set as to be the following distances from the lines
hereinafter enumerated:
A. Front lot line - 15 feet.                            X     X           
B. Rear lot line - 10 feet.                             X     X           
C. Interior lot line - 6 feet.                          X     X           
D. Park area boundary line abutting upon a public       X     X           
street or highway - 25 feet.
E. Between mobile homes - 18 feet.                      X     X           
Minimum Setbacks For Trailers: Only 1 trailer shall be
permitted per lot for occupancy as a dwelling unit, and           X     X
shall be so placed on the lot as to be the following
distances from the lines herein enumerated:
A. Front lot line - 15 feet.                                      X     X
B. Rear lot line - 10 feet.                                       X     X
C. Interior lot line - 6 feet.                                    X     X
D. Park area boundary line abutting upon a public                 X     X
street or highway - 25 feet.
E. Between trailers - 15 feet.                                    X     X
F. The above setbacks herein established have been
arrived at predicated that no additional land will be
needed to comply with health requirements involving               X     X
well setbacks or subsurface sewage disposal
requirements.
G. Travel trailer courts and parks shall be required to
provide water to each site through a central
distribution system and to provide a sewage collection
system to serve each site for the transportation of the                 X
effluent to a remote treatment facility, such systems
being subject to the approval of the Idaho state
department of health or its duly designated
representative.
Mobile Home Or Trailer Stand:                           X     X     X     X
A. Objective: The objective of the stand requirement is                 
to provide for:
1. Practical placement on and removal from the lot of
the mobile home or trailer and their respective         X     X     X     X
appurtenant structures.
2. Retention of the home or trailer on the lot in a
stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to    X     X     X     X
its surroundings.
B. Size: The size of the stand shall be:                                
1. Suitable for the general market to be served by the  X     X     X     X
individual proposal.
2. To fit dimensions of mobile homes anticipated.       X     X     X     X
3. To accommodate mobile home or trailer appurtenant    X     X     X     X
structures or appendages.
C. Location: The location of each mobile home or
trailer stand shall be at such elevation, distance, and
angle in relation to the access street and the mobile   X     X     X     X
home or trailer accessway, that placement and removal
of the mobile home or trailer is practical.
D. Gradient: 0 percent -- 5 percent longitudinal and    X     X     X     X
adequate crown or cross gradient for surface drainage.
E. Construction: Appropriate material properly graded,
placed and compacted so as to be durable and adequate   X     X     X     X
for the support of the maximum anticipated loads during
all seasons.
F. Special Facilities: Special mobile home stand
facilities shall be provided as necessary to properly   X     X           
serve new units. Also special situations may require
special facilities in some locations.
Note: An alternate provision                                            
Mobile Home Stands: The area of the mobile home stand
shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for
the placement and tie down of the mobile home, thereby  X     X           
securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding,
rotation and overturning.
1. The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or
settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due                 
to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or
other forces acting on the superstructure.
2. The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors
and tie downs such as cast in place concrete "deadmen",
eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways,                    
screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices
securing the stability of the mobile home.
3. Anchors and tie downs shall be placed at least at
each corner of the mobile home stand and each shall be                  
able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800
pounds.
Patio:                                                  X     X     O     O
A. Objective: The objective of the patio requirements
is to provide an appropriate outdoor living space to
supplement the limited interior space of a mobile home.                 
Patio may be omitted when its equivalent is provided by
mobile home models.
B. Size: Minimum 180 square feet.                       X     X     X     X
C. Location: Patio location shall be: 1) convenient to
the entrance of the mobile home; 2) appropriately
related to open areas of the lot and other facilities;  X     X     X     X
3) fitted to terrain and natural features; and 4)
related to anticipated mobile home models.
D. Elevation: The patio shall be at an elevation at
least as high as the elevation of its mobile home stand X     X     X     X
with adequate crown or cross gradient for surface
drainage.
E. Construction:                                        X     X     X     X
1. Subgrade: Well drained uniformly graded, and         X     X     X     X
compacted.
2. Provide a useful outdoor surface constructed or
formed either monolithically or in movable units with                   
weather resistant materials placed sufficiently close
together to create a paved area.
Tenant Storage:                                         X     X     O     O
A. Objective: The objectives of the requirements for
tenant storage are to provide adequate storage                          
facilities on or conveniently near each mobile home
lot.
1. For the active storage of outdoor equipment,         X     X           
furniture and tools.
2. For the inactive storage of such other material as
is used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical  X     X           
tenant and cannot be conveniently stored in the typical
mobile home.
B. Size: Minimum 90 cubic feet for general storage for  X     X     X     X
each mobile home lot, when required.
C. Design And Location Of Storage Facilities: Unless
provided in current mobile home models, storage
facilities shall be provided on the lot, or in
compounds located within a reasonable distance,
generally not more than 100 feet from each stand.
Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that   X     X     X     X
will enhance the appearance of the court and shall be
constructed of suitable weather resistant materials
appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated.
Storage facilities shall comply with the provisions
contained in the section on structural standards.
Yards And Distances Between Stands And Structures: The  X     X     X     X
objectives of yard requirements are:
A. Distance Between: To obtain sufficient distances
between mobile homes or trailer stands on their
respective lots and obstructions on adjoining land to   X     X     X     X
assure privacy, adequate natural light and air, and
convenient access to the unit; and
B. Circulation: To provide for circulation around a
mobile home or trailer unit for such uses of the yard   X     X     X     X
spaces as are considered essential to the mobile home
or trailer.
C. Determination Of Yards: Yard width shall be measured
from the required mobile home or trailer lot line. At
every point, it shall be at least equal to the required
minimum. Expandable rooms, enclosed patios, garages or  X     X     X     X
structural additions shall be included in the mobile
home standard area. Patios, carports and individual
storage facilities shall be disregarded in determining
yard widths.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-7: WATER SUPPLY:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Individual Water Connections: If facilities for
individual water service connections are provided, the            X     X
following requirements shall apply:
A. Riser pipes provided for individual water service
connections shall be so located and constructed that              X     X
they will not be damaged by the parking of travel
trailers.
B. Water riser pipes shall extend at least 4 inches               X     X
aboveground elevation. The pipe size shall be 3/4 inch.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent                   X     X
freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes.
D. Underground stop and waste valves shall not be                 X     X
installed on any water service.
E. Valves shall be provided near the outlet of each
water service connection. They shall be turned off and                  
the outlets capped or plugged when not in use.
Individual Water Riser Pipes And Connections:                           
A. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within
the confined area of the mobile home stand at a point   X     X           
where the water connection will approximate a vertical
position.
B. Water riser pipes shall extend at least 4 inches
above ground elevation. The pipe shall be at least 3/   X     X           
4 inch. The water outlet shall be capped when a mobile
home does not occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent
freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes to
protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of      X     X           
ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall
be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be
provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile home  X     X           
lot.
E. Underground stop and waste valves shall not be       X     X           
installed on any water service.
Source Of Supply:                                       X     X     X     X
A. The water supply shall be capable of supplying a                     
minimum of 150 gallons per day per mobile home.
B. Every well or suction line of the water supply
system shall be located and constructed in such a
manner that neither underground nor surface             X     X     X     X
contamination will reach the water supply from any
source. The following minimum distances between wells
and various sources of contamination shall be required.
Contamination    Well Or Suction Line
         Sources   Distance In Feet  
 
Building sewer   50
Septic tank   50                                                     
Disposal field   100
Seepage pit   100
Dry well   50
Cesspool   150
C. No well casings, pumping machinery or suction pipes
shall be placed in any pit room or space extending
below ground level nor in any room or space aboveground X     X     X     X
which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such
rooms, whether aboveground or belowground have free
drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground.
D. The treatment of a private water supply shall be in  X     X     X     X
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Water Distribution System:                                              
A. The water supply system of the mobile home parks
shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes,             X           
buildings, and other facilities requiring water.
B. All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall
be constructed and maintained in accordance with Idaho
state department of reclamation and the Idaho state     X     X     X     X
plumbing board regulations and requirements shall be of
a type and in locations approved by the Idaho state
department of health.
C. The water piping system shall not be connected with
nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be  X     X     X     X
protected against the hazards of backflow or back
siphonage.
D. The system shall be so designed and maintained as to
provide a pressure of not less than 20 pounds per
square inch under normal operating conditions at        X     X     X     X
service buildings and other locations requiring potable
water supply.
Watering Stations: Each travel trailer parking area
shall be provided with 1 or more easily accessible
water supply outlets for filling trailer water storage
tanks. Such water supply outlets shall consist of at         X     X     X
least a water hydrant and the necessary appurtenances
and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow
and back siphonage.
Water Storage Facilities: All water storage reservoirs
shall be covered, watertight and constructed of
impervious material. Overflows and vents of such
reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes      X     X     X     X
shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to
prevent the entrance of contaminated material.
Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an
acceptable air gap.
Water Supply, General Requirements: An accessible,
adequate, safe, and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each mobile home subdivision or park and
each travel trailer court or park where a public supply                 
of water of satisfactory quantity, quality, and                         
pressure is available. Connection shall be made thereto X     X     X     X
and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory
public water supply is not available, a community water
supply system may be developed and used as approved by
the Idaho state health department.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-8: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
General Requirements: An adequate and safe sewerage
system shall be provided in all mobile home
subdivisions, parks and travel trailer courts and parks X     X     X     X
for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system
shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and local laws.
Individual Sewer Connections:                           X     X     X     X
A. Each mobile home and trailer stand shall be provided
with at least a 4 inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The
sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that                 
the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet
will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection (see definition) shall have a
nominal inside diameter of at least 3 inches and the
slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch X     X     X     X
per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of 1
pipefitting. All joints shall be only without any
branch watertight.
C. All materials used for sewer connections shall be
semirigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and        X     X     X     X
durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
D. Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser
pipe when a mobile home does not occupy the lot.
Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. X     X     X     X
The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least 4
inches above ground elevation.
Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser
pipe when a trailer does not occupy the space. Surface            X     X
drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.
 
Sanitary Stations: A sanitary station shall be provided
consisting of at least: a trapped 4 inch sewer riser
pipe, connected to the travel trailer parking area
sewerage system, surrounded at the inlet end by a
concrete apron sloped to the drain, and provided with a      X     X     X
suitable hinged cover; and a water outlet, with the
necessary appurtenances, connected to the parking area
water supply system to permit periodic washdown of the
immediate adjacent areas.
Sewage Treatment And/Or Discharge: Where the sewer
lines of the mobile home park are not connected to a
public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities
shall be approved by the health authority prior to      X     X     X     X
construction. Effluents from sewage treatment
facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of
the state except with prior approval of the Idaho state
health department.
Sewer Lines: All sewer lines shall be located in
trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage
from traffic or other movement and shall be separated
from the park water supply system at a safe distance.
Sewers shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity X     X     X     X
of 2 feet per second when flowing full. All sewer lines
shall be constructed of materials approved by the
health authority, shall be adequately vented, and shall
have watertight joints.
Sink Wastes: No liquid wastes from sinks shall be
charged onto or allowed to accumulate on the ground          X     X     X
surface.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-9: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
General Requirements: Every subdivision, court or park
shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which     X     X     X     X
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems.
Individual Electrical Connections For Mobile Homes:          X     X     X
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and overcurrent protective         X     X           
equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/
240 volts AC, 50 amperes.
Individual Electrical Connections For Trailers:                   X     X
A. If individual trailer spaces are connected to the
electrical wiring system, an approved type of
disconnecting device and overcurrent protective                         
equipment shall be provided. The service per outlet
shall be 120 volts AC, 15 amperes and/or 30 amperes.
B. Outlet receptacles at individual mobile home and
trailer spaces shall be located not more than 25 feet
from the overcurrent protective devices in the trailer
or mobile home, and a 3-wire grounding type shall be    X     X     X     X
used. Receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction
and configurations shall be in accordance with American
standard outlet receptacles C-73.1.
C. The trailer shall be connected to the outlet
receptacle by an approved type of flexible cable with             X     X
connectors and a male attachment plug.
D. Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more
than 50 amperes, either a second outlet receptacle           X           
shall be installed or electrical service shall be
provided by means of permanently installed conductors.
Power Distribution Lines:                               X     X     X     X
A. Main Power Lines: Main power lines not located
underground, shall be suspended at least 18 feet above
the ground. There shall be a minimum horizontal         X     X     X     X
clearance of 3 feet between overhead wiring and any
mobile home, service building or other structure.
B. Direct Burial Conductors Or Cable: All direct burial
conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18 inches
below the ground surface and shall be insulated and     X     X     X     X
specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors
shall be located not less than 1 foot radial distance
from water, sewer, gas or communication lines.
Required Grounding: All exposed noncurrent carrying
metal parts of trailers and all other equipment shall
be grounded by means of a grounding conductor run with
branch circuit conductors or other method of approved   X     X     X     X
grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall
not be used as an equipment ground for trailers or
other equipment.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-10: SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
   StandarMHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
   Standards                                         MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Barbecue Pits, Fireplaces, Stoves, Incinerators:
Barbecue pits, fireplaces, cooking shelters,
woodburning stoves and incinerators, shall be so        O     O     O     O
located, constructed, maintained, and used as to
minimize fire hazard and smoke nuisance both on the
property on which used and on neighboring property.
A. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities X     X     X     X
provided.
B. No open fire shall be left unattended.               X     X     X     X
C. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which   X     X     X     X
emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
General: The requirements of this section shall apply
to service buildings, recreation buildings and other    O     X     X     X
community service facilities such as:
A. Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;  O     X     X     X
B. Sanitary facilities;                                 O     X     X     X
C. Laundry facilities;                                       O     X     X
D. Indoor recreation areas;                             O     O     O     O
E. Commercial uses supplying essential goods or              O     O     O
services.
Required Community Sanitary Facilities: Every park
shall be provided with the following emergency sanitary
facilities: For each 100 mobile home lots or fractional
part thereof, there shall be 1 flush toilet and 1            X     X     X
lavatory for each sex. The building containing such
emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to
all mobile homes.
Service Building:                                            X     X     X
A. A central service building containing the necessary
toilet and other plumbing fixtures specified shall be
provided in travel trailer parking areas which provide                  
parking spaces for dependent trailers. Service
buildings shall be conveniently located within a radius
of approximately 300 feet to the spaces to be served.
   No. Of
   Parking    Toilets   Urinals Lavatories Showers    Other
   Spaces (1)   M   W      M   M      W   M   W   Fixtures (2)
 
      1 - 15   1   1      1   1    1   1   1   1-Service sink
      16 - 30   1   2      1   2 2   1   1   with a flushing
       31 - 45   2   2      1   3    3   1   1    rim (3)
      46 - 60   2   3      2   3    3   2   2
      61 - 80   3   4      2   4    4   2   2
      81 - 100   3   4      2   4    4    3   3
Notes: For parking areas having more than 100 travel trailer spaces, there
shall be provided: 1 additional toilet and lavatory for each sex per each
additional 30 travel trailer spaces; 1 additional shower for each sex per
additional 40 travel trailer spaces; and 1 additional men's urinal per each
additional 100 travel trailer spaces.
(1) Parking spaces for dependent trailers.
(2) Additional fixtures including laundry trays, clothing washing machines 1
for every 30 sites and an ice making machine may be provided.
(3) A service sink with a flushing rim shall be provided for disposal of liquid
wastes unless a sanitary station is conveniently accessible for this purpose.
B. Where a travel trailer parking area is designed for
and exclusively limited to use by self-contained
trailers, only the following minimum emergency sanitary           X     X
facilities shall be required; for each 100 trailer
spaces, or fractional part thereof, there shall be 1
flush toilet and 1 lavatory for each sex.
C. When a travel trailer parking area requiring a
service building is operated in connection with a
resort or other business establishment, the number of
sanitary facilities for such business establishment               X     X
shall be in excess of those required by the schedule
for trailer spaces and shall be based on the total
number of persons using such facilities.
D. Exemptions: Any person desiring to furnish temporary
facilities for accommodating a travel trailer rally or
other group of trailers assembled for the purpose of
traveling together, shall make application for such
activity to the health authority. The requirements for
a service building and other sanitary and physical
facilities may be waived by the health authority on the
determination that public health will not be                 O     O     O
endangered; but the location of the site, the
facilities which are provided, and the method of
conducting such rally shall be acceptable to the health
authority before a special license shall be issued
specifying the location of the site, the period of
operation not to exceed 10 days, and conditions of
issuance.
Structural Requirements For Buildings:                                  
A. All portions of the structure shall be properly
protected from damage by ordinary use and by decay,
corrosion, termites and other destructive elements.     X     X     X     X
Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so
constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or
penetration of moisture and weather.
B. All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities  X     X     X     X
shall:
1. Have sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling
between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and
partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and     X     X     X     X
other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with
moisture resistant material.
2. Have at least 1 window or skylight facing directly
to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of         X     X     X
windows for each required room shall be not less than
10 percent of floor area served by them.
3. Have at least 1 window which can be easily opened or
a mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the X     X     X     X
room.
C. Toilets shall be located in separate compartments
equipped with self-closing doors. The shower stalls
shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be     X     X     X     X
screened to prevent direct view of the interior when
the exterior doors are open.
D. Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
1) general seeing tasks - 5 foot-candles; 2) laundry    X     X     X     X
room work area - 40 foot-candles; 3) toilet room in
front of mirrors - 40 foot-candles.
E. Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every
lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture and X     X     X     X
cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and
urinal.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-11: REFUSE HANDLING:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
Standards MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Collection: All refuse containing garbage shall be
collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable
collection service is not available from a public or
private agency, the owner or operator of the mobile     X     X     X     X
home or travel trailer parking area shall provide this
service. All refuse shall be collected and transported
in covered vehicles or covered containers.
Containers: All refuse shall be stored in flytight,
watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be
located not more than 150 feet from any trailer space.  X     X     X     X
Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and
capacity to properly store all refuse.
Incinerators:                                                           
A. Construction: Refuse incinerators shall be
constructed in accordance with engineer plans and
specifications which shall be reviewed and approved by  X     X     X     X
the health authority or other authority having
jurisdiction.
B. Operation: Incinerators shall be operated only when
attended by some person specifically authorized by the                  
owner or operator of the mobile home or travel trailer
parking areas.
Refuse Collection Stands: Refuse collection stands
shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
container stands shall be so designed as to prevent     X     X     X     X
containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and
container deterioration and facilitate cleaning around
them.
Refuse Handling: The storage, collection and disposal
of refuse in the mobile home and travel trailer parking
area shall be so conducted as to create no health       X     X     X     X
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
accident, fire hazards, or air pollution.
Service Unavailable: Where municipal or private
disposal service is not available, the owner or
operator of the travel trailer parking area shall       X     X     X     X
dispose of the refuse by incineration or transporting
to a disposal site approved by the health authority.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-12: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
 
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Brush, Weeds And Grass: The growth of brush, weeds and
grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of
ticks, chiggers, and other noxious insects. Parking
areas shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth   X     X     X     X
of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and
other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health.
Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowth of any description.
Existing Infestations: Where the potential for insect
and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in X     X     X     X
or beneath any structure shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
Grounds, Buildings And Structures: Grounds, buildings
and structures shall be maintained free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods X     X     X     X
and other measures to control insects and rodents shall
conform with the requirements of the health authority.
Parking Areas: Parking areas shall be maintained free
of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent     X     X     X     X
harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and
other pests.
Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be so maintained as
to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other     X     X     X     X
building material shall be stored at least 1 foot above
the ground.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-13: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
 
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Fuel Oil Storage:                                                       
A. All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be
securely fastened in place and shall not be located                     
inside or beneath any trailer or less than 5 feet from
any trailer exit.
B. Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic    X     X     X     X
shall be protected against physical damage.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas:                                X     X     X     X
A. Liquified petroleum gas containers installed on a
trailer space shall be securely but not permanently
fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Individual                  
containers mounted on such vehicles shall be limited to
105 pounds' water capacity (approximately 45 pounds'
gas capacity).
B. No liquified petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or
located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, X     X     X     X
trailer, or any other structure, unless such
installations are approved by the health authority.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-14: FIRE PROTECTION:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
 
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-3 TTP-4
Fire Protection:                                                        
A. Fire District Rules: The travel trailer courts and
parks, mobile home subdivision and parks shall be       X     X     X     X
subject to the rules and regulations of the fire
district in which they are located.
B. Litter, Rubbish And Other Flammable Materials:
Mobile home and trailer parking areas shall be kept     X     X     X     X
free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
C. Portable Fire Extinguishers: Portable fire
extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all X     X     X     X
locations designated by such fire prevention authority,
and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
D. Fires: Fires shall be made only in stoves,
incinerators and other equipment intended for such                      
purposes.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
12-1-15: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH PRACTICES:
 
   X = Mandatory O = Optional Blank = Nonapplicable
 
Standards                                               MHS-1 MHP-2 TTC-4 TTP-4
Registration Of Occupants: Every owner or operator of a
mobile home or travel trailer park or travel trailer
court shall maintain a register containing a record of
all mobile homes or travel trailers and occupants. Such
register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the site and shall be preserved for the           X     X     X
period required by the health authority. Such register
shall contain: a) the names and permanent addresses of
all trailer occupants; b) the make, model and license
number of the mobile home or travel trailer and tow
vehicle; and c) the dates of arrival and departure of
each vehicle and its occupants.
Reporting Communicable Diseases: Every owner, operator,
attendant or other person operating a mobile home park
or travel trailer court or park shall notify the local
health authority immediately of any suspected
communicable or contagious disease within the travel
trailer and mobile home site. In the case of disease         X     X     X
diagnosed by a physician as quarantinable, the
departure of a trailer or mobile home or its occupants,
or the removal therefrom of clothing or other articles
which have been exposed to infection without approval
of the health authority is prohibited.
Supervision: The person to whom a license is issued
shall at all times operate the mobile home parks or
travel trailer courts and parks in compliance with this
chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to            X     X     X
maintain such sites and their facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.
 
(Ord. 71-4, 5-12-1971)
CHAPTER 2
MOBILE HOME ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
12-2-1: Sticker Required
12-2-1: STICKER REQUIRED:
   A.   Furnished By County Annually: The county assessor, or his deputy, after
having assessed a mobile home located in the county, shall furnish to the owner
or occupant of said mobile home an emblem or a sticker, which emblem or sticker
shall be printed and furnished at county cost. The owner or occupant of the
mobile home shall affix the emblem or sticker to the mobile home, and the
emblem or sticker shall be affixed so that it shall be visible from the public
roadway, and the emblem or sticker shall designate the mobile home has been
assessed for that year.
   B.   Duty To Report: It shall be the duty of the owner to report to the
office of the county assessor any mobile home not licensed or assessed in Idaho
within seven (7) days after moving to the county. Violation of this subsection
is a misdemeanor, punishable as specified in subsection C of this section.
(Ord. 72-1, 11-13-1972)
   C.   Occupancy Without Sticker Unlawful: It shall be unlawful and punishable
as a misdemeanor as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person to occupy or own a mobile home in the county
for a continuous period in excess of seventy two (72) hours without having
displayed, as described in subsection A of this section, the emblem or sticker
described in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 72-1, 11-13-1972; amd. 2011
Code)
TITLE 13
PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 1
GROOMED TRAILS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Certificates of Number/Trails Pass Requirement
13-1-2: Obtaining Certificates
13-1-3: Penalty
13-1-1: CERTIFICATES OF NUMBER/TRAILS PASS REQUIREMENT:
All authorized users of trails groomed by Valley County shall have a
certificate of number/trails pass attached to their equipment, including, but
not limited to, snowmobiles, bicycles, off road vehicles weighing two thousand
(2,000) pounds or less, dogsleds, etc., as described in Idaho Code 67-7103.
(Ord. 14-01, 6-16-2014)
13-1-2: OBTAINING CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Certificates shall be obtained annually and affixed to equipment.
   B.   Certificates are not interchangeable.
   C.   Certificates can be purchased from local vendors as listed on the Idaho
department of parks and recreation website and department of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 14-01, 6-16-2014)
13-1-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 14-01, 6-16-2014)
CHAPTER 2
CAMPGROUNDS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Fee Required for Designated Campgrounds
13-2-2: Campground Rules
13-2-3:    Penalty
13-2-1: FEES REQUIRED FOR DESIGNATED CAMPGROUNDS:
All users of Valley County operated or owned campgrounds as designated in a
subsection of the Parks and Recreation Fee Schedule shall pay a day use fee or
overnight fee as adopted by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
13-2-2: CAMPGROUND RULES:
   A.   Use can only be for a maximum of fourteen (14) days, whether occupied
by a recreation vehicle or a tent.
   B.   Quiet Hours in all campgrounds are from ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. to
eight o’clock (8:00) a.m.
   C.   All pets must be leashed.
   D.   Trash must be hauled out - "Pack it In, Pack it Out".
   E.   Users shall not remove vegetation within the campground.
   F.   Parking:
      1.   Shall only be in designated areas.
      2.   Shall not be in driveway to camping spots.
      3.   Only one vehicle per camping spot.
   G.   Campfires:
      1.   Shall not be left unattended.
      2.   Shall be fully extinguished when not attended. (Ord. 21-10, 9-20-
2021)
13-2-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Violators of this chapter may be asked to vacate the campground.
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 3
RAFT LAUNCHES
SECTION:
13-3-1: Fee Required for Raft Launches
13-3-2: Raft Launch Rules
13-3-3: Penalty
13-3-1: FEES REQUIRED AT DESIGNATED RAFT LAUNCHES:
All users of Valley County operated or owned raft launch areas as designated in
a subsection of the Parks and Recreation Fee Schedule shall pay a day use fee
as adopted by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners. (Ord. 21-10, 9-
20-2021)
13-3-2: RAFT LAUNCH RULES:
   A.   Cannot block launch area.
   B.   Must be prepared to unload when backing in to the launch area.
   C.   No overnight parking is allowed.
   D.   Concessionaires must have an Memorandum of Agreement with the Board of
County Commissioners.
   E.   Must remove all garbage - "Pack it In - Pack it Out".
   F.   Cannot block a public right-of-way.
   G.   All pets must be leashed. (Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
13-3-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Violators of this chapter may be asked to vacate the raft launch area.
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGNATED PARKING AREAS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Fee Required for Designated Parking Areas
13-4-2: Parking Area Rules
13-4-3: Penalty
13-4-1: FEES REQUIRED FOR DESIGNATED PARKING AREAS:
All users of Valley County operated or owned Parking Areas as designated in a
subsection of the Parks and Recreation Fee Schedule shall pay a day use fee or
overnight fee as adopted by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
13-4-2: PARKING AREA RULES:
   A.   Outfitters are limited to one trailer left in parking area overnight.
   B.   Outfitters delivering sleds for rental must remove trailer after
delivery.
   C.   Full-time residents of Secesh and Warren must obtain a long-term
parking permit from the Parks and Recreation Director.
   D.   Overnight Parking:
      1.   Allowed only in designated areas as set by policy of Valley County
Board of Commissioners or their designee.
      2.   Cannot be for over one week per season.
   E.   Parking areas cannot be used as storage areas for trailers. (Ord. 21-
10, 9-20-2021)
13-4-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Violators of this chapter may be towed at owner's expense.
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 21-10, 9-20-2021)
TITLE 14
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
14-1-1:   Short Title
14-1-2:   Authority
14-1-3:   pplicability
14-1-4:   Findings
14-1-5:   Purpose
14-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Valley County Development
Impact Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Valley County’s general police powers and
its authority to enact ordinances as set forth in Article XII, Section 2 of the
Idaho Constitution and section 31-714, Idaho Code, its authority as provided by
the Act and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho to impose and collect
development impact fees on behalf of the County; and on behalf of certain
districts pursuant to the County’s authority to enter into intergovernmental
agreements as provided for in section 67-8204A, Idaho Code when jointly
affected by growth and development. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
This title shall apply to the Development of property located within the
unincorporated area of Valley County.
Except as otherwise exempted in section 14-8-1, this title shall apply to the
Development of property located within the unincorporated area of Valley
County, Idaho.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-1-4: FINDINGS:
   A.   The County is experiencing considerable growth and Development; and
   B.   The purposes of the Act [I.C. § 67-8202] are as follows:
      1.   Ensure that adequate Public Facilities are available to serve new
growth and Development; and
      2.   Promote orderly growth and Development by establishing uniform
standards by which local governments, such as the County, and any District with
which the County has entered into an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to
I.C. § 67-8204A, may require those who benefit from new growth and Development
pay [development impact fees] their Proportionate Share of the costs of new
Public Facilities needed to serve that new growth and Development; and
      3.   Establish minimum standards for adoption of development impact fee
ordinances by cities; and
      4.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and Development are
required to pay no more than their Proportionate Share of the cost of Public
Facilities needed to serve that new growth and Development and to prevent
duplicate and ad hoc Development Requirements; and
      5.   To empower counties to adopt ordinances to impose development impact
fees.
   C.   The Act does not authorize any District to enact a development impact
fee ordinance; and
   D.   The Act does provide, pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A, in circumstances
where the County and any District are both affected by the considerable growth
and Development, that the County and any district with which the County has
entered into an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A may
enter into the Intergovernmental Agreement for the purpose of agreeing to
collect and expend development impact fees for System Improvements which
provides for a new funding mechanism for those System Improvements Costs
incurred by any district with which the County has entered into an
Intergovernmental Agreement to meet the demand and growth occurring within the
unincorporated area of the County and which promotes and accommodates orderly
growth and Development and protects the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residences within the unincorporated area of the County; and
   E.   New growth within the County imposes and will impose increasing and
excessive demands upon the existing, capital facilities of the County and of
any district with which the County has entered into an Intergovernmental
Agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A; and
   F.   New growth within the County is expected to continue, and will place
ever-increasing demands on the County, and any district with which the County
has entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A, to
provide and expand capital facilities to serve that new growth; and
   G.   The tax revenues generated from new Development within the
unincorporated area of the County often do not generate sufficient funds to
provide the necessary improvements and expansion of existing County, and any
district with which the County has entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement
pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A, to accommodate for that new growth; and
   H.   Section 67-8204A of the Act authorizes the County to adopt an impact
fee system and to enter into the Intergovernmental Agreements to offset,
recoup, or reimburse the portion of the costs of needed improvements to capital
facilities caused by new growth and Development within the unincorporated area
of the County; and
   I.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system facilitated by the
Intergovernmental Agreements, will promote the purposes set forth in the Act,
in that it would: (a) ensure that adequate Capital Facilities are available to
serve new growth and Development; (b) promote orderly growth and Development by
establishing uniform standards by which the County may require that those who
benefit from new growth and Development pay a Proportionate Share of the cost
of new Capital Facilities needed to serve new growth and Development in the
unincorporated area of the County; (c) establish minimum standards for the
adoption of impact fees; (d) ensure that those who benefit from new growth and
Development are required to pay no more than their Proportionate Share of the
cost of Capital Facilities needed to serve new growth and Development; and (e)
prevent duplicate and ad hoc Development Requirements in the unincorporated
area of the County; and
   J.   The Capital Improvements Plans contain the Capital Improvements planned
for by the District during the term of the Capital Improvements Plan, and such
elements have been developed in conformance with the requirements Chapter 82 of
Title 67, Idaho Code; and
   K.   The Capital Improvements Plans set forth reasonable methodologies and
analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new Development on the
capital facilities and determines the cost of acquiring or constructing the
improvements necessary to meet the demands for such facilities created by new
Development; and
   L.   In accordance with Idaho Code, the Capital Improvements Plan was based
on actual System Improvements Costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. In
addition, the Capital Improvements Plan uses a fee calculation methodology that
is net of credits for the Present Value of revenues that will be generated by
new growth and Development based on historical funding patterns and that are
anticipated to be available to pay for System Improvements, including taxes,
assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers; and
   M.   The development impact fees established by this title are based on the
Capital Improvements Plan, and do not exceed System Improvements Costs to serve
new Development that will pay the Impact Fees; and
   N.   The capital facilities, included in the calculation of fees in the
Capital Improvements Plans, will benefit all new residential Development
throughout the service area identified for purposes of calculating, collecting,
and spending the Impact Fees collected from Developers; and
   O.   There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between
Development impacts created by each type of Development covered by this title,
the development impact fees assessment of such Development covered by this
title, and the development impact fees that such Developer will be required to
pay; and
   P.   This title creates a system by which development impact fees paid by
Developers will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the costs
incurred by the County, and any district with which the County has entered into
an Intergovernmental Agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A, to construct and/or
purchase System Improvements in ways that benefit the Development for which
each development impact fee was paid within a reasonable period of time after
the development impact fee is paid, and in conformance with I.C. § 67-8210; and
   Q.   This title creates a system under which development impact fees shall
not be used to correct existing deficiencies for any Capital Facilities, or to
replace or rehabilitate existing Capital Facilities, or to pay for routine
operation or maintenance of those facilities; and
   R.   This title creates a system under which there shall be no double
payment of development impact fees, in accordance with I.C. § 67-8204(19); and
   S.   This title is consistent with all applicable provisions of the Act
concerning development impact fee ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-1-5: PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement the
Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   The intent of this title is to ensure that new Development bears a
Proportionate Share of the cost of System Improvements; to ensure that such
Proportionate Share does not exceed the cost of such System Improvements
required to accommodate new Development; and to ensure that funds collected
from new Development are used for System Improvements in accordance with the
Act.
   C.   It is the further intent of this title to be consistent with those
principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of System Improvements to
new Development, and for adopting development impact fee ordinances,
established by the Act.
   D.   It is not the intent of this title to collect any money from any new
Development more than the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for
System Improvements created by such new Development.
   E.   It is the intent of this title that any monies collected, as imposed
Impact Fees, are deposited in the appropriate Impact Fees Capital Projects
Trust Fund account, are never commingled with monies from a different impact
fee account, are never used for a development impact fee component different
from that for which the fee was paid, are never used to correct current
deficiencies in any district’s, with which the County has entered into an
Intergovernmental Agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A, Capital Facilities,
and are never used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain or operate any Capital
Facilities.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-2-1: Definitions
14-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended and words and terms
appearing in the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular:
 
ACCOUNTS:      Any of one or more interest bearing accounts within a Development Impact
               Fee Capital Projects Trust Fund established in chapter 14 of this title.
ACT:           The Idaho Development Impact Fee Act as set forth in Chapter 82 of Title
               67, Idaho Code.
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the County’s impact fees or an administrator of a
               District’s impact fees.
               The advisory committee established and identified in chapter 3 of this
ADVISORY       title which are formed and staffed pursuant to I.C. § 67-8205 to prepare
COMMITTEE:     and recommend the Capital Improvements Plan and any amendments,
               revisions, or updates of the same.
               To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to the expenditure of
APPROPRIATE:   funds by appropriation or other official act of the Board of
               Commissioners.
BUILDING       The County permit required for foundations, new construction, and
PERMIT:        additions.
 
               Facilities, stations, apparatus, vehicles, and equipment which are
CAPITAL        identified in the Capital Improvements Plan, and specifically including
FACILITIES:    those related costs including System Improvements Costs, but not
               including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand
               their capacity.
CAPITAL        Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new
IMPROVEMENTS:  construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of
               Capital Facilities.
               A component of the Capital Improvements Plans identified in each Capital
CAPITAL        Improvements Plan adopted the Board of County Commissioners pursuant to
IMPROVEMENTS   Chapters 65 and 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code, and as amended, which
ELEMENT:       component meets the requirements of a Capital Improvements Plan required
               by the Act.
               Any District Capital Improvements Plan which have been recommended by the
CAPITAL        Advisory Committee and adopted by the District Board of Commissioners and
IMPROVEMENTS   the County Commissioners pursuant to the Act that identifies District
PLANS:         Capital Facilities for which District Impact Fees may be used as a
               funding source.
COUNTY:        Valley County.
COUNTY         The Valley County Board of Commissioners, who are the governing board of
COMMISSIONERS: the County.
               Any person or legal entity undertaking Development and/or undertaking the
DEVELOPER:     subdivision of property pursuant to I.C. §§ 50-1301 through 50-1334, as
               amended.
               Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any
               change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use,
DEVELOPMENT:   character, or appearance of land, which creates additional demand and
               need for Public Facilities and/or subdivision of property that would
               permit any change in the use, character, or appearance of land.
 
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL:             Any written duly authorized document from the County which authorizes the
                                  commencement of a Development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL    The County’s or a District’s, as the case may be, individual impact fee
PROJECTS TRUST FUND (the “TRUST capital projects trust fund account.
FUND”):
                                  A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other County
                                  governmental action approving or authorizing a particular Development
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT:          Project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement
                                  compels the payment, dedication or contribution of goods, services, land,
                                  or money as condition of approval.
DISTRICT:                         Any district (individually) with which the County has separately entered
                                  into an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A.
DISTRICT ADMINISTRATOR:           Each District’s fire chief, or her, or his designee.
                                  District facilities, stations, apparatus, vehicles, and equipment which are
DISTRICT CAPITAL FACILITIES:      identified in the Capital Improvements Plan, and specifically including
                                  those related costs including System Improvements Costs, but not including
                                  maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand their capacity.
DISTRICT COMMISSIONERS:           The board of commissioners of a District, which is its governing board.
EMS:                              The emergency medical facilities for preservation of life services provided
                                  by the Districts.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS:              Those costs incurred as result of an Extraordinary Impact.
 
 
FEE PAYER:        The person who pays or is required to pay Impact Fees. A Fee Payer may include a
                  Developer.
                  A payment of money imposed as condition of Development to pay for a Proportionate
IMPACT FEES:      Share of the County’s or a District’s, as the case may be, costs of System
                  Improvements needed to serve the Development. The term does not include the
                  following:
                 •   A charge or fee to pay the administrative plan review, or inspection cost
                  associated with permits required for Development; or
                 •   Connection or hookup charges; or
                 •   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation charges for
                  services provided directly to the Development; or
                  •   Amounts collected from a Developer in a transaction in which the County or a
                  District has incurred expenses in constructing Capital Improvements for the
                 Development if the owner or Developer has agreed to be financially responsible for
                  the construction or installation of those Capital Improvements, unless a written
                  agreement is made, pursuant to I.C. § 67-8209(3) as amended, for credit or
                  reimbursement.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL Any agreement entered into by and between the County and a District pursuant to
AGREEMENT:        I.C. § 67-8204A for the collection and expenditure of Impact Fees established
                  pursuant to this title.
 
 
LAND USE      A description of the Service Area and projections of land uses,
ASSUMPTIONS:  densities, intensities, and population in the Service Area over
              at least a ten-year period.
LEVEL OF      A measure of the relationship between service capacity and
SERVICE:      service demand for Public Facilities.
              A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
              construction and safety standards, transportable in one (1) or
              more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) feet or
              more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
              when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more
              square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
MANUFACTURED/ designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
MOBILE HOME:  foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the
              plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
              contained in such structure, except that such term shall include
              any structure which meets all the requirements of this subsection
              except the size requirements and with respect to which the
              manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
              secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the
              standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
              Any building or building component other than a Manufactured/
              Mobile Home, which is constructed according to the International
MODULAR       Building Code, as adopted or any amendments thereto, which is of
BUILDING:     closed construction and is either entirely or substantially
              prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building
              site.
PRESENT       The total current monetary value of past, present or future
VALUE:        payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services,
              materials, construction, or money.
PROJECT:      A particular Development on an identified parcel of land.
 
 
PROJECT
IMPROVEMENTS   Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide
(in contrast   service for a particular Development Project and that are necessary for the
to System      use and convenience of the occupants or users of the Project.
Improvements):
PROPORTIONATE  That portion of System Improvements Costs determined pursuant to I.C. § 67-
SHARE:         8207 which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the
               Project.
               Water supply production, treatment, storage and distribution facilities;
               wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities; roads, streets and
               bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local
PUBLIC         components of state or federal highways; stormwater collection, retention,
FACILITIES:    detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and
               bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements; parks, open space
               and recreation areas, and related capital improvements; and public safety
               facilities, including law enforcement, fire stations and apparatus,
               emergency medical and rescue, and street lighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL   A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for
VEHICLE:       recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power
               or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
               Any defined geographic area within the unincorporated area of the County as
SERVICE AREA:  identified in a Capital Improvement Plan in which specific Public Facilities
               provide service to Development within the areas defined, on the basis of
               sound planning or engineering principles or both.
               A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge
               attributable to an individual unit of Development calculated in accordance
SERVICE UNIT:  with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular
               category of Capital Improvements. As specifically used in this title,
               Service Units include dwelling units as defined in County code and square
               feet of nonresidential Development.
 
SYSTEM
IMPROVEMENTS   Capital Improvements to Public Facilities which are designed to provide service to
(in contrast   a Service Area.
to Project
Improvements):
               Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of System Improvements, including
SYSTEM         design, acquisition, engineering, and other costs, and also including, without
IMPROVEMENTS   limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code § 50-1702(h), as amended, to
COSTS:         provide additional Public Facilities needed to service new growth and development.
               For clarification, System Improvements Costs do not include:
              •   Construction, acquisition, or expansion of Public Facilities other than Capital
               Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan; or
              •   Improvements, repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital; or
               •   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
              serve existing Development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
               environmental or regulatory standards; or
              •   Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
               provide better service to existing Development; or
               •   Administrative and operating costs of the District and/or the County unless
              such costs are attributable to development of the Capital Improvements Plan, as
               provided in IC § 67-8208, and as amended; or
               •   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other
              indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the County or a
               District, as the case may be, to finance Capital Improvements identified in the
               Capital Improvements Plan.
 
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 3
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEES
SECTION:
14-3-1: Development Impact Fee Advisory Committees
14-3-2: Committee Membership
14-3-3: Committees Charge
14-3-4: Advisory Committee Organization
14-3-5: Committee Reporting
14-3-6: Review of Committee’s Reports and Recommendations
14-3-1: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEES:
The following named County development impact fee advisory committees are
established as standing permanent committees:
   A.   Valley County Development Impact Fee Advisory Standing Committee; and
   B.   Valley County/Cascade Rural Fire Protection District Development Impact
Fee Advisory Standing Committee by an intergovernmental agreement; and
   C.   Valley County/Donnelly Rural Fire Protection District Development
Impact Fee Advisory Standing Committee by an intergovernmental agreement; and
   D.   Valley County/McCall Fire Protection District Development Impact Fee
Advisory Standing Committee by an intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 2024-01,
10-16-2023)
14-3-2: COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP:
The members of the Valley County Development Impact Fee Advisory Committees
shall be appointed (including vacancy appointments) by the County
Commissioners. The members of District development impact fee advisory
committees shall be appointed as provided in the intergovernmental agreement
(including vacancy appointments) for a term stated of at least one (1) year.
   A.   Notice of Committee Appointments: Pursuant to the intergovernmental
agreements, notice of District development impact fee advisory committee
appointments shall be provided to the county clerk and the County Commissioners
within seven (7) days of any such appointment.
   B.   Committee Membership Requirements: There shall be no fewer than five
(5) members on the development impact fee advisory committees (“advisory
committees”) and two (2) or more members must be active in the business of
development, building, or real estate. All members must reside within the
service area of the applicable capital improvement plan. No members shall be
employees or officials of the County; or any the district, whose service area
is the subject of the applicable capital improvements plan, with which the
County has an intergovernmental agreement to enact an impact fee ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-3-3: COMMITTEES CHARGE:
Each development impact fee advisory committee established by this chapter
shall serve as an advisory committee to the county board of commissioners. In
the case of advisory committees established by an intergovernmental agreement,
the advisory committees shall also serve as an advisory committee to the
governing body of any district with whom the county has an intergovernmental
agreement to enact an impact fee ordinance. Each advisory committee is charged
with the following responsibilities:
   A.   Assist in adopting land use assumptions; and
   B.   Review the capital improvements plan; and
   C.   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
and
   D.   File with the impact fee administrator and the county clerk (at least
annually) a report of any perceived inequities in implementing the capital
improvements plan or imposing development impact fees; and
   E.   Advise the county board of commissioners and the governing body of the
other party (per the respective intergovernmental agreement) of the need to
update or revise land use assumptions of capital improvements plans; and
   F.   The county and the governing body of the other party (per the
respective intergovernmental agreement) shall make available to the advisory
committees, upon request, all financial and accounting information,
professional reports in relation to development and implementation of land use
assumptions of the capital improvements plans, and of the need for periodic
updates to the capital improvements plan(s).
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-3-4: ADVISORY COMMITTEE ORGANIZATION:
The impact fee administrator shall staff the advisory committee in order to
provide the committee with needed information for the committee’s review and
for the committee’s compliance with the Open Meeting Law (Chapter 2 of Title 74
Idaho Code).
   A.   The advisory committee shall select its officers, which include a
chairman, vice chairman and a secretary of the committee; and
   B.   The chairman shall conduct the meetings of the committee. The duties of
the chairman shall be performed by the vice chairman in the absence of the
chairman or as delegated by the chairman. The chairman and the vice chairman
shall be members of the committee; and
   C.   The impact fee administrator shall serve as the secretary of the
committee and shall take minutes and post agenda notices as required by the
Open Meeting Law. The secretary is not a member of the committee; and
   D.   The committee shall establish a regular meeting schedule; and
   E.   The agenda of each meeting shall include the approval of the minutes of
the last meeting and the secretary shall provide a copy of the approved minutes
to the county commissioners and to the respective governing body of the party
with whom the county has an intergovernmental agreement; and
   F.   Fifty (50) percent of the membership of the committee shall constitute
a quorum. Once a quorum is established for a meeting, the subsequent absence of
a member present for creating the quorum shall not dismiss the quorum; and
   G.   A majority vote of those present at any meeting is sufficient to carry
motions.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-3-5: COMMITTEE REPORTING:
The advisory committees report directly to the County Commissioners and to the
respective District governing body.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-3-6: REVIEW OF COMMITTEE’S REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
The County Commissioners and the respective District governing body shall each
consider the advisory committee’s recommended revision(s) to the capital
improvements plan (as relevant) at least once every twelve (12) months. Each
advisory committee shall make recommendations intended to ensure that the
development impact fees are equitable, so that the impact fee charged to a
development do not exceed a proportionate share of system improvements costs,
and that the procedures for administering impact fees remain efficient.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 4
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLANS
SECTION:
14-4-1: Proportionate Determination Methodology
14-4-2: Service Areas
14-4-3: Review and Modification Of Capital Improvements Plan
14-4-4: Capital Improvements Plan Error Discovery
14-4-1: PROPORTIONATE DETERMINATION METHODOLOGY:
Impact Fees are determined by the approved Capital Improvement Plan and shall
not exceed a Proportionate Share of the cost of the System Improvements
determined in accordance with I.C. § 67-8207, as amended. Impact Fees shall be
based on actual System Improvements Costs or reasonable estimates of such
costs. The amounts of the Impact Fees shall be calculated using the methodology
contained in the Capital Improvements Plan which complies with the following:
   A.   Based on a reasonable and fair formula or method under which the Impact
Fees imposed do not exceed a Proportionate Share of the costs incurred or to be
incurred by the County or a District, as the case may be, in the provision of
System Improvements to serve the new Development. The Proportionate Share is
the costs attributable to the new Development after the consideration of the
following:
      1.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication
of land or construction of System Improvements; and
      2.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new Development in the form of user fees and debt service payments; and
      3.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated by a
District to System Improvements; and
      4.   All other available sources of funding such System Improvements.
   B.   In determining the Proportionate Share of the cost of System
Improvements to be paid by the Developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the County or a District, as the case may be, and accounted for
in the calculation of the Impact Fees:
      1.   The costs of existing System Improvements within the Service Area;
and
      2.   The means by which existing System Improvements have been financed;
and
      3.   The extent to which the new Development will contribute to System
Improvements costs through taxation, assessments, or Developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to System Improvements costs
through Developer or landowner contributions; and
      4.   The extent to which the new Development is required to contribute to
the cost of existing System Improvements in the future; and
      5.   The extent to which the new Development should be credited for
providing System Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
Service Area; and
      6.   Extraordinary Costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
Development; and
      7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      8.   The availability of other sources of funding System Improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation.
   C.   Levels of service. Impact Fees shall be calculated on the basis of
levels of service for Public Facilities adopted in this title that are
applicable to existing Development as well as new growth and Development. The
construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or existing Public
Facilities for which the Impact Fees are imposed must be attributable to the
capacity demands generated by the new Development.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-4-2: SERVICE AREAS:
Service Areas include unincorporated areas of the County as are identified and
defined in the approved Capital Improvement Plan.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-4-3: REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
Unless the County Commissioners, regarding the County’s Capital Improvements
Plan; and unless the County Commissioners and the District Commissioners,
regarding a District Capital Improvements Plan deems some other period is
appropriate, the County Commissioners and the District Commissioners shall, at
least once every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the original
adoption of their respective Capital Improvements Plan, review the Development
potential and update the Capital Improvements Plan in cooperation and in
accordance with the procedures set forth in I.C. § 67-8206, as amended. Each
update shall be prepared by the Administrator in consultation with the advisory
committee. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-4-4: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN ERROR DISCOVERY:
If the County or a District discovers an error in a Capital Improvements Plan
which results in assessment or payment of more than a Proportionate Share of
System Improvements Costs on any proposed Development, the Administrator shall:
   A.   Adjust the Impact Fees to collect no more than a Proportionate Share;
or
   B.   Discontinue the collection of any Impact Fees until the error is
corrected by ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 5
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
14-5-1: Authority To Enter Into Intergovernmental Agreements
14-5-2: County And District Intergovernmental Agreements
14-5-3: District Governed By This Title
14-5-4: Amendments To Intergovernmental Agreement
14-5-1: AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The County is a governmental entity that is empowered by the Act to adopt
development impact fee ordinances, and as such is authorized, by I.C. § 67-
8204A, to enter into Intergovernmental Agreement with highway districts, fire
districts, ambulance districts, water districts, sewer districts, recreational
water and sewer districts, or irrigation districts for the purpose of
developing joint plans for capital improvements or for the purpose of agreeing
to collect and expend development impact fees for system improvements.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-5-2: COUNTY AND DISTRICT INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The County has entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement with each District
which Intergovernmental Agreements are in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-5-3: DISTRICT GOVERNED BY THIS TITLE:
The Intergovernmental Agreements comply with this title and requires each
District to be governed by and to fully abide by the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-5-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
Any amendments of any Intergovernmental Agreement shall be implemented by
corresponding relevant amendments of this title which amendments shall not
apply to any Impact Fees then not expended and currently held in the Trust
Fund.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 6
IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES AND PAYMENT
SECTION:
14-6-1: Impact Fees Imposed
14-6-2: Impact Fee Calculation
14-6-3: Impact Fee Schedules
14-6-4: Developer’s Election
14-6-5: Procedures
14-6-6: Certification Of Impact Fees Due
14-6-7: Payment And Receipt Of Fees
14-6-8: Payment Under Protest
14-6-1: IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
Impact Fees are hereby imposed on all new Development within a Service Area, as
defined in the Capital Improvements Plan, in accordance with the impact fee
schedules as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-2: IMPACT FEE CALCULATION:
The Impact Fees shall be calculated and imposed in accordance with the Impact
Fee schedule set forth in the Capital Improvements Plan which provide for
standard fees based on the total number of dwelling units or square feet of
nonresidential space in the Development, unless:
   A.   The Fee Payer requests an individual assessment pursuant to chapter 9
of this title; or
   B.   The Development will have an Extraordinary Impact pursuant to chapter
10 of this title. The methodology for determining the costs per Service Unit
provided for in the fee schedule is set forth in the Capital Improvements Plan.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-3: IMPACT FEE SCHEDULES:
The schedules of development impact fees for the various land uses per unit of
development are herein set forth as follows:
   A.   Cascade Rural Fire Protection District
 
Residential (per Single Family Dwelling Unit) $2,891.00
Non-Residential (per square foot)             $1.16
 
   B.   Donnelly Rural Fire Protection District
 
Residential (per Single Family Dwelling Unit) $1,796.00
Non-Residential (per square foot)             $0.72
 
   C.   McCall Fire Protection District
 
Residential (per Single Family Dwelling Unit) $ 1,845.00
Non-Residential (per square foot)             $ 0.74
 
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-4: DEVELOPER’S ELECTION:
A Developer shall have the right to elect to pay a Project’s Proportionate
Share of System Improvements Costs by payment of an Impact Fee according to the
fee schedule as full and complete payment of the Development Project’s
Proportionate Share of System Improvements Costs, except as provided in I.C. §
67-8214(3), as amended.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-5: PROCEDURES:
The collection of Impact Fees shall be in accordance with the following:
   A.   Building Permit. Upon submittal of complete Building Permit plans for
the Development to the County, the County shall calculate the Impact Fees for
the Development in accordance with an Impact Fee Schedule (section 14-6-4)
unless the Fee Payer requests an individual assessment or is the subject of a
credit or the Administrator determines that the Development may have
Extraordinary Impact.
   B.   Exemption. An exemption pursuant to section 14-8-1 of this title must
be claimed by the Fee Payer upon application for a Building Permit or
manufactured home installation permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be
deemed waived by the Fee Payer.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-6: CERTIFICATION OF IMPACT FEES DUE:
After the Impact Fees due for a proposed Development have been calculated by
the County pursuant to the Impact Fees Schedule or by the Administrator using
the individual assessment process or there is a credit or Extraordinary Impact,
the Fee Payer may request from the County or the Administrator a certification
of the amount of the Impact Fee due for that Development. Within thirty (30)
days after receiving such request the Administrator shall issue a written
certification of the amount of the Impact Fee due for the proposed Development.
Such certification shall establish the Impact Fee so long as there is no
material change to the Project as identified in the individual assessment
application, or the impact fees schedule of the Capital Improvements Plan. The
certification shall include an explanation of the calculation of the Impact Fee
including an explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code Section 67-
8207, and shall also specify the system improvement(s) for which the Impact Fee
is intended to be used. If the Impact Fee is calculated by the County pursuant
to the impact fee schedule, the County shall provide the certification to the
Fee Payer and the Administrator. If the impact fee is determined by the
Administrator following an individual assessment of the fee, the Administrator
shall provide the certification to the Fee Payer and the County.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-7: PAYMENT AND RECEIPT OF FEES:
The Impact Fees shall be paid to the County at the following times:
   A.   If a Building Permit or Manufactured/Mobile Home installation permit is
required, then at the time before the permit is issued; or
   B.   If no Building Permit or Manufactured/Mobile Home installation permit
is required, then at the time that construction commences; or
   C.   At such other time as the Developer and County or a District, as the
case may be, have agreed upon in writing with notice to the County.
   D.   All Impact Fees paid to the County pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement shall then be delivered to the Administrator on a once-a-month basis.
   E   In the event Impact Fees are paid to a District, then the District
Administrator shall immediately notify the County of said payment.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-6-8: PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST:
A Fee Payer may pay an Impact Fee under protest in order not to delay in the
issuance of a Building Permit by the County. A Fee Payer making a payment under
protest shall not be estopped from exercising the right to appeal provided
herein, nor shall such Fee Payer be estopped from receiving a refund of any
amount deemed to have been illegally collected.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 7
COUNTY AND ADMINISTRATOR POWERS TO REQUIRE PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
14-7-1: Impact Fee Payment Enforcement
14-7-1: IMPACT FEE PAYMENT ENFORCEMENT:
When any Impact Fee is due pursuant to this title, or pursuant to the terms of
any written agreement between a Fee Payer and the County or a District, as the
case may be, and or otherwise such Impact Fee has not been paid in a timely
manner, the County, or Administrator on behalf of a District, may exercise any
or all of the following powers as applicable to their authority, in any
combination, to enforce the collection of the Impact Fee:
   A.   Withhold Building Permits, manufactured home installation permits, or
other County Development related to the Development for which the County or a
District Impact Fee is due until all Impact Fees due have been paid, issue stop
work orders, and revoke or suspend a Building Permit.
   B.   Withhold utility services from the Development for which the Impact Fee
is due until all Impact Fees due have been paid.
   C.   Add interest to the Impact Fees not paid in full at the legal rate
provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104, as amended, plus five (5) percent beginning
on the date at which the payment of the Impact Fees was due until paid in full.
   D.   Impose a penalty of five (5) percent of the total Impact Fee (not
merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month, beginning
on the date at which the payment of the Impact Fee was due, until paid in full.
   E.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of I.C. § 67-8213(4) for
failure to timely pay an Impact Fee following the procedures contained in Idaho
Code Title 45, Chapter 5. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 8
EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
14-8-1: Exemptions
14-8-2: Exemption Claim Process
14-8-1: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction; or
   B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of Service Units;
   C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a Manufactured/Mobile Home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that the number of
Service Units does not increase; or
   D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot; or
   E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of Service Units; or
   F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as a
tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of System Improvements; or
   G.   The installation of a Modular Building, Manufactured/Mobile Home, or
Recreational Vehicle if the Fee Payer can demonstrate by documentation, such as
utility bills and tax records, that either:
      1.   A Modular Building, Manufactured/Mobile Home, or Recreational
Vehicle was legally in place on the lot or space prior to the effective date of
this title; or
      2.   an Impact Fee has been paid previously for the Modular Building,
Manufactured/Mobile Home, or Recreational Vehicle on that same lot or space.
   H.   Construction that would otherwise be subject to payment of the
development impact fee pursuant to this chapter if undertaken by a taxing
district, as defined in section 63-201, Idaho Code, or by an authorized public
charter school, as defined in section 33-5202A, Idaho Code, in the course of
carrying out its statutory responsibilities. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-8-2: EXEMPTION CLAIM PROCESS:
An exemption from an Impact Fee must be claimed on the application by the
Developer (Fee Payer) upon submitting their application for a Building Permit
or manufactured home installation permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be
deemed waived by the Fee Payer. Applications for exemption shall be determined
by the Administrator within ninety (90) days of receipt of the claim for
exemption.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 9
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION:
14-9-1: Individual Assessment Process
14-9-1: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS:
Requests for individual assessment shall be processed in accordance with the
following:
   A.   In lieu of calculating the amount of the Impact Fee pursuant to section
14-6-3 and the Capital Improvements Plan, a Fee Payer may file a request with
the County or a District, that the amount of the required Impact Fee be
determined by the Administrator through an individual assessment for the
proposed Development. A request for an individual assessment process shall
involve consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information
submitted by the Fee Payer to adjust the amount of the Impact Fee. If a Fee
Payer files a request for the use of an individual assessment, the Fee Payer
shall be responsible for retaining a qualified professional to prepare the
individual assessment that complies with the requirements of this title, at the
Fee Payer’s expense. The Fee Payer shall, at the Fee Payer’s expense, bear the
burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the resulting
individual assessment complies with the requirements of this title. The Fee
Payer shall bear the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that
the resulting individual assessment is a more accurate measure of its
Proportionate Share of the cost of System Improvements, based on the adopted
levels of service, than the Impact Fees that would otherwise be due pursuant to
section 14-6-3 and the Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   Each individual assessment shall be based on the same Level of Service
standards and unit costs for System Improvements used in the Capital
Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
   C.   A request for an individual assessment shall be delivered and filed
with the County or a District Administrator, as the case may be, at any time
that the number of dwelling units in the proposed Development and the types and
amounts of Development in each non-residential category identified in section
14-6-3, and the Capital Improvements Plan is known. Upon filing a request for
individual assessment, the County shall transmit the request to the
Administrator for review. The Administrator shall issue a written decision
within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed request for individual
assessment together with all supporting information from the Fee Payer, so as
not to unreasonably delay the Developer’s (Fee Payer’s) subsequent applications
to the County for Building Permits.
   D.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the Administrator may
then be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by the Administrator
as the basis for calculating the Impact Fee. The criteria for acceptance,
rejection, or acceptance with modifications shall be whether the individual
assessment is a more accurate measure of demand for System Improvements Element
(s) created by the proposed Development, or the costs of those facilities, than
the applicable fee shown in the fee schedule attached to the Capital
Improvements Plan.
   E.   The decision by the Administrator on an application for an individual
assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of the Impact Fee,
shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the Impact Fee is intended to
be used, and shall include an explanation of those factors identified in I.C. §
67-8207.
   F.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with modifications
by the Administrator, then the Impact Fee due under this title for such
Development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment.
   G.   The Administrator shall provide notice of final determination of an
individual assessment to the Developer (Fee Payer).
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 10
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS
SECTION:
14-10-1: Extraordinary Impact Determinations
14-10-1: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT DETERMINATIONS:
Determinations of Extraordinary Impacts are made as follows:
   A.   The Administrator shall review and determine whether the Development
application will impose Extraordinary Impact.
   B.   If the Administrator determines that a proposed Development generates
Extraordinary Impact that will result in extraordinary Systems Improvements
Costs, the Administrator will notify the Fee Payer of their determination
within thirty (30) days after Administrator’s receipt of the Development
application. Such notice shall include a statement that the potential impacts
of such Development on System Improvements are not adequately addressed by the
Capital Improvements Plan, and that a supplemental study, at the Fee Payer’s
expense, will be required.
   C.   Circumstances that may lead to a determination of Extraordinary Impact
include, but are not limited to an indication that the assumptions used in the
Capital Improvements Plan underestimate the level of activity or impact on
Capital Facilities from the proposed Development or activity.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a Development with
Extraordinary Impact, the Administrator shall meet with the Fee Payer to
discuss whether the Fee Payer wants to:
      1.   Pay for the supplemental study necessary to determine the System
Improvements Costs related to the proposed Development; or
      2.   Modify the proposal to avoid generating Extraordinary Impact; or
      3.   Withdraw the application for certification, Building Permit, or
Development.
   E.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed Development’s Proportionate Share of System Improvements
Costs, then the County or the District, as the case may be, and the Fee Payer,
shall jointly select an individual or organization acceptable to both to
perform such study. The Fee Payer shall enter into a written agreement with the
individual or organization to pay the costs of the study. Such agreement shall
require the supplemental study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such
written agreement unless the Fee Payer agrees to a longer time.
   F.   Once the study has been completed, the Fee Payer may choose to:
      1.   Pay the Proportionate Share of System Improvements Costs documented
by the supplemental study; or
      2.   Modify the proposed Development to reduce such costs; or
      3.   Withdraw the application.
   G.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay the System Improvements Costs documented
in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to writing between
the County or the District, as the case may be, and the Fee Payer, prior to
review and consideration of any application for any Development or Building
Permit related to the proposed Development.
   H.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the Fee Payer to pay the Proportionate
Share of System Improvements Costs documented by the supplemental study,
nothing in this ordinance shall obligate the County or a District to approve
Development that results in an Extraordinary Impact to the County or a
District, as the case may be.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 11
DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
14-11-1: Developer Credits And Reimbursement Process
14-11-2: Credit Limitations
14-11-3: Valuation Of Credit At Present Value
14-11-4: When Credits Become Effective
14-11-5: Credit Request Procedures
14-11-1: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT PROCESS:
When a Developer or their predecessor in title or interest has constructed
System Improvements of the same category as a Capital Improvements Element, or
contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of System
Improvements of the same category as a Capital Improvements Element, and the
County or the District, as the case may be, has accepted such construction,
contribution or dedication, the County or the District, as the case may be,
shall issue a credit, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
against the Impact Fees otherwise due for the same Capital Improvements Element
in connection with the proposed Development, as set forth in this section.
Credit shall be issued regardless of whether the contribution or dedication to
System Improvements was required as a condition of Development or was offered
by the Developer and accepted by the County or the District, as the case may
be, in writing, and regardless of whether the contribution or dedication was
contributed by the Developer or by a local improvement district controlled by
the Developer.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-11-2: CREDIT LIMITATIONS:
Credits against an Impact Fee shall not be given for:
   A.   Project Improvements; or
   B.   Any construction, contribution, or dedication not agreed to in writing
by the County or a District, as the case may be, prior to commencement of the
construction, contribution, or dedication. Credits issued for one Capital
Improvements Element may not be used to reduce the impact fee due for a
different capital improvement. No credits shall be issued for System
Improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the effective date of this
title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-11-3: VALUATION OF CREDIT AT PRESENT VALUE:
The valuation of system improvements for credit against Impact Fees shall be in
accordance with the following:
   A.   Land. Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the Fee Payer’s
option, be valued at the Present Value of:
      1.   One hundred (100) percent of the most recent assessed value for such
land as shown in the records of the county assessor; or
      2.   The fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable
to the County or a District, as the case may be, in an appraisal paid for by
the Fee Payer.
   B.   Improvements. Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall be valued by the County or a District, as the case
may be, at the Present Value of such improvements based on complete engineering
drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates as submitted by the
Fee Payer. The Administrator shall determine the amount of credit due based on
the information submitted, or, if it determines that such information is
inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs
acceptable to the County or a District, as the case may be, as a more accurate
measure of the value of the offered System Improvements.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-11-4: WHEN CREDITS BECOME EFFECTIVE:
Credit against Impact Fees become effective in accordance with the following:
   A.   Land. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when
the land has been conveyed to the County or a District, in a form acceptable,
at no cost, and has been accepted by the County or a District, as the case may
be. Upon request of the Fee Payer, the County or a District shall issue a
letter stating the amount of credit available, as the case may be.
   B.   Improvements. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall generally become effective when (a) all required
construction has been completed and has been accepted by the County or the
District, as the case may be, (b) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond has
been received and approved by the to the County or the District, as the case
may be, and (c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the County or a District, as the case may be and the State of
Idaho. Upon request of the Fee Payer, the County or a District, as the case may
be, shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-11-5: CREDIT REQUEST PROCEDURES:
The following are the procedural requirements for the processing of credit
against impact fees requests:
   A.   Request. In order to obtain a credit against (an) Impact Fee(s)
otherwise due, a Fee Payer shall submit to the County or a District, as the
case may be, a written offer of request to dedicate specific parcels of
qualifying land or a written offer to contribute or construct specific System
Improvements to the Capital Facilities in accordance with all applicable state
and local governmental design and construction standards, and shall
specifically request a credit against the type of impact fee for which the land
dedication or System Improvements is offered. The County or a District, as the
case may be, shall then deliver the written offer of request to the
Administrator.
   B.   Review. After receipt of the written offer of request for credit, the
Administrator shall review the request and determine whether the land or System
Improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of providing Capital
Facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of the credit. If the
Administrator determines that the offered credit satisfies those criteria and
will be acceptable to the County or the District Commissioners, as the case may
be, then the credit shall be issued. The review and determination of a written
offer/application for credit shall be completed by the Administrator within
thirty (30) days after receipt of a written offer and application for credit.
   C.   Credits exceeding fee amounts due. If the credit due to a Fee Payer
pursuant to sections above exceeds the Impact Fees that would otherwise be due
from the Fee Payer pursuant to this title (whether calculated through the fee
schedule attached to the capital improvement plan or through an independent
assessment), the Fee Payer may choose to receive such credit in the form of
either:
      1.   A credit against future County or a District’s Impact Fees due for
the same System Improvements; or
      2.   A reimbursement from Impact Fees paid by future Development that
impacts the System Improvements contributed or dedicated by the Fee Payer.
Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the Fee Payer, the County, or the
District, as the case may be, shall be under no obligation to use any of its
funds other than Impact Fees paid by other Development for the same System
Improvements to reimburse the Fee Payer for any credit in excess of the Impact
Fees that are due.
   D.   Written agreement required. If credit or reimbursement is due to the
Fee Payer pursuant to this section, the County or a District, as the case may
be, shall enter into a written agreement with the Fee Payer, negotiated in good
faith, prior to the contribution, dedication, or funding of the System
Improvements giving rise to the credit. The agreement shall provide for the
amount of credit or the amount of time and form of reimbursement, and shall
have a term not exceeding ten (10) years.
   E.   The Administrator’s determination on the written offer of request for
credit shall be provided to the Fee Payer and the County or the District
Commissioners, as the case may be.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 12
IMPACT FEE PAYMENT MISTAKE OR MISREPRESENTATION
SECTION:
14-12-1: Incorrect Impact Fee Payment
14-12-1: INCORRECT IMPACT FEE PAYMENT:
If Impact Fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or misrepresentation,
they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a Fee Payer shall be
refunded by the County or the District, as the case may be, within thirty (30)
days after the acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the
legal rate provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
paid. Any amounts underpaid by the Fee Payer shall be paid to the County or the
District, as the case may be, within thirty (30) days after the Administrator’s
acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided
for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. In the case of
an underpayment of Impact Fees, the Administrator may request the County and
the County may withhold issuance of the Building Permits or Development for the
Project for which the Impact Fees were paid until such underpayment is
corrected, and if amounts owed are not paid within such thirty-day period, the
Administrator may also ask the County to revoke any Building Permits or
Development issued in reliance on the previous payment of such Impact Fees and
refund such fees to the Fee Payer.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 13
REFUNDS
SECTION:
14-13-1: Duty To Refund
14-13-2: Refund Procedure
14-13-3: No Refund Due For Subsequent Reduction In Size Of Development Or
Service Units
14-13-4: Interest
14-13-5: Timing
14-13-1: DUTY TO REFUND:
Fees shall be refunded to the Fee Payer, or to a successor in interest, in the
following circumstances:
   A.   Service is available but never provided; or
   B.   A Building Permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured home,
is denied by the County or abandoned; or
   C.   The Fee Payer pays Impact Fees under protest and a subsequent review of
the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment determines that the
fee paid exceeded the Proportionate Share to which the County or a District, as
the case may be, was entitled to receive; or
   D.   The County or the District, as the case may be, collected the Impact
Fees and failed to Appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to the
section below; or
   E.   Failure of the County or a District, as the case may be, to commence
construction or encumber the funds in the Development Impact Fee Capital
projects Trust Fund.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-13-2: REFUND PROCEDURE:
Any Impact Fee paid shall be refunded if the County or a District, as the case
may be, has failed to commence construction of System Improvements in
accordance with this title, or to Appropriate funds for such construction,
within eight (8) years after the date on which such Impact Fees were collected.
Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of record of the parcel for which the
Impact Fees were paid. The County or the District, as the case may be, may hold
Impact Fees for longer than eight (8) years if it is identified in writing and
in written notice to the owner of record of the parcel identifying:
   A.   A reasonable cause for why the Impact Fees should be held longer than
eight (8) years; and an anticipated date by which the fees will be expended,
but in no event greater than eleven (11) years from the date the Impact Fees
were collected.
      1.   If the County or a District, as the case may be, fails to comply
with the previous sentence, fails to commence construction of System
Improvements in accordance with the written notice, or to Appropriate funds for
such construction on or before the date identified in such writing then any
Impact Fees so identified shall be refunded to the Fee Payer or to a successor
in interest, as the case may be.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-13-3: NO REFUND DUE FOR SUBSEQUENT REDUCTION IN SIZE OF DEVELOPMENT OR
SERVICE UNITS:
After Impact Fees have been paid pursuant to this title and after a certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the County, no refund of any part of such fee
shall be made if the Project for which the fee was paid is later demolished,
destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce the
size of the Project or the number of units in the Project. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-
16-2023)
14-13-4: INTEREST:
Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half the legal rate
provided for in I.C. § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was originally
paid.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-13-5: TIMING:
The County or a District, as the case may be, shall make a determination of
whether a refund is due within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written
request for a refund from the owner of record of the property for which the fee
was paid. When the right to a refund exists, the County or the District, as the
case may be, shall send the refund to the owner of record within ninety (90)
days after it determines that a refund is due.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 14
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUNDS/EXPENDITURES,
BUDGET, AUDIT, AND SURCHARGE
SECTION:
14-14-1: Establishment Of Development Impact Fee Capital Projects Trust Funds
By County And Districts
14-14-2: Trust Fund Deposits And Accounting
14-14-3: Expenditure Eligibility
14-14-4: Annual Capital Budget
14-14-5: Monies In Trust Fund Not Expended Carried Over From Fiscal Year To
Fiscal Year
14-14-6: Annual Audit Report
14-14-7: Surcharge Reimbursement
14-14-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUNDS
BY COUNTY AND DISTRICTS:
The County and each District shall establish a respective Trust Fund. The
County shall maintain the County’s Trust Fund and each District shall maintain
their respective Trust Fund, for the purpose of ensuring that all Impact Fees
collected, pursuant to this title, are used to address impacts reasonably
attributable to new Development for which the Impact Fees are paid. Each Trust
Fund shall be divided into the Accounts. All funds in all Accounts in each
Trust Fund shall be maintained in an interest-bearing account. The interest
earned on each Account pursuant to I.C. § 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by
I.C. § 57-127, as amended, but shall be considered funds of the Account and
shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the Impact Fees
on which the interest is generated.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-2: TRUST FUND DEPOSITS AND ACCOUNTING:
All monies paid by a Fee Payer, pursuant to this title, shall be identified as
Impact Fees and shall be promptly deposited by the Administrator in the
appropriate account of the Trust Fund.
   A.   First-in/first-out. Monies in each account shall be spent in the order
collected, on a first-in/first-out basis.
   B.   Maintenance of Records. The County and each District shall maintain and
keep accurate financial records for each account that shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues, account for all monies received, ensure that the
disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively
for the provisions of Projects specified in the Capital Improvements Plan, and
provide an annual accounting for each Impact Fee Account showing the source and
amount of all funds collected and the Projects that were funded.
   C.   Accounting Principles. The calculation of Impact Fees shall be in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Impact Fees shall not
be deemed invalid because payment of Impact Fees may result in an incidental
benefit to owners or Developers within the Service Area other than the Fee
Payer.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-3: EXPENDITURE ELIGIBILITY:
Expenditures of Impact Fees collected and deposited in the Trust Fund shall be
made only for System Improvements within the Service Area for which the Impact
Fees were collected in accordance with the Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord.
2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-4: ANNUAL CAPITAL BUDGET:
The County and each District shall annually adopt a capital budget.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-5: MONIES IN TRUST FUND NOT EXPENDED CARRIED OVER FROM FISCAL YEAR TO
FISCAL YEAR:
Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific System
Improvements within such Capital Improvements Plan and not expended or refunded
shall be retained in the same account until the next fiscal year. (Ord. 2024-
01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-6: ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT:
As part of their annual audit process, the County and the District(s) shall
each prepare an annual report:
   A.   Describing the amount of all Impact Fees collected, appropriated, or
spent during the preceding year by category of public facility; and
   B.   Describing the percentage of taxes and revenues from sources other than
the Impact Fees collected, appropriated, or spent for System Improvements
during the preceding year in the systems improvements category of Capital
Facilities.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-14-7: SURCHARGE REIMBURSEMENT:
A portion of each Impact Fee collected shall be designated as a surcharge for
reimbursement for the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan in
accordance with I.C. § 67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the
Development’s Proportionate Share of the cost of preparing the Capital
Improvements Plan.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 15
APPEALS/MEDIATION
SECTION:
14-15-1: Appeals to the District’s Commissioners
14-15-2: Appeals to the County Commissioners
14-15-3: Mediation
14-15-1: APPEALS TO THE DISTRICT’S COMMISSIONERS:
Any Fee Payer who is or may be obligated to pay an Impact Fee, which is
established by the County by Intergovernmental Agreement, and who claims a
right to receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption, or credit under this title
or is otherwise dissatisfied with a decision made by the Administrator in
applying this title, may appeal such decision to the District Commissioners in
accordance with the following process:
   A.   The Fee Payer shall have the burden of demonstrating that the decision
was in error.
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this subsection, the Fee
Payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the Administrator within
thirty (30) days after the date of the Administrator’s decision, or the date on
which the Fee Payer submitted a payment of the Impact Fees under protest,
whichever is later. Such written notice of appeal shall include a statement
describing why the Fee Payer believes that the appealed decision was in error,
together with copies of any documents that the Fee Payer believes support the
claim.
   C.   The Commissioners shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after
receipt of a written notice of appeal. The Fee Payer shall have a right to be
present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The Administrator
shall likewise have the right to be present and to present evidence in support
of their decision. The criteria to be used by the District Commissioners in
considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the Administrator or the
alternative decision or interpretation offered by the Fee Payer, more
accurately reflects the intent of this title that new Development in the
Service Area pay its Proportionate Share of the costs of System Improvements to
the District’s facilities necessary to serve new Development and whether the
provisions of this title have been correctly applied. The District
Commissioners shall issue a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying the
decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-15-2: APPEALS TO THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS:
Any Fee Payer who is or may be obligated to pay an Impact Fee which is
established by the County and is subject to an Intergovernmental Agreement, and
who claims a right to receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption, or credit
under this title or is otherwise dissatisfied with a decision made by the
County Administrator or the decision of the District Commissioners in applying
this title, may appeal such decision to the County Commissioners.
   A.   The Fee Payer shall have the burden of demonstrating that the County
Administrator’s or the District Commissioners’ decision was in error.
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this subsection, the Fee
Payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the County Administrator
within thirty (30) days after the date of the District Commissioners’ decision.
Such written notice of appeal shall include a statement describing why the Fee
Payer believes that the appealed decision of the County Administrator or the
District Commissioners, as the case may be, was in error, together with copies
of any documents that the Fee Payer believes support the claim. The County
Administrator shall within three (3) business days deliver the notice of appeal
together with copies of any documents filed with it to the County Clerk.
   C.   The County Commissioners shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days
after receipt by the County Clerk of a written notice of appeal. The Fee Payer
shall have a right to be present and to present evidence in support of the
appeal. The County Administrator or the District Administrator, as the case may
be, shall likewise have the right to be present and to present evidence in
support of the decision. The criteria to be used by the County Commissioners in
considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the County Administrator or
the District Commissioners’ decision on appeal, or the alternative decision or
interpretation offered by the Fee Payer, more accurately reflects the intent of
this title that new Development pay its Proportionate Share of the costs of
System Improvements to facilities necessary to serve new Development and
whether the provisions of this title have been correctly applied. The County
Commissioners shall issue a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying the
decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-15-3: MEDIATION:
Any Fee Payer that has a disagreement with an Administrator regarding an Impact
Fee determination that is or may be due for a proposed Development pursuant to
this title, may enter into a voluntary agreement with (depending upon the
progress of the protest) the County or the District, as the case may be, to
submit the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party
acceptable to both the Fee Payer and the County or the District.
   A.   Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a timely
appeal pursuant to sections 14-15-1 and 14-15-2, or as an alternative to such
appeal, provided that the request for mediation is filed no later than the last
date on which a timely appeal could be filed pursuant to section 14-15-2.
   B.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the Fee Payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in this section.
   C.   If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be shared
equally by the Fee Payer and the County or the District, (depending upon the
progress of the protest), and a written agreement regarding the payment of such
costs shall be executed prior to the commencement of mediation.
   D.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues, the Fee Payer
retains all rights to seek relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
CHAPTER 16
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-16-1: No Requirement Of The County To Approve Extraordinary Impact
Development
14-16-2: District Not Obligated To Approve Development That Reduces Levels Of
Service
14-16-3: No Additional Right To Develop Created By This Title
14-16-4: No Limit On County’s Eminent Domain Authority
14-16-5: Agreements Between Property Owners, Idaho Transportation Department
(ITD), And Other Governmental Entities For Construction Or Installation Of
System Improvements
14-16-6: Plan Of Alternative Sources Of Revenue
14-16-7: Safety Codes And Other Rules Applicable To Project Improvements
14-16-8: Development Approved By The County Prior To The Effective Date Of This
Title Not Subject To Impact Fees
14-16-9: Punishment
14-16-10: Liberal Construction
14-16-1: NO REQUIREMENT OF THE COUNTY TO APPROVE EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT
DEVELOPMENT:
Nothing in this title shall obligate the County to approve Development which
results in an Extraordinary Impact.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-2: DISTRICT NOT OBLIGATED TO APPROVE DEVELOPMENT THAT REDUCES LEVELS OF
SERVICE:
Nothing in this title shall obligate a District to approve any Development
request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in this title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-3: NO ADDITIONAL RIGHT TO DEVELOP CREATED BY THIS TITLE: 
Nothing in this title shall be construed to create any additional right to
develop real property or diminish the County in regulating the orderly
development of real property within its boundaries. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-4: NO LIMIT ON COUNTY’S EMINENT DOMAIN AUTHORITY:
Nothing in this title limits the use of the County’s power of eminent domain or
supersedes or conflicts with requirements or procedures authorized in the Idaho
Code for local improvement districts or general obligation bond issues. (Ord.
2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-5: AGREEMENTS BETWEEN PROPERTY OWNERS, IDAHO TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT
(ITD), AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION OF
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private
agreements between property owners or Developers, Idaho Transportation
Department, and governmental entities in regards to the construction or
installation of System Improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements
for System Improvements Costs incurred by a Developer including inter-project
transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for Project Improvements
which are used or shared by more than one (1) Development Project. (Ord. 2024-
01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-6: PLAN OF ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF REVENUE:
The County and the Districts shall each develop a plan for alternative sources
of revenue, which shall include but not necessarily be limited to plans
generated during their annual budget process. These alternative sources of
revenue may include lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, and
implementation of user fees, administrative and regulatory fees, and other
forms of revenue. (Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-7: SAFETY CODES AND OTHER RULES APPLICABLE TO PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the County or a District from requiring a
Developer to construct reasonable Project Improvements, as are required by
applicable safety odes and other rules that are adopted which have jurisdiction
to enforce in conjunction with a Development.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-8: DEVELOPMENT APPROVED BY THE COUNTY PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
TITLE NOT SUBJECT TO IMPACT FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision(s) of this title, that portion of a Project
for which a complete application for a Building Permit has been received by the
County, prior to the effective date of this title, shall not be subject to an
Impact Fee imposed by this title. If the resulting Building Permit is later
revised or replaced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
title, and the new Building Permit(s) reflects a Development with density,
intensity, size or number of units more than ten (10) percent higher than
reflected in the original Building Permit, then the Impact Fee may be charged
on the difference in density, intensity, size or number of units between the
original and the revised or replacement Building Permit.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-9: PUNISHMENT:
Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to one (1) year in county jail, and/or a one
thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Knowingly furnishing false
information to any official of the County or a District charged with the
administration of this title, including without limitation, the furnishing of
false information regarding the expected size, use, or impacts from a proposed
Development, shall be a violation of this title.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
14-16-10: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this title shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Act may
be fully carried out by the County Commissioners and each District’s
Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-01, 10-16-2023)
TITLE 15
AGRICULTURAL LANDS, WORKING FARMS, AND FORESTS
CHAPTER 1
AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA
SECTION:
15-1-1: Title
15-1-2: Structure
15-1-3: Purpose
15-1-4: Authority
15-1-5: Definitions
15-1-6: Creation And Designation Of APA
15-1-7: Review Process
15-1-8: Expansion Of An APA
15-1-9: Removal Or Termination Of An APA
15-1-10: Enrollment Duration And Review
15-1-11: Fees
15-1-12: Enforcement, Prohibitions, And Penalties
15-1-13: APA Commission
15-1-14: Severability
15-1-15: Affect On Other Ordinances
15-1-16: Allowed Appurtenant Uses
15-1-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA ACT ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-2: STRUCTURE:
Titles and subtitles of this Chapter are only used for organization and
structure and the language in each paragraph of this Chapter should control
with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of the Board of
County Commissioners (Board). (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for a voluntary process through which
agricultural and timber producers of Valley County may make application to
commit lands actively devoted to agriculture for future agricultural use. An
Agricultural Protection Area (APA) designation aims to protect productive
farmland, rangeland, and forest land; promote farm viability; support the local
agricultural economy; and provide for long-term planning stability. This
chapter sets out the process for creation of Agriculture Protection Areas.
(Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-4: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter is authorized by Idaho Code Chapter 97, Title 67. (Ord. 2025-01,
12-12-2024)
15-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, words shall have the following meanings:
   AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION: Activities or conditions conducted on land actively
devoted to agriculture as defined in Idaho Code § 63-604, or on forest land as
defined in Idaho Code § 63- 1701.
   AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA (“APA”): Specific parcels of land in a
designated geographic area voluntarily created under the authority of this
chapter for the purpose of protecting and preserving agricultural land.
   APA COMMISSION: The advisory board to the Board of County Commissioners
created pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-9705.
   APPLICANT: Anyone who owns five (5) contiguous acres or more of land that
has been in active agricultural or forest production for the previous three (3)
consecutive years who voluntarily applies for that land to be part of an APA.
   AREA OF CITY IMPACT (AOI): Area designated by county ordinance where city
growth and development are expected to occur under Idaho Code § 67-6526.
   CAFO (CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION OR CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING
OPERATIONS): See definition in Idaho Code section 67-6529C. All CAFOs are
subject to Idaho Code section 67-6529.
   HARDSHIP: A situation or circumstance over which a landowner in an APA has
no control and can then petition for removal for reasons that include but are
not limited to an adverse result in litigation against the farm or landowner,
illness or health issues resulting in financial impacts, death of a close
family member that would lead to unanticipated financial hardships, significant
tax liabilities, bankruptcy due to another person’s fraud, or any other illegal
activity.
   PROPOSAL: Written documents submitted to a governing body or agricultural
protection area commission from a landowner regarding his property. (Ord. 2025-
01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-6: CREATION AND DESIGNATION OF APA:
An Agriculture Protection Area shall be designated as an “APA.” An APA
designation is a voluntary land use designation available to landowners who
wish to protect their agricultural land from future nonagricultural
development.
   A.   To qualify for an APA designation, the land must be:
      1.   At least five (5) contiguous acres,
      2.   Actively devoted to an agricultural or forest production for the
previous three (3) consecutive years,
      3.   Assessed as agricultural (Valley County Assessor Appraisal Category
1-5) or forest land (Valley County Assessor Appraisal Category 6-7), and
      4.   Located within a zone that allows for agricultural or forest use.
   B.   Landowners wishing to establish an APA must submit an application to
the Valley County Planning and Zoning Department. At a minimum, the application
shall include the following:
      1.   Name, phone number, email, and mailing address of the landowner;
      2.   Proof of land ownership;
      3.   A legal description of the parcels, structures, and facilities
proposed to be included in the APA;
      4.   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed APA;
      5.   A statement outlining the current contiguous acreages of land, land
use, agricultural productivity, and other relevant characteristics of the land
to be included in the APA;
      6.   The agricultural category designation by the Assessor’s Office;
      7.   The number of years the land has been in agricultural or forest
production, the types of agricultural or forest commodities produced, and the
applicant’s plan to continue using the land for agricultural or forest
purposes;
      8.   Plans for donation, bequest, sale, transfer, or transition of the
agricultural or forest production operations to heirs, business partners, or
other third parties, if any, and may include a term longer than 20 years;
      9.   The stated reasons for seeking an APA designation. (Ord. 2025-01,
12-12-2024)
15-1-7: REVIEW PROCESS:
Upon receipt of a completed application, the APA commission shall schedule a
meeting and review the proposal and make a recommendation to the Board of
County Commissioners within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application
by staff.
   A.   Review Criteria - The application shall be evaluated on the following
criteria:
      1.   The total contiguous acreage of the land is at least five (5) acres
in size and is and has been actively devoted to agricultural or forest
production for the last three (3) consecutive years,
      2.   Viability of the proposed APA lands for continued use for
agricultural or forest production,
      3.   The Applicant’s plan for continuity of operation over the 20-year
designation period,
      4.   Possible conflict with adjacence to an existing area of city impact,
existing city annexation, or development plans or agreements,
      5.   Proximity to existing public rights of way,
      6.   Proximity to planned transportation corridors or future public
rights of way,
      7.   Proximity to planned airport expansion or development,
      8.   Proximity to planned development with existing entitlements,
      9.   Agricultural production capability of the land within the proposed
APA, and
      10.   Other local impacts relevant to the proposed APA.
   B.   Additional Conditions - Notwithstanding the criteria and review process
outlined in this chapter, the Board of County Commissioners may place
additional conditions on lands designated as an APA, including, but not limited
to, setbacks from existing public rights of way, setbacks from existing public
structures, and a review of the land’s APA designation after twenty (20) years.
   C.   Memorialize Decision - Once the APA commission makes its recommendation
to the Board of County Commissioners, the Board of County Commissioners shall
hold a public hearing and issue its decision within 60 days of a
recommendation. Failure to make a decision shall render the APA commission’s
recommendation final. The Board of County Commissioner’s decision shall include
Findings of Facts supporting its decision. The decision shall be memorialized
as follows:
      1.   Record the designation of an APA, a legal description of the area,
and any findings of fact with the County recorder within ten (10) days;
         a.   Findings of Fact should include the description.
         b.   Findings of Fact should include conditions along with a mandatory
condition that the APA designation transfers with the land.
      2.   Update County land use planning maps to delineate the APA in
Appendix B of the Comprehensive Plan in order to reflect the boundaries of the
APA:
         a.   Update will be through recordation of a resolution approved by
the Board of County Commissioners.
         b.   This change shall not be an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan
but an inclusion to the maps that can be changed more frequently.
         c.   This map update does not require Planning and Zoning Commission
approval.
      3.   Notify relevant public officials and agencies of the designation.
   D.   Hearing Procedures - Hearing notice shall include the following:
      1.   Notice to property owners within 300' of the boundaries of the
property held by the applicant and political subdivisions a minimum of ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date.
      2.   One notice is the newspaper a minimum of 15 days prior to the
hearing date.
      3.   Posted on-site a minimum of one week prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-8: EXPANSION OF AN APA:
An expansion of an existing APA shall follow the same application, review, and
hearing procedures outlined in this chapter. Any expansion of an APA shall be
contiguous to the APA. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-9: REMOVAL OR TERMINATION OF AN APA:
   A.   A landowner wishing to remove their property from an APA must do so in
writing to the APA Commission. The APA Commission shall make a recommendation
to the Board. The Board of County Commissioners shall acknowledge receipt of
the request for removal in writing confirming the removal date as ten (10)
years from the date of the written request for removal, or upon expiration of
the designation, whichever is sooner.
   B.   A landowner wishing to remove a portion of the APA may do so at any
time with approval from the Board of County Commissioners for the following
reasons and it must be memorialized with an amended document that is recorded
and with changes to the planning maps:
      1.   In order to establish commercial, industrial, or manufacturing uses
that are associated with the agricultural production activity in the APA.
      2.   In order to establish multi-generational houses or employee houses
for the agricultural operations.
   C.   A landowner wishing to terminate an APA for a hardship must request in
writing a meeting with the Board of County Commissioners. The meeting request
shall include a proof of hardship. The request and proof of hardship should be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department. Early termination of the APA
shall only occur if the landowner is able to establish a hardship as defined in
this chapter. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-10: ENROLLMENT DURATION AND REVIEW:
Twenty (20) year, or a specifically designated longer duration, after the
creation of an APA, if the landowner desires to continue with the APA, no
action on the part of the landowner is necessary and the APA shall
automatically renew for another twenty (20) years. If the landowner desires to
terminate the agricultural protection area, written notice to the Board of
County Commissioners is required to be submitted to both the County Clerk and
Planning and Zoning Board at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of
the APA. Failure to meet the initial termination deadline shall constitute
hardship for purposes of requesting an early termination of the APA during any
automatic renewal period. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-11: FEES:
An application fee shall be required to cover administrative costs, including,
but not limited to, reviewing materials, conducting public meetings and
hearings, processing and recording documents, and updating county land use
maps. Fees will be established by resolution of the BOCC. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-
2024)
15-1-12: ENFORCEMENT, PROHIBITIONS, AND PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise approved by the Board of County Commissioners, the following
land uses are not allowed within an APA:
   A.   The siting of large confined animal feeding operations (CAFO);
   B.   The siting of non-agricultural commercial, manufacturing, industrial,
solar energy (does not include solar for agricultural uses i.e. pump houses,
electric fences, and pivots), wind energy, or battery storage structures
associated with the APA; or
   C.   Any other nonagricultural land uses.
The Board of County Commissioners or acting code enforcement officer or other
designee shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Any
person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Idaho Code § 18-113. (Ord. 2025-01,
12-12-2024)
15-1-13: APA COMMISSION:
The Board of County Commissioners shall appoint five (5) members to the APA
Commission to serve for a term of three (3) years. Members shall be actively
employed by or supporting production agriculture as further defined in Idaho
Code 67- 905. APA Commission members shall serve in an advisory role and have
the following responsibilities: 1) review and make recommendations on APA
applications, and 2) assess and report on the agricultural needs of the County.
The Board of County Commissioners may remove members of the APA Commission at
any time, with or without cause. APA Commission members serve in a volunteer
capacity without pay, benefits, or other compensation. (See APA Commission
Bylaws for additional information.) (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held
to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions, and they shall remain in full
force and effect. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-15: AFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES:
Nothing in this Title relieves APA lands from compliance with existing Valley
County Codes. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
15-1-16: ALLOWED APPURTENANT USES:
Lands protected under the APA program may have structures such as employee
bunkhouses for agricultural uses and/or agricultural buildings such as barns
and pumphouses. (Ord. 2025-01, 12-12-2024)
