WALLACE, IDAHO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-01, passed March 12, 2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2022-04
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WALLACE, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE OF
IDAHO, ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY, REVISING, AMENDING,
RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY, REPEALING ALL PREVIOUSLY ENACTED ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT, REESTABLISHING
PENALTIES PERTINENT TO THE CITY CODES, AND SETTING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
   WHEREAS, the City of Wallace is a municipal corporation located in the
county of Shoshone, state of Idaho, duly established under the laws of the
state of Idaho; and
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wallace
are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs;
and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Idaho empower and
authorize the City of Wallace to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the City of Wallace has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
Wallace of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in
book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the CITY OF
WALLACE:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Wallace as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Wallace.
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be duly published after adoption and approval by
the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Wallace is hereby authorized and
ordered to file such copies of the Code as may be required by law, with said
Code available immediately for viewing by the general public at:
   https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/wallaceid/latest/overview
Section 5.   Such Code shall take effect and be in full force and effect as of
the date of publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all
courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings
and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   That all said penalties for violations of such Code are hereby
reaffirmed by the passage of this Code, except as may have been amended or
modified therein.
ADOPTED BY THE COUNCIL AND APPROVED by the MAYOR this 8th day of September,
2022.
 
                        /s/ Lynn Mogensen
                        LYNN MOGENSEN, Mayor
                        City of WALLACE
ATTEST:
/s/ Kristina Larson
KRISTINA LARSON, City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Alterations
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Public ways and utility ordinances
   
10.07   Court proceedings
   
10.08   General constructional rule
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Definitions
   
10.11   Catchlines
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   (A)   Upon the adoption by the City Council, this code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of Wallace. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the “Wallace City Code” and is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city, as provided in §
10.03. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, to its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title
in any legal documents.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
   (B)   (1)   From and after the date of passage of this division (B), this
code, containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together
with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the
official code and law of the city as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
      (2)   There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature
amending, altering, adding, or deleting provisions of this official code is
identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each
of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of
the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any
and all times that said office is regularly open.
      (3)   All ordinances of a general nature included in this official code
shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision, and the fact
that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body
shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of
ordinances included in said official code. All ordinances of a special nature,
such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances,
and annexation ordinances, shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically repealed or amended by a provision of this code. Such ordinances
are not intended to be included in this official code.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to change
or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
      (5)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
      (6)   This division (B) and the rest of this code adopted by the same
shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Preface)
(Ord. 2000-01, passed 3-14-2000)
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.05.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter, and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.04 ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change,
replace, or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a
manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted.
      (2)   Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official
instructions when so authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk/Treasurer
shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official
copies maintained in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (C)   Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer when directed so to do by
order of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.06 PUBLIC WAYS AND UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service, or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of §
10.05, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which
case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.07 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Prior acts. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatsoever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   Extend to all repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals,
either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Currently-pending actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.08 GENERAL CONSTRUCTIONAL RULE.
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons,
any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party, or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only
or a particular gender, several matters, parties, or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   (B)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to “title,” “chapter,” “subchapter,”
“section,” and/or “division,” or words of like-import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
code or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional,
invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, division,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional,
invalid, or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
§ 10.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of the principal with authority conferred
by the principal to the AGENT, either expressly or by implication.
   CITY. The City of Wallace, County of Shoshone, State of Idaho.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police shall be the individual appointed as
the head of the Police Department, or the executive officer of that agency/
organization contracted to carry out the policing functions for the city.
   CODE. The City Code of the City of Wallace.
   COUNCIL. Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of
Wallace, Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Shoshone, State of Idaho.
   CRIME. An act in violation of this code.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Wallace.”
   FELONY. A crime as defined under Idaho Code § 18-111.
   GENDER. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   INFRACTION. A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not to exceed $300 and for which no incarceration
may be imposed.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession, or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Every crime, except a felony.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community, or that activity which arises from unreasonable,
unwarranted, or unlawful use by a person of his or her own property working
obstruction or injury to the right of another or to the public.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others, or who has possession of or who can control what goes on the premises.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of
Wallace.”
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person, any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or lessee of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government, legal representative, trustee or receiver, trustee in
bankruptcy, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include tangible or intangible property and every
description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action,
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right, or title
to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged, or diminished and every right or interest therein, whether it has
any intrinsic value or not.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to a person engaged in the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or
things direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STATE. The State of Idaho.
   STREET. Shall include thoroughfares such as alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks, or urban
ways used for travel.
   TENANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. Relates to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles, or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person’s proper mark.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
§ 10.11 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty.
      (1)   Misdemeanor.
         (a)   Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person convicted of
a violation of any section or provision of this code deemed a misdemeanor may
be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000 for any single offense and may be
confined in the county jail for a period of not more than six months.
         (b)   Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and,
in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court
may assess.
      (2)   Infraction. When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not to exceed $300, and no incarceration may be imposed.
      (3)   Federally mandated programs. Any city which is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, may enforce such
requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty not
to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment for criminal offenses not to exceed six
months, or to include both a fine and imprisonment for criminal offenses.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
   (B)   Application of penalty provisions.
      (1)   Applicability. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or
where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to
be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
      (2)   Breach of section. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
      (3)   One recovery for same offense. In all cases where the same offense
is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
   (C)   Liability of officers. No provision of this code designating the
duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer
or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform
such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
   (D)   Rate of credit on fine for days in jail. In default of the payment of
any fine and the costs of prosecution, or either of them, upon conviction under
any of the ordinances of the city, the defendant shall be committed to the
county jail at the rate of not less than one day for each $35 of such fine and
costs, or at a rate then applicable to a detention facility wherein the
defendant is committed.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)
(Ord. 350, passed 9-14-1959)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Corporate limits
   
11.02   Corporate seal
   
11.03   Official newspaper
   
11.04   Official depository
§ 11.01 CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   Original corporate limits.
      (1)   All the territory contained within the lines hereinafter described,
situated in the county shall comprise the municipal corporation of the city,
and all of the laws and ordinances now in force in said city or which may be
regularly adopted shall be in force in said territory.
      (2)   The following is the description of the exterior boundary lines of
the city aforesaid, and such lines are hereby established, designated, adopted,
and accepted as the boundary lines of the city: Beginning at corner No. 1, a
cedar post from which the north quarter corner of section 34, township 48,
north range 4; east of the Boise meridian, bears east 250 feet; thence south
1,786.44 feet to corner No. 2; thence east 6,269.76 feet to corner No. 3;
thence north 1,786.44 feet to corner No. 4, situated 739.36 feet east of the
north quarter corner of section 35, township 48, north range 4, east of the
Boise meridian; thence north 69 degrees west 2,084.7 feet to corner No. 5;
thence north 1,893 feet to corner No. 6; thence west 4,323.53 feet to corner
No. 7; thence south 2,640 feet to corner No. 1, the place of beginning.
   (B)   Territory added. The following described territory, divided into lots
of less than five acres each, and contiguous and adjacent to the east boundary
of the city, shall be and hereby is annexed to and made a part of the city: The
boundary of said territory begins at corner No. 4 of the city, according to the
official survey thereof, thence north 70 degrees 00 minutes east 1,150 feet to
a point south of the county highway designated corner No. 4-A; thence north 20
degrees 00 minutes west 640 feet to a point designated corner No. 4-B; thence
south 70 degrees 00 minutes west 1,886.2 feet to a point designated corner No.
4-C, being the intersection of said line with the city boundary; thence south
69 degrees 00 minutes east 975.5 feet along the present city boundary to corner
No. 4 and the place of beginning.
   (C)   Filing. The City Clerk/Treasurer is ordered to file a copy of the
ordinance codified in this section with the County Recorder, and it is hereby
ordered that the cost of said survey of the territory hereby annexed be
assessed and prorated to the present owners of said lands within the territory
above described and that said assessments be handled the same as a regular tax.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 11.02 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   Design. The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in form with
inner and outer circles. The outer circle shall be one and one-half inches in
diameter overall, and the inner circle shall be one inch in diameter overall.
It shall bear upon the space between the two circles the words, “City of
Wallace, Idaho,” and upon the space within the inner circle the words
“Corporate Seal.”
   (B)   Adopted. The seal described in division (A) above be and the same is
hereby adopted as the corporate seal of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 11.03 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.
   (A)   Designation. It shall be the duty of the City Council at any regular
meeting of said Council to designate some newspaper published and printed in
the city as the official city paper, in which shall be published all
ordinances, resolutions, and other notices by law required to be published, or
authorized by a vote of the City Council, which official newspaper may be
changed at any regular meeting of said City Council by a majority vote of the
City Council.
   (B)   Affidavit of publication. It shall be the duty of the publisher and
printer of such paper, within five days after the completion of the publication
of any ordinance, resolution, or notice of the City Council, to file, with the
City Clerk/Treasurer, an affidavit of the publication thereof, showing the
dates upon which such publication commenced and ended, the number of times
published and the name of the paper in which it was published, to which
affidavit shall be attached a copy of the ordinance, resolution, or notice so
published, taken from the regular issue of such paper, which proof of
publication shall be recorded in case of an ordinance as required by §
30.08.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)
§ 11.04 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORY.
   Mountain West Bank is hereby designated as the official depository of
municipal funds for the city. The City Clerk/Treasurer is hereby ordered,
required, and directed to keep monies belonging to or in the care of the city
coming into his or her hands and into the hands of the city in the above-named
depository.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-4)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
Organization of Legislative Body
   
30.01   Election; term
   
30.02   President
   
30.03   Salaries
   
30.04   Monthly meetings
   
30.05   Quorum
   
30.06   Rules and order of business
   
30.07   Ordinances
   
30.08   City Clerk/Treasurer to record proceedings
   
30.09   Custody of seal and records
   
30.10   Committees
   
30.11   Banking services
Elections
   
30.25   Officers of election
   
30.26   Assigned position of City Council members
   
30.27   Supplies
   
30.28   Polling places
ORGANIZATION OF LEGISLATIVE BODY
§ 30.01 ELECTION; TERM.
   (A)   The City Council, consisting of six members, and the Mayor shall be
elected to office for four-
year terms at the time and in the manner as provided by the laws of the state.
   (B)   The City Council shall be the legislative department of the city and
shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by statute
to it.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
§ 30.02 PRESIDENT.
   At the first meeting in January following election, the City Council shall
elect one of its members to serve as President of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)
§ 30.03 SALARIES.
   Commencing January 1, 1990, the salaries of the Mayor and the members of the
City Council shall be as follows.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary in the sum of $3,600,
payable at the rate of $300 monthly.
   (B)   Council members. Each member of the City Council shall receive an
annual salary in the sum of $600, payable at the rate of $50 monthly.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3) (Ord. 504, passed 8-16-1989)
§ 30.04 MONTHLY MEETINGS.
   City Council meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month
beginning November 2022 and continuing until otherwise amended. Such meetings
begin at 5:00 p.m. and shall be held at the City Hall, 703 Cedar Street,
Wallace, Idaho, in the City Council chambers, unless otherwise designated.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4) (Ord. 404(A), passed 4-14-1998; Ord. 2022-07, passed 11-
9-2022)
§ 30.05 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-5)
§ 30.06 RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish such rules and order of business as
it sees fit for the conduct of its meetings and for the transaction of such
business as may properly come before it.
   (B)   Such rules and order of business may be amended at any time by a
majority vote of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-6)
§ 30.07 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Presentment of ordinances. All ordinances shall be written or printed
and presented to the City Council by a member or a committee at a regular or
special meeting.
   (B)   Manner of passing.
      (1)   Every such ordinance shall be read at length in meetings of the
City Council on three different days. At each reading of such ordinance, it
shall be open to discussion and amendment and may be referred to a committee,
and shall be passed to the next reading, unless, by a vote of the City Council,
some other disposition is made of it.
      (2)   On final passage, the yeas and the nays shall be called and
recorded and a concurrence of a majority of all the members elected to the City
Council shall be required for its passage; provided, three-fourths of the
members of the City Council present may dispense with the three readings and
pass the ordinance at any meeting.
   (C)   Endorsement after passage. When such ordinance is passed, it shall be
signed by the City Clerk/Treasurer, and the date of its passage by the City
Council shall be added thereto; within three days thereafter, it shall be
presented to the Mayor, or in case of his or her absence from the city, to the
President of the City Council for his or her consideration. If he or she
approves the same, he or she shall attach his or her signature thereto,
together with the date of such approval.
   (D)   Veto by Mayor; passage over Mayor’s veto. Should the Mayor not approve
the ordinance, he or she shall return the same to the City Council with his or
her objections to the same, in writing, on or before the date of the next
regular meeting after the same was presented to him or her.
      (1)   When an ordinance is so returned by the Mayor, the City Council
shall proceed to reconsider the same.
      (2)   If, on such reconsideration, two-thirds of the members elected to
the City Council vote in the affirmative, the ordinance shall become a law
notwithstanding the Mayor’s veto.
   (E)   Certificate attached when passed over Mayor’s veto. When any ordinance
has been passed over the Mayor’s veto, as provided in division (D) above, the
City Clerk/Treasurer shall annex a certificate to the ordinance stating that
the same was vetoed by the Mayor, giving the date of such veto, and that, upon
reconsideration by the City Council, it received the required two-thirds vote
of all the members elected to the City Council, together with the date of such
action.
   (F)   Ordinance becoming law without Mayor’s signature. Should the Mayor
refuse or neglect to sign any such ordinance or return the same with his or her
objections, in writing, on or before the date of the next regular meeting after
the same was submitted to him or her, it shall become a law without his or her
signature.
   (G)   Certificate attached when Mayor fails to sign or veto. When any
ordinance has become a law without the signature of the Mayor, as provided in
division (F) above, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall annex to such ordinance a
certificate to the effect that the Mayor has failed to sign or veto the same,
and it has therefore become a law without his or her signature.
   (H)   When ordinance passed. An ordinance shall be considered passed on the
date of its approval by the Mayor; and, in case of his or her vetoing an
ordinance, on the date of the passage of such ordinance over his or her veto;
and, in the case of the failure of the Mayor to sign or veto an ordinance, on
the date of the next regular meeting after such ordinance was presented to him
or her.
   (I)   Effective date of ordinances. All ordinances, unless otherwise
provided in such ordinance, shall take effect and be in force from and after
their passage, approval, and publication. Publication shall be made by being
inserted in one issue of the official paper of the city, as provided by §
11.03.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-7)
§ 30.08 CITY CLERK/TREASURER TO RECORD PROCEEDINGS.
   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall attend all meetings of the City Council and
keep a correct journal of its proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-8)
§ 30.09 CUSTODY OF SEAL AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall have custody of the corporate seal of the
city and all records, papers, and files relating to the proceedings or business
of the City Council; the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have custody of all
ordinances, and when the same are published, he or she shall record the same at
length together with the affidavit of publication in an ordinance book which
shall be designated as “Ordinance Book Number of the City of Wallace.”
   (B)   The original of all ordinances shall be filed and preserved by the
City Clerk/Treasurer in an orderly file maintained for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-9)
§ 30.10 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Mayor to appoint committees. The Mayor may appoint up to three members
of the City Council to each of the following committees, and if members are so
appointed, said committee shall function in accordance with the provisions of
this section:
      (1)   Finance Committee;
      (2)   Street and Alley Committee;
      (3)   Rules and Ordinance Committee;
      (4)   Park and Library Committee;
      (5)   City Buildings Committee;
      (6)   Health and Sanitation Committee (two members);
      (7)   Sewer and Light Committee;
      (8)   Police and Police Regulations Committee;
      (9)   Fire and Water Committee;
      (10)   Swimming Pool Committee; and
      (11)   Garbage Committee.
   (B)   Finance Committee. It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to
see that all bonds required of any of the officers of the city shall be
properly executed and filed; to audit and approve, or reject, all claims
presented to the City Council for allowance; to check up and audit all accounts
and reports of the several officers of the city; to keep advised of the amount
of money in the hands of the City Clerk/Treasurer in the several funds; to
advise the City Council in case the money in any fund shall be exhausted before
the allowance of any claim upon such fund; and further, to have general
supervision over the financial affairs of the city.
   (C)   Street and Alley Committee. It shall be the duty of the Street and
Alley Committee to inspect and require to be kept in repair all walks and
sidewalks now existing, or that may hereafter be constructed by any ordinance
duly passed by the City Council; it shall see that such walks are kept free
from obstructions and in good repair, and in case it, or any of the members,
have or receive notice of any defects or breakages in any such walks or
sidewalks, or of any obstructions thereon, it shall give immediate notice to
the owner or occupant of the lot abutting on such walk, or to the person so
obstructing such walk, to repair or remove the same; it shall be its duty to
see that the streets and alleys of the city are kept free from all
encroachments and obstructions and in good repair; and it shall have general
supervision of all work done thereon by the overseer of streets.
   (D)   Rules and Ordinance Committee. It shall be the duty of the Rules and
Ordinance Committee, with the assistance and advice of the City Attorney, to
prepare all ordinances recommended by the City Council; and, before any
ordinance or resolution shall be presented to the Council for passage, it must
be submitted to the Rules and Ordinance Committee.
   (E)   Park and Library Committee. It shall be the duty of the Park and
Library Committee to have general supervision over the City Library and City
Park, and it shall have the care and maintenance of all property of the city
thereon; it shall make such improvements as may be directed by the City
Council; and shall make such rules and regulations regarding the use of the
City Park and City Library as may be deemed to be to the best interest of the
public.
   (F)   Health and Sanitation Committee. It shall be the duty of the Health
and Sanitation Committee, in connection with the Panhandle Health District or
its agent, to see that the sanitary ordinances are observed and enforced; to
inspect the alleys and public buildings and see that all refuse, filth, and
decayed matter are removed therefrom; and to report the maintenance of any
nuisance to the City Council.
   (G)   City Buildings Committee. It shall be the duty of the City Buildings
Committee to have general supervision over all the city buildings, to provide
suitable quarters for the members of the Fire Department and for the officers
of the city, and to keep the property and buildings belonging to the city
insured against loss by fire.
   (H)   Sewer and Light Committee. It shall be the duty of the Sewer and Light
Committee to have general supervision over the sewer system of the city, and to
see that all sewer mains are kept free from obstructions and are properly
flushed when required; it shall see that all sewer connections are made in
accordance with the city ordinances; it shall also have supervision over the
street lighting of the city, and shall report to the City Council any failure
or neglect in lighting the city on the part of the company furnishing same.
   (I)   Police and Police Regulations Committee. The Police and Police
Regulations Committee shall be composed of the Mayor as Chair and three members
of the City Council, to be chosen and named by the Mayor, and it shall be its
duty to exercise a strict supervision over the police force, to see that it
performs all of the duties that are required of them by the laws and
ordinances, and, in case of default, to report the same to the City Council at
its next regular meeting. It shall have the power to direct and control the
actions of any member of such police force in any manner consistent with the
laws and ordinances.
   (J)   Fire and Water Committee. It shall be the duty of the Fire and Water
Committee to have a general oversight and care over the property and
proceedings of the Fire Department, to look after all the hydrants attached to
the water mains in the city and see that these are kept properly protected and
open so that the water therein may be unobstructed by frost or in any other
manner; and to see that the East Shoshone Water District and its successors and
assigns keep and maintain a sufficient supply of water in the mains of the city
at all times for fire purposes.
   (K)   Swimming Pool Committee. It shall be the duty of the Swimming Pool
Committee to exercise a strict supervision over the city swimming pool. It
shall adopt such rules and regulations governing the use of such pool as it
deems best for the public interest. All employees at such pool shall be subject
to its orders and supervision.
   (L)   Garbage Committee.
      (1)   The Garbage Committee shall have supervision of the enforcement of
the city’s garbage ordinance and/or franchise agreement(s) for the regulation
of refuse or garbage within the city limits. It shall have charge of and
oversee that the sanitary provisions of the garbage ordinance or franchise
agreement(s) are complied with and enforced.
      (2)   It shall have the power to establish such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with any garbage ordinance or franchise agreement or other city
ordinances as it shall deem in the best interests of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-10)
§ 30.11 BANKING SERVICES.
   (A)   Banking services established. The official bank of the City, being
that bank authorized to hold the money belonging to the City of Wallace, shall
be Mountain West Bank.
   (B)   Authorized signers on accounts. The City shall designate by Resolution
those individuals duly authorized to act in an official capacity as a signor
for any banking institution for which the City has authorized to hold the money
belonging to the City.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 10-26-2023)
ELECTIONS
§ 30.25 OFFICERS OF ELECTION.
   (A)   Appointment. The City Council shall, prior to each election, appoint
three capable and discreet persons, possessing the qualifications of electors,
as election officers. Two of such persons shall be designated as Judges of
Election and one of such persons as Clerk of Election.
   (B)   Term of office. Such officials shall hold office for the period of two
years and shall be the officials of all elections, both general and special,
during that period.
   (C)   Notice of appointment. The City Clerk shall give such appointees
notice of their appointment and shall request each appointee to give notice of
his or her acceptance or declination of his or her appointment to the City
Clerk within ten days thereafter.
   (D)   Vacancies. Any vacancies arising in the office of election officials
shall be filled by the City Council at any regular or special meeting called
for that purpose. If such vacancy does not become apparent until the time for
the opening of the polls, the duly-appointed election officers present may fill
such vacancies from any electors present.
   (E)   Compensation. The compensation of Judges and Clerks of Election shall
be the then-current amount for minimum wage for the period from the opening to
the closing of the polls through election service after the closing of the
polls and counting of the ballots.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-1)
§ 30.26 ASSIGNED POSITION OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall assign a number to each City Council seat, which
shall consist of six members for the City Council.
   (B)   Any candidate seeking election to the City Council shall file for one
of the assigned City Council seats.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-2) (Ord. 99-04, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 30.27 SUPPLIES.
   The City Council shall designate suitable polling places and cause the same
to be provided with suitable voting compartments, supplies, official stamps,
ballot boxes, and such other supplies as County Commissioners are required to
provide for state elections.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-3)
§ 30.28 POLLING PLACES.
   The polling place for elections for the city shall be the City Council
chambers of the City Hall located at 703 Cedar Street.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-4) (Ord. 99-04, passed 5-11-1999)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   City Administrator
   
31.02   Appointive officers
   
31.03   Salaries
   
31.04   City Clerk/Treasurer
   
31.05   City Attorney
   
31.06   Public Works Superintendent
§ 31.01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Position established. There is hereby established the position of City
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
   (B)   Appointment. A City Administrator may be appointed by the Mayor, with
the majority consent of the full City Council. The City Administrator shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, subject to the removal provisions set forth
in Idaho Code § 50-206, or its successor, unless said City Administrator is a
party to an express employment contract, approved by the Mayor and City
Council, which provides otherwise. Such a contract is hereby authorized. The
City Administrator shall be subject to policy direction and supervision by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2)
   (C)   Responsibilities. The City Administrator shall be responsible for
management and supervision of the city and/or its departments, as designated by
the Mayor. Such duties may be changed at any time by direction of the Mayor or
by resolution of the City Council. Unless otherwise directed by the Mayor or by
formal City Council action, the City Administrator shall have supervisory
authority concerning the activities of all city operating departments.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-3)
   (D)   Additional rights, duties, and obligations. Such additional rights,
duties, and responsibilities as the Mayor and City Council deem appropriate to
assign to the City Administrator may be set forth in mayoral directives or City
Council resolutions addressing such matters. Such resolutions shall be
maintained in the records of the City Clerk/Treasurer. Any rights or
administrative prerogatives established by such resolutions shall inure to the
administrative position held by the City Administrator and shall not be
personal rights of the individual appointed to the position.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-4)
(Ord. 96-01, passed 3-7-1996)
§ 31.02 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointments. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the City
Council, a City Clerk/Treasurer, City Attorney, and Chief of Police. The Mayor
may appoint, subject to approval by the City Council, such other officers as
may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the
city.
   (B)   Terms of office. All appointments under this chapter shall be deemed
to be for an indeterminate period of time or in accordance with any applicable
contract thereto. Termination of any appointed official’s term of office may be
effected by the Mayor, at any time, subject to the approval of the City Council
of the Mayor’s action, at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting or
at a special meeting called for that purpose, or, where applicable, in
accordance with any contractual agreement executed by the parties thereto.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 31.03 SALARIES.
   Salaries of the appointive officers and the employees of the city shall be
as approved in the city’s budget.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-3) (Ord. 504, passed 8-16-1989)
§ 31.04 CITY CLERK/TREASURER.
   (A)   Duties.
      (1)   As City Clerk. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged
to any other department or office, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have
supervision, control, and responsibility of all of the records of the city. The
City Clerk/Treasurer shall serve as City Clerk of the City Council and perform
such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by the City Council.
         (a)   Records of City Council. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall be
responsible for the recording, filing, indexing, and safekeeping of all
proceedings of the City Council and shall have published all proceedings, legal
notices, ordinances, and resolutions that are required to be published by this
code or by state statute.
         (b)   Ordinances. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall record in full,
uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and shall authenticate the same.
         (c)   Election records. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep and
maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections.
         (d)   Notify of term expirations. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall
notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of
office of a member of any board or commission at least 30 days before the
expiration of the term.
         (e)   Official seal. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall be the custodian
of the official seal of the city.
         (f)   Copies of records. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall furnish to any
member of the City Council a certified copy of any record or document in his or
her custody, and he or she may furnish such a copy to any other person upon
payment of a fee to be determined by the City Council.
         (g)   License. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to
any other department or office, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue all
licenses in accordance with the provisions of this code. A record of all
licenses issued, including the name of the person to whom issued, the amount of
the license fee, and the purpose of the license, shall be kept by the City
Clerk/Treasurer.
         (h)   Bonds. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a complete record of
all outstanding bonds of the city and report such record regularly to the City
Council.
         (i)   Warrants. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall countersign all
warrants and keep a warrant register and abstract of expenditures showing the
number of warrants issued and the person to whom issued, the date redeemed, the
interest paid, and the several funds against which each of said warrants is
drawn.
      (2)   As Treasurer. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged
to any other department or office, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall act to
promote, secure, and preserve the financial and property interests of the city.
He or she shall safely keep in designated depositories (as described in §
11.04) all funds belonging to the city and all other securities in safety
deposit boxes of an approved institution designated by the City Council.
         (a)   Accounts. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep, in proper books,
a full and accurate account of all the monies received and disbursed by him or
her on behalf of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement,
from whom received and to whom disbursed, on what account received and
disbursed, and how paid.
         (b)   Monies.
            1.   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all
monies paid to the city and shall disburse monies upon the official warrant of
the city when so ordered by the City Council.
            2.   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk/Treasurer, before
receiving money from any officer of the city or other person, to require said
officer or person to apply for a certificate authorizing the City Clerk/
Treasurer to receive said money; said certificate shall show the name of the
officer or person paying said money, the amount, for what received, and the
fund to which the same is apportioned, and the City Clerk/Treasurer shall
attach a copy of said certificate to his or her monthly report.
   (B)   Warrants.
      (1)   Payment. Warrants shall be paid by the City Clerk/Treasurer from
funds available in the order in which the warrants are presented for payment.
When a warrant is presented for payment and no funds are available, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall plainly mark the warrant “Not Paid for Want of Funds” and
enter the same in a book maintained for such purpose, which shall be known as
the “Warrant Register.” Such warrants shall bear interest at the rate of 7% per
annum from the date of presentation until paid. Warrants shall be called for
payment in the order in which they were presented whenever sufficient funds are
available to the City Clerk/Treasurer to make such payment.
      (2)   Cancellation. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall cancel all warrants
and other evidence of debt against the city, whenever paid by him, by writing
or stamping across the face thereof the words “Paid by the City Clerk/
Treasurer” with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. These warrants
and evidences of debt so cancelled shall be filed immediately with the city.
   (C)   Claims and damages.
      (1)   Claims. All claims against the city must be filed, in writing, with
the City Clerk/Treasurer. Claims must present a full account of the items and
must contain a verification, under oath, by the claimant to the effect that the
claim is correct, reasonable, and just and that no part of said claim has been
paid. All such claims must be approved by the City Council before payment can
be made.
      (2)   Damages. All claims for damages against the city must be filed with
the City Clerk/Treasurer within six months after such time as the damage is
alleged to have accrued. All such claims shall specify the time, place,
character, and cause of damage, and no action shall be maintained against the
city for any claim for damages until after 60 days have elapsed after such
presentation. Allowance of any claim for damages against the city shall be made
only by ordinance.
   (D)   Reports.
      (1)   Monthly report. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall make a detailed
report to the City Council during the first week of each month showing the
business of his or her office during the month preceding, showing the balance
on hand to the credit of the different funds, the amounts received during the
month, and on what account, together with such other information as may be
required by the City Council.
      (2)   Quarterly report. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall cause to be
published for at least one insertion in the official newspaper of the city a
full statement of the receipts and expenditures of the city showing sources of
revenue and disposition of funds. This quarterly report shall be published
before the third Monday of the months of February, May, August, and November.
   (E)   Delivery to successor. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall deliver, to his
or her successor in office, all materials, records, and resources of the
office.
   (G)   As referenced. The City Clerk shall function as the City Treasurer;
throughout this code of ordinances, where the position of City Clerk or City
Treasurer is referenced, they shall mean the City Clerk/Treasurer as defined in
this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)
§ 31.05 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Appointment. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the City Council. He or she shall hold office for
the duration of his or her appointment, unless sooner removed by the Mayor with
the concurrence of the City Council.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   Suits and actions. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any
and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party, or
in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by any
officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as
an officer of the city.
      (2)   Judgments. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the
full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of
the city, and of all similar interlocutory orders.
      (3)   Advising. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city
and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city whenever
requested to do so by any municipal official. Upon request by the Mayor or by
the City Council, he or she shall reduce any such opinion to writing.
      (4)   Special assessments. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation
proceedings.
      (5)   Ordinances and documents. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney
to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease, or other
documents or instruments to which the city may be a party, and, upon request of
the City Council, to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)
§ 31.06 PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor may appoint, with approval of the City Council,
a Public Works Superintendent, who shall hold office for the duration of his or
her appointment or until such time as he or she shall be removed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Duties. The Public Works Superintendent shall supervise all municipal
work as follows.
      (1)   He or she shall supervise the grading, surfacing, repairs, and
maintenance of all streets and alleys.
      (2)   He or she shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all
sewer lines in the city, except the installation of sewer projects which are
accomplished by contract.
      (3)   He or she shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all
water mains and water services, except the installation of water mains so
accomplished by contract.
      (4)   He or she shall supervise the maintenance of city parks and public
grounds.
      (5)   He or she shall have charge of and supervise the repair and upkeep
of all public works equipment.
      (6)   He or she may employ, with the consent of the Mayor and the City
Council, such help as is needed to carry on the work of the city, such help to
be directly under his or her supervision.
      (7)   The Superintendent shall present to the City Council at its regular
meeting each month a written report of the public works accomplished the
preceding month and also, as far as can be foreseen, public works planned for
the current month.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-6)
CHAPTER 32: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Police Department
   
32.01   Department creation
   
32.02   Membership
   
32.03   Monthly report
   
32.04   Power to call others to assist
Fire Department
   
32.15   Department creation
   
32.16   Membership
   
32.17   Chief of the Fire Department
   
32.18   Duties assumed by others
   
32.19   Failure to obey Chief of the Fire Department
Water for Fire Protection
   
32.30   Financing
   
32.31   Fire hydrants
   
32.32   Quarterly assessment
   
32.33   Fees
   
32.34   Billings
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT CREATION.
   The City may establish a Police Department within the city, and, if so
created, the Police Department shall be governed by the provisions of this
subchapter. In the absence of an established Police Department, the city may
contract with any other state, county, or municipal agency authorized to
enforce the laws of the state to carry out those functions otherwise
contemplated of its Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1)
§ 32.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Composition. The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police
and three police officers and such other police officers as shall be authorized
by the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall
appoint the Chief of Police and the three police officers provided for in
division (A) above, and he or she shall have authority, with the consent of the
City Council, to appoint special police officers as from time to time becomes
necessary.
   (C)   Members’ qualifications. Any person appointed as an officer or member
of the Police Department shall be a citizen of the United States at the time of
his or her appointment.
   (D)   Standards of training. The city will adhere to the standards for
employment and training established by the State Peace Officers Standards and
Training Advisory Council.
   (E)   Supervision. All persons appointed under the provisions of this
chapter as a police officer or special police shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Chief of Police. The police officer shall be subject to the
orders of the Chief of Police, except in cases otherwise provided by ordinance.
   (F)   Assistant Chief. The Chief of Police shall designate one of the police
officers to be Assistant Chief of the Fire Department and, in the absence of
the Chief of Police, he or she shall have all the authority herein vested in
the Chief of Police.
   (G)   Duties of police officers. It shall be the duty of police officers to
cause the public peace to be preserved and to see that all laws and ordinances
are enforced within the city limits. When violation of any law or ordinance
shall be reported to them or come to their knowledge, they shall cause the
required complaint to be made and see that all possible evidence is procured
for the successful prosecution of the offenders.
   (H)   Powers. The officers and members of the Police Department shall have
power to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city by
day or by night in the same manner as other police officers of the state, and
to keep them in jail or other place to prevent their escape, until trial can be
had before the proper officer. They shall likewise be vested with power to
serve any other process issued under authority of the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2) (Ord. 310, passed 5-14-1951)
§ 32.03 MONTHLY REPORT.
   The Chief of Police shall make a written report monthly giving a true
account of the number of arrests made, persons arrested, and nature of offense
charged during the month, and such further reports as may at any time be
requested by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)
§ 32.04 POWER TO CALL OTHERS TO ASSIST.
   (A)   Authority. The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department
shall have authority to call upon any person to assist him or her in making an
arrest, a capture, or retaining in custody any person.
   (B)   Violation. Any person, when so requested, who shall refuse or fail, to
the best of his or her ability, to render such aid as required shall be guilty
of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subjected to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.15 DEPARTMENT CREATION.
   (A)   The City may establish a Fire Department within the city, and, if so
created, the Fire Department shall be governed by the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   In the absence of an established Fire Department, the city may
contract with any other state, county, or municipal agency authorized to carry
out those functions otherwise contemplated of its Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 32.16 MEMBERSHIP.
   The officers and employees of the Fire Department shall consist of one Chief
of the Fire Department, one Assistant Chief of the Fire Department, two
captains, and one relief driver, who shall be chosen by the Chief of the Fire
Department with the approval of the Mayor, and such call persons as shall be
determined necessary by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)
§ 32.17 CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Appointment. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Qualifications.
      (1)   Experience. A person to be qualified for the position of the Chief
of the Fire Department shall have a minimum of five years’ full-time experience
with an underwriters-rated fire department, or, alternatively, shall have
served as a chief or assistant chief of a volunteer fire department for a
minimum period of five years.
      (2)   Citizenship; health. He or she must be a citizen of the United
States and in good health, as evidenced by a physical examination certified by
a physician duly licensed to practice medicine within the state, which physical
examination shall be taken not more than 90 days prior to his or her
appointment as Chief of the Fire Department.
   (C)   Executive officer. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the
executive officer of the Fire Department. Additionally, the Chief of the Fire
Department shall be the chief or executive officer of the agency and/or
organization contracted to carry out the Fire Department functions for the
city.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   Rules and regulations. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have
the power to make rules and regulations governing the officers and employees of
the Fire Department; such rules and regulations shall be subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council.
      (2)   Assignment of duties. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department to assign the employees of the Fire Department to duty with the
various apparatus of the Fire Department.
      (3)   Employee records. The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep a
book in which shall be entered the name of each officer and employee, the date
and character of his or her employment, his or her nationality, his or her age
at the time of his or her employment, whether he or she is married or
unmarried, and, in case of his or her discharge or discontinuance in service,
the date and cause thereof; he or she shall also keep an entry in said book of
the duty to which each employee is assigned.
      (4)   Equipment. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible
for the efficient working of the Department, and shall have under his or her
charge all fire apparatus belonging to the city and the Fire Department, and
shall from time to time make such recommendations to the Fire and Water
Committee of the City Council with reference to the extension, alteration, or
improvement of the fire alarm system and the purchase, repair, and maintenance
of the apparatus belonging to the city and the Fire Department as he or she
shall deem necessary.
      (5)   Fire scene.
         (a)   Ex officio powers. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have
control of all persons present at any fire, and to that end shall ex officio
have and exercise all the powers of the Chief of Police.
         (b)   Immediate action. When a fire breaks out, he or she shall take
immediate and proper steps for its extinguishment.
         (c)   Summon assistance.
            1.   Power. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power
to summon and require any and all persons present at a fire to aid in
extinguishing the same as he or she shall direct, or in removing personal
property from any building on fire or in danger thereof, or in guarding such
property.
            2.   Refusal to obey summons. Any person refusing to obey such
summons and order shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Turnover of books and property upon leaving office. Whenever the Chief
of the Fire Department shall go out of office, he or she shall turn over to his
or her successor in office all the books, papers, and property of the Fire
Department under his or her care. He or she shall take a receipt in duplicate
therefor, and file one copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk for
reference. Said receipt shall discharge the liability of the outgoing Chief of
the Fire Department for all books and papers enumerated therein, and charge the
same to his or her successor.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3) (Ord. 350, passed 9-14-1959; Ord. 405, passed 11-9-1971)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.18 DUTIES ASSUMED BY OTHERS.
   In case of absence from duty of the Chief of the Fire Department or his or
her inability to act, the Assistant Chief of the Fire Department shall be ex
officio Chief of the Fire Department, and, in case of the absence of both the
Chief of the Fire Department and Assistant Chief of the Fire Department or
their inability to act, the oldest captain from point of service shall be ex
officio Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 32.19 FAILURE TO OBEY CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Any firefighter who shall refuse or willfully neglect to obey any lawful
order of the Chief of the Fire Department or the officer in charge thereof when
at, or going to, a fire shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon
conviction shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5) (Ord. 350, passed 9-14-1959) Penalty, see §
10.99
WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION
§ 32.30 FINANCING.
   (A)   Definition. Within the meaning of this subchapter, IMPROVED REAL
PROPERTY shall include real estate which:
      (1)   Has city water service;
      (2)   Is paved;
      (3)   Is landscaped; or
      (4)   Has erected thereon any construction for which a building permit
would be required.
   (B)   Cost. The cost of all water for fire protection within the city shall
be financed by fees assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real
property. The fees assessed shall be included in the general utility billing as
a separate item and as hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   Assessment. Fees for water for fire protection hereinafter provided
are hereby assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real property.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1) (Ord. 92-4, passed 1-10-1992)
§ 32.31 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Number required. The number of fire hydrants shall be the minimum
necessary to provide sufficient service and to promote public safety, and the
particular location within the city to provide sufficient service and to
promote public safety and the protection of improved real property within the
city shall be determined within the sound discretion of the City Council.
   (B)   Below minimum standards. In areas where the fire hydrants do not meet
the minimum standards as herein provided, hydrants shall be installed to meet
such standards as soon as practicable.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2) (Ord. 92-4, passed 1-10-1992)
§ 32.32 QUARTERLY ASSESSMENT.
   The owners and occupants of all improved real property parcels within the
city are hereby assessed fees for providing water for fire protection and for
all other related necessities for fire protection in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3) (Ord. 92-4, 1-10-1992)
§ 32.33 FEES.
   (A)   Annual assessment. Such fees are assessed effective October 1 of each
year.
   (B)   Fire Hydrant Operation Fund. All billings for fees levied and assessed
under this subchapter shall be made by the City Clerk and all monies received
under this subchapter shall be delivered by the City Clerk to the City
Treasurer, who shall deposit the same to a special account, to be known as the
Fire Hydrant Operation Fund.
   (C)   Payment.
      (1)   Due. Such fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk within 15
days after the mailing of said billings.
      (2)   Delinquencies; late charge. In the event any such fee billed is not
paid when due, after 30 days, the same shall be deemed to be delinquent and a
late penalty charge of 10% of the amount of such fee shall be added thereto. If
the fees shall remain delinquent and unpaid for a period of 90 days, the City
Clerk shall certify the delinquency to the County Tax Collector, and the
delinquency and penalty shall be placed by the County Tax Collector upon the
tax roll and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as
other city taxes.
   (D)   Liability for payment; lien. The owners and occupants of improved real
property shall be jointly and severally liable for such fees, and the fees
shall become a lien upon and against the property against which the charge is
levied to the extent permitted by the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the city and may be collected in any manner permitted or hereafter permitted by
such laws and ordinances.
   (E)   Determination of fees.
      (1)   Amount. The foregoing fees are fixed and determined in amounts
determined sufficient to pay the costs of providing water for fire protection
and other related services within the city.
      (2)   Change or amendment. Such fees shall be changed or amended by the
City Council from time to time as determined necessary to finance such costs.
Any changes or amendments to such service fees may be made and fixed by the
City Council by resolution.
      (3)   Copies on file. Three copies of such resolution, duly certified by
the City Clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for the
use of and examination by the public.
   (F)   Violation. In addition, the city may elect to enforce this subchapter
in accordance with Idaho Code § 50-302. In that event, the maximum punishment
for any offense shall be as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4) (Ord. 92-4, passed 1-10-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.34 BILLINGS.
   Billings for fees levied and assessed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be made quarterly or at such other intervals as may be
determined by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, and shall be fixed at
such intervals as will correspond to billing of the same improved real property
for sewer services. Such billing shall be billed on the same statement;
provided, however, that the billings for such services shall be segregated.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-5) (Ord. 92-4, passed 1-10-1992)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
53.   PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
Water Supply
   
50.01   Findings; declaration of policy
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Domestic water
   
50.04   Watershed sanitation
   
50.05   Violations
WATER SUPPLY
§ 50.01 FINDINGS; DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is the duty of the city to secure the general health of the city,
to prevent and remove nuisances, to provide the city with water, to make
regulations to prevent the introduction of contagious diseases into the city,
to make quarantine laws for that purpose and to enforce such laws, rules, and
regulations adopted pursuant to such laws within the city limits and within
five miles of the city limits; to secure the general health of the city, its
inhabitants and residents, and all persons within said city, it is necessary
that provision be made for furnishing an adequate supply of pure, sanitary, and
wholesome water at all times; in order that an adequate supply of pure,
sanitary, and wholesome water be so provided, the watershed or water sheds from
which the water supply of said city and its inhabitants and persons within said
city is obtained must be kept at all times in a pure and sanitary condition and
free from every kind and species of excreta, garbage, house slops, kitchen
wastes, or decaying, foul, or noxious matter, and from refuse from pens,
corrals, barns, or other places in which animals or fowl are customarily
harbored and kept, and free from every manner of contamination.
   (B)   The city has heretofore by Ordinance 474, as described in Table III of
this code’s Table of Special Ordinances, granted a franchise for the
construction and operation of a system of waterworks to supply water to said
city and its inhabitants, and, by said ordinance, has agreed to adopt and
enforce such ordinances as may be necessary to protect the grantee named in
said ordinance against the pollution of the source of water supply.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-1)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Wallace, Shoshone County, Idaho, and to it alone.
   OWNER. Includes the state, county, city, town, corporation, firm, company,
institution, person, or persons owning or operating any water supply or water
purification plant.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. Includes any and all water supply systems or other
means of conveying water to consumers, whether privately or municipally owned,
where water is furnished to any community, collection, or number of
individuals.
   WATERSHED. That area which contributes by drainage to a stream the water
that falls upon it, and from which stream the public water supply is obtained.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-2)
§ 50.03 DOMESTIC WATER.
   (A)   Duty to supply. It shall be the duty of the city and the owner of a
plant or system to supply water to the inhabitants and residents of, and
persons within, the city for domestic purposes, and to keep said water free
from all impurities, accumulations of sediment, offal, refuse, dead animals,
and all other foreign substances which tend to injure the health of the
consumers of such water.
   (B)   Bacteriological examinations. The owner shall have bacteriological
examinations made of the water as it enters the supply mains for distribution
to the city as often as necessary to maintain the clean and pure quality of the
water, and not less often than once each month, and the Health Officer from the
Panhandle Health District may demand more frequent examinations.
   (C)   Water purification plants. Water purification plants must be of such a
character and must be operated in such a manner that the water after
purification shall have as little taste or odor as possible.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-3)
§ 50.04 WATERSHED SANITATION.
   (A)   Adoption. The City Council hereby adopts by reference the standards as
set forth in the Federal Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., with
regard to watershed sanitation.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter in regard to watershed
sanitation shall apply to and be enforced at all places within five miles of
the city.
   (C)   Fishing boating, bathing, or wading. No fishing, boating, bathing, or
wading shall be permitted in any public water supply reservoir, lake, or pond,
or in any streams tributary to the same; provided, however, that wading,
walking in, or entering the public water supply reservoir, lake, pond, or
stream by persons engaged in necessary work of altering, repairing, or doing
other work upon said reservoir, lake, pond, or stream shall not be construed to
be a violation of this section.
   (D)   Picnicking or camping.
      (1)   Prohibited. No picnicking or camping on the watershed shall be
permitted, as set forth in the Federal Clean Water Act.
      (2)   Sanitary provisions required. Picnickers, campers, or residents of
the watershed must make adequate sanitary provision for the disposal of
excreta, and all privies must comply with the standards as set forth in the
Federal Clean Water Act and must be fly-proof and rodent-proof, and, before the
construction thereof, must be approved by the Health Officer from the Panhandle
Health District.
      (3)   Trash; rubbish. All trash and rubbish must be burned or buried in a
trench and covered with soil; no garbage, house slop, kitchen waste, or other
forms of decaying foul, or noxious matter, either solid or liquid, shall be
thrown, spread, or otherwise deposited on the surface of the ground and all
shall comply with the Federal Clean Water Act.
      (4)   Animals. No hog pen, cattle pen, horse or mule lot, rabbit hutch,
poultry house, hitching or standing place for horses or cattle, or any other
place where animal manure accumulates shall be maintained or used within 250
feet of any of said reservoirs, ponds, streams, and tributaries.
      (5)   Construction, industrial, or recreational camps. No construction,
industrial, or recreational camps shall be established or maintained within the
area of the watershed, nor shall any number or group of laborers be employed in
lumbering, mining, or other operations within the watershed area, without
giving advance notice thereof to the Health Officer from the Panhandle Health
District, who will prescribe rules and regulations to govern the conduct of
such work pertaining to the sanitary protection of the water supply during such
operations.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction of such violation, shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each and every violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
Sewers and Drains
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Required use of public sewer
   
51.03   Building sewers and connections
   
51.04   Use of public sewers
   
51.05   Protection of sewage works
   
51.06   Powers and authority of inspectors
Sewer Rates
   
51.20   Sewer rates and fees
   
51.21   Billings and payment of monthly charges
   
51.22   Delinquencies
   
51.23   Disconnection of service for nonpayment
   
51.24   Repeal of conflicting ordinances
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SEWERS AND DRAINS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). Shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge of sanitary waste inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The pipeline from the building drain to the point of
connection with the public sewer. Also referred to as SEWER LATERAL.
   CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Wallace, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent,
representative, or deputy thereto.
   CLEAR WATER. Any water not being sanitary sewage. Examples include, but are
not limited to, stormwater, groundwater, or surface water.
   COMMERCIAL. Any nondomestic user operating a business for profit within the
city limits who is not an industrial user as defined herein.
   FLOW.   The volume of sewage being discharged into the sewage system from
all sources, including domestic, commercial, and industrial uses and
infiltration.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Any nondomestic/noncommercial user with an indirect
discharge of effluent industrial waste into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto. This term includes federal, state, and local facilities as part of the
regulated community, since such entities are subject to federal pretreatment
regulations.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MULTIPLE-BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. Includes the various types of developments
that would have common or joint ownership areas, such as condominiums,
townhouses, mobile home parks or courts, shopping centers, and the like.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
   OWNER. A person owning real property which is, or proposes to be, connected
to the sewage system.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   PH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution, with a pH value of 7 being neutral.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PROPERLY-SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). Any device and system used in the
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature to implement § 201 of the Clean Water Act.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not admitted.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The point at which the building sewer connects to the
publicly owned main sewer line.
   SEWAGE OR WASTE MATTER. A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER LATERAL. The pipeline from the building drain to the point of
connection with the publicly owned main sewer line. Also referred to as
BUILDING SEWER.
   SEWER LATERAL REPLACEMENT PROGRAM (LRP). A program providing for the
inspection, repair, and replacement of private sewer laterals for deficiencies
in an effort to decrease the volume of inflow and infiltration (I&I) entering
the sewer system.
   SEWER USER. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, or
corporation or group who has connected to the sewer system.
   SFSD. South Fork Coeur d’Alene River Sewer District, commonly referred to as
the SOUTH FORK SEWER DISTRICT.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted water such as cooling water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the wastewater system who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this subchapter, or a duly- authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids, organic or inorganic, that either float on
the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable
residue.
   WASTEWATER SYSTEM. All city facilities for the collecting and pumping of
sewage.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Prior Code, § 10-2-1) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018)
§ 51.02 REQUIRED USE OF PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city limits, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter. Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
   (D)   The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city
are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, within 30 days after the
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200
feet of any property line.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-2) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see§
51.99
§ 51.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or its appurtenances
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system shall conform to the
State Plumbing Code. Connections for the purpose of discharging clear waters
shall be directed to the storm sewer system. Any discharge that cannot be
directed to the storm sewer system must be approved by permit authorized by the
city.
   (C)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits for residential
wastewater service, and to commercial, institutional/governmental, or
industrial wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his or her agent
shall make a request, in writing, to the city describing the volume and nature
of the discharge. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers and pump stations, have sufficient reserve
capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste
load.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer connection shall be provided
for every building. Each independent sewer connection (lateral) shall be owned
and maintained by the property owner from the building to the main line and
shall be maintained by the property owner.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to connect any eligible building or
contract for connection at the owner’s expense. Should the owner fail to pay or
contract for payment of such expenses, the city may:
      (1)   File the expenses for reimbursement with the county, to be
collected with property taxes; or
      (2)   Utilize available legal remedies to collect the expenses. Should
the city collect such expenses over time, a reasonable interest rate, to be
established by the City Council resolution, shall be assessed. Extended
delinquency is cause for disconnecting the service, which costs for both
disconnection and reconnection will be billed to the property owner.
   (H)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city and paid for by the
property owner, to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
   (I)   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of §§
153.110 through
153.126, or to other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the State Plumbing Code
shall apply.
   (J)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to and within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer, in
conformance with §§
153.110 through
153.126.
   (K)   The purpose of sewer lateral replacement program (LRP) inspection and
repair is to decrease the volume of inflow and infiltration (I&I) which enters
the sewers by repairing or replacing private sewer laterals. The program shall
initiate inspections periodically so that the condition of private laterals can
be accurately assessed and repaired or replaced as necessary.
      (1)   For private sewer laterals installed prior to 2015, an owner must
have his or her private sewer lateral inspected by video for defects when any
of the following events occur:
         (a)   A pre-2010 built house or business prior to its sale closing;
         (b)   An owner takes out a building permit for more than $10,000 for a
house or $25,000 for a business which was constructed more than five years
prior;
         (c)   An inspection of a sewer main line is conducted by city sewer
crews or an approved agent who identifies excessive inflow and infiltration
from a private sewer lateral or identifies that private sewer lateral repairs
are needed from the close circuit television (CCTV) inspection in the main
line;
         (d)   No house or business shall be required to have its lateral
inspected more than once every five years. If the city determines that the
lateral is in need of repair, the city will review the video of the lateral
inspection and rate it based on the city’s most current sewer lateral
replacement program. A sewer lateral receiving a rating of 1,000 points or more
would require repair or replacement; and
         (e)   Once a lateral has a failed rating of 1,000 points or more, the
property owner will be notified by the city and the property owner shall repair
the lateral within 90 days. If the lateral has not been repaired after 90 days,
an additional charge, to be established by resolution of the City Council, will
be billed to the owner for noncompliance.
      (2)   Beginning in 2030, an owner who had their private sewer lateral
installed on or after 2015 must have his, her, or their private sewer lateral
inspected by video for defects when any of the following events occur:
         (a)   A house or business is to be sold which was constructed prior to
2010, before the sale closes;
         (b)   An owner takes out a building permit for more than $10,000 for a
house or $25,000 for a business which was constructed more than five years
prior;
         (c)   An inspection of a sewer main line is conducted by city sewer
crews or an approved agent who identifies excessive inflow and infiltration
from a private sewer lateral or identifies that private sewer lateral repairs
are needed from the close circuit television (CCTV) inspection in the main
line;
         (d)   No house or business shall be required to have its lateral
inspected more than once every five years. If the city determines that the
lateral is in need of repair, the city will review the video of the lateral
inspection and rate it based on the city’s most current sewer lateral
replacement program. A sewer lateral receiving a rating of 1,000 points or more
would require repair or replacement; and
         (e)   Once a lateral has a failed rating of 1,000 points or more, the
property owner will be notified by the city and the property owner shall repair
the lateral within 90 days. If the lateral has not been repaired after 90 days,
an additional charge, to be established by resolution of the City Council, will
be billed to the owner for noncompliance.
      (3)   The owner may apply for an extension of up to ten months to
complete repairs. The extension period will begin at the end of the 90-day
period. The fine, to be established by resolution of the City Council, will
continue to accrue during this extension period and will be due in full at the
end of the 10 month extension if work is not completed. All penalty fines
collected will go into the Sewer Repair and Maintenance Fund.
      (4)   Should the owner fail to pay the bill or have his or her lateral
repaired, the city may repair the lateral and file the expenses for
reimbursement with the county, to be collected with property taxes, or utilize
available legal remedies to collect the expenses. Should the city collect such
expenses over time, a reasonable interest rate, to be established by the City
Council resolution, may be assessed. Extended delinquency is cause for
disconnecting the service, which costs for both disconnection and reconnection
will be billed to the property.
   (L)   Existing sump pumps, roof drains, and roof downspouts that currently
discharge to the sanitary sewer system shall be redirected to the storm sewer
system and/or disconnected, mechanically severed, or altered. Replaced
connections shall conform to the standards described in division (B) above.
   (M)   All future connections of sump pumps, roof drains, and roof downspouts
shall be built to the standards described in division (B) above. No person(s)
shall connect sump pumps, roof drains, and roof downspouts for the purpose of
discharging clear waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (N)   The connection of building sewer laterals into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building Code, and specifically §§
153.110 through
153.126, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or to the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the International
Plumbing Code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviations from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
city before installation. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall
notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
city or an authorized representative.
   (O)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall take reasonable
safety measures to protect the public from hazard, following established
industry standards for excavation and installation existing at the time of the
excavation/installation. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
   (P)   The city and the South Fork Sewer District (SFSD) have an active
memorandum of understanding, established on March 16, 1978, that explains the
responsibilities of each governing body (Appendix No. 1 on file in the city).
   (Q)   No person shall disconnect any sewage connection without first
notifying the city. After such notification and approval by the city, the
connection may be disconnected and sealed in such a manner so as to prevent the
passage of any liquid, substance, gas, or odor into or out of said sewage line.
Pipe sealing shall be completed using a sewer cap or repair coupling. Sealing
shall not in any way impede the flow of sewage within the sewage main, and
shall be of sufficient thickness, strength, and design to equal the sewage
main. The city shall be notified upon completion of sealing, and any excavation
for such a sealing shall be left open for sufficient time for the city to
inspect the same.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-3) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the city and meeting all appropriate local, state, and federal rules and
regulations. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be
discharged on approval of the city and the South Fork Sewer District (SFSD) to
a storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or natural outlet. If discharged to the sanitary
sewer system, additional approval will be required from the SFSD.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the city or the SFSD, that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or constitute
a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city and the SFSD will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F, or
65°C;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F to 150°F, or 0ºC to 65°C;
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review of and approval by the
city;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, lead,
cadmium, or similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received
in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the South Fork Sewer District for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams
per liter of Hg at any time, except as permitted by the city in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of one milligram per liter at any time,
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volumes of flow or concentrations of water constituting
slugs, as defined.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the SFSD sewage treatment process, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
      (13)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      (14)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (15)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; and
      (16)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, and entrails, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (C) above, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 C.F.R. part 403 and
any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers in accordance with the United States Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) pretreatment requirements. National categorical pretreatment
standards found in 40 C.F.R. chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are
hereby incorporated and made enforceable under this code;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. If the city and the
SFSD permit the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
   (E)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be so located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (F)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
   (G)   Each industrial business shall be required to install a control
manhole when required by the city upon the city’s identification of a need to
monitor and/or regulate the drainage. The owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense and shall be
maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (H)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may be required, upon request, to provide laboratory
measurements, tests, and analyses of water and wastes to illustrate compliance
with this subchapter and any special conditions for discharge established by
the city or SFSD having jurisdiction over the discharge.
      (2)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but, no less than
once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state,
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analyses by an outside laboratory service.
   (I)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with regulations established by the Environmental Protection Agency,
the State Department of Environmental Quality, and/or the Panhandle Health
District, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
      (1)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
      (2)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily-accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.
   (J)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with this subchapter, by the industrial concern provided that such
payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge
systems.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-4) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment,
which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to the penalties described in §
51.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-5) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   The city, and other duly-authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. The city or authorized
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment. Any authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within the right-of-way of the city’s
sewer line. All entry and subsequent work on said easement or right-of-way
shall ensure any private property affected is returned to a similar condition
as it existed prior to the entry.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-6) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018)
SEWER RATES
§ 51.20 SEWER RATES AND FEES.
   (A)   Monthly sewer rates. The city shall assess a monthly rate for
properties connected to the sewer system.
      (1)   Equivalent residence. One EQUIVALENT RESIDENCE, hereinafter
referred to as ER, shall be defined as the sewage flow from one typical single-
family residence. The sewage flow from one typical single-family residence is
18 cubic feet (CF) of sewage per day, 0.2 pounds of biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) per day, and 0.2 pounds of suspended solids (SS) per day, based on
average residential water usage.
      (2)   Measuring; sampling. The city may install a measuring device in the
sewer service line at any time to determine the amount of wastewater and/or
collect wastewater samples for testing. After measuring and/or sampling, the
city may adjust the user charge to conform to actual usage.
      (3)   Minimum charge. Each sewer user billed separately shall pay a
minimum charge per month, regardless of actual flow. The minimum charge shall
be one ER as calculated in this section.
      (4)   Nonresidential users; fees. Commercial and industrial connections
shall pay sewer usage fees as determined by the formula: ER = (annual
residential water usage in cubic feet)/12 months/548 CF. A commercial customer
may have his or her ERs reviewed once annually if requested prior to January 1
of the year in which the assessment will apply.
      (5)   Appeal of ERs. A commercial customer may appeal the number of ERs
to the city by filing written notice with the City Clerk outlining the reason
for the customer’s appeal. The City Clerk will deliver the protest to a Review
Board, which will consist of two City Council members appointed by the Mayor.
If the customer is unable to reach an agreement with the Review Board (two
appointed City Council members), he or she may appeal to the City Council at
the next regular City Council meeting. The Review Board and the City Council
shall make their decision of the appeal solely based on the ERs. Any appeals
are due by November 1 of the year proceeding the next billing cycle.
      (6)   Rates set by City Council. The monthly rates assessed to properties
shall be set by the City Council through the passage of a resolution by law. A
disconnected or unoccupied property may still be assessed a fee as established
by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   New user facility fee (NUFF).
      (1)   Connection. The owners of property connecting to the city sewer
system, directly or by connecting to a private system that connects to the city
sewer system, shall be subject to a new user facility fee which includes
inspection costs.
      (2)   Payment. The NUFF shall be paid in advance or at the time the
building permit is issued.
         (a)   The new user facility fee (NUFF) and service connection fee for
new or modified connections to the city sewer system shall be equal to the
number of ERs times the NUFF and the sewer permit fee for a single-family
residence. In no case shall the NUFF and permit fee be less than that for one
single-family residence (one ER). The fee for a single-family residence (one
ER) shall be the sum of a NUFF, a permit fee, and the inspection fee described
as follows.
         (b)   The new user facility fee and service connection fee shall be
set by resolution adopted by the City Council.
         (c)   In instances where an improvement on a property has previously
been connected to the sewer system and complied with the connection fee(s) in
force at the time of connection, the fees listed above in this division (B) do
not apply. If, however, the connection involves an increase in the number of
ERs or an increase in demand on the system, then the connection is subject to
these fees for the increase only.
         (d)   A permit and inspection fee shall be set by the City Council and
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The applicant,
as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
         (e)   A NUFF does not include the cost to install a lateral service
line from the structure to the main. (The cost to install a new lateral service
shall be borne entirely by the property owner.) All new user facility fees
shall be paid in an amount as set by the City Council.
         (f)   An owner may apply for a waiver of the NUFF where he or she can
establish, through sufficient verifiable documentation, that the property
previously had a connection.
   (C)   Sewer fee use. All sewer fees collected, including sewer
capitalization rates, monthly sewer rates, connection fees, and reconnection
fees, shall be used by the city for the sole purpose of improving and
maintaining the city sewer system.
   (D)   Other fees and charges. The city hereby establishes other fees and
charges, including, but not limited to, permit, review, and inspection fees,
periodic service charges and other fees for the use, and for service rendered
by the city.
      (1)   Levy of lots. The rates, charges, and fees provided by this
subchapter are hereby levied and assessed against each lot, parcel of land,
building, or property having any connection with the sanitary sewer of the city
or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastewater, or other
liquids directly into the sanitary sewer of the city.
      (2)   Payment by each owner. The rates, charges, and fees shall be billed
to and paid by the owner of each lot, parcel of land, building, or property
served by the sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-1) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 12-12-2018)
§ 51.21 BILLINGS AND PAYMENT OF MONTHLY CHARGES.
   (A)   Billings; Sewer Repair and Maintenance Fund. All billings and fees
levied and assessed hereunder shall be made by the City Clerk, and all monies
received hereunder shall be delivered to the City Clerk, who shall deposit the
same to a special account, to be known as the Sewer Repair and Maintenance
Fund.
   (B)   Due date. Such fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk on a
quarterly basis. For new construction, the annual user charge shall be computed
from the date the service connection has been inspected and approved or when
the building being served is substantially completed, whichever is the latest
date. For new commercial construction completed during the eight lawn-
sprinkling months, the sewer user charges shall be based on the use of 548 CF
per month, or actual use, whichever is less.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-2) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 12-12-2018)
§ 51.22 DELINQUENCIES.
   (A)   Penalty. The city may assess an appropriate penalty for delinquency as
established through resolution.
   (B)   Lien against property. Where allowed by law, all delinquent charges or
fees, as provided by this subchapter, not paid after the final determination of
the sewer user’s account shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the
property or premises against which such charge or fee is levied or assessed,
and the City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying the city taxes, certify
such delinquencies together with all penalties to the County Tax Collector,
and, when so certified, the same shall be a lien upon the property. All monies
collected by the City Clerk under the provisions of this section shall be paid
over to the City Treasurer in the same manner as is required for the payment of
other city monies.
   (C)   Use at new location. The owner of any property leaving a delinquency
in sewer fees at any location shall not be entitled to the use of the sewer
system at any new location until all fee delinquencies are paid.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-3) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.23 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Termination of water service for nonpayment.
      (1)   If a sewer user has not paid the billing within 14 days from the
date of the statement, it shall be deemed delinquent.
      (2)   The city shall give notice to the owner and occupant of the
delinquency and provide an opportunity to cure the delinquency within 14 days
of the notice.
      (3)   Failure to cure the delinquency may allow the city to cause the
water supplied to said sewer user to be turned off from the premises where
sufficient agreement exists between the city and any associated water district,
with the city taking notice that without water, the sewer system of the user
cannot be used, and shutting off the water is the only way to prevent the use
of the sewer for nonpayment; provided, if the charges are not paid within 14
days after the delinquency notice, and if no penalty is due for nonpayment of
water charges, an additional penalty, as set by resolution of the City Council,
will be added to the account and must be paid to restore service.
   (B)   Discontinue sewer service. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all property served with sanitary sewer within and outside the corporate
limits of the city, including all property owned or occupied by the United
States, the county, and the state, and, in case of nonpayment or delinquency,
the city or its authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to
disconnect and/or plug the sewer connection with the sewer system and direct
the water district to terminate the water supply to the property.
   (C)   Penalty for unlawful reconnection. If any person turns on a
disconnected service without authority after the service has been turned off or
disconnected from the premises on account of nonpayment of rates, other
violation of this chapter, or the rules and regulations pertaining to the sewer
service, said person shall so be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject
to penalty as provided in §
51.99 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-4)
   (D)   Opportunity to challenge termination.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)    That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present, orally or in writing, his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpaymentof bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge, to be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 12-12-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.24 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city which conflict with the
provisions of this subchapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-5) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 12-12-2018)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The knowing violation of any provision or failure to comply with any
requirement of §§
51.01 through
51.06 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine in the
amount of $1,000, or six months in jail, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-7) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 12-12-2018)
CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Responsible authority
   
52.03   Use required
   
52.04   Refuse collection
   
52.05   Accumulation unlawful
   
52.06   Burning; dumping
   
52.07   Refuse containers
   
52.08   Collection period
   
52.09   Special handling
   
52.10   Collection fees
   
52.11   Method of collection
   
52.12   Permit to haul to landfill site
   
52.13   Violation
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTOR. The agents and/or employees of the Sanitation Department of the
city designated by the city to collect, handle, transport, and dispose of
refuse and wastes.
   GARBAGE.
      (1)   All putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including
waste accumulation of animal food or vegetable matter, and including waste that
attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit, and vegetables, and shall include all of such wastes or
accumulations of vegetable matter of residences, restaurants, cafes, hotels,
and places where food is prepared for human consumption.
      (2)   The term GARBAGE shall not include recognized industrial products.
   INSPECTOR. The authorized employee of the city or some individual designated
by the City Council as having the duty of the enforcement of this chapter.
   OWNER AND OCCUPANT. Wherever herein used may be used interchangeably, and
shall mean every person in possession, in charge, or in control of any
dwelling, flat, rooming house, or any eating place, shop, place of business, or
manufacturing or business establishment where garbage or other refuse is
created or accumulated.
   PERSON. Every individual, business, organization, and business entity.
   REFUSE. Solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH.
      (1)   Refuse other than garbage (tin cans, bottles, ashes, paper,
pasteboard, cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds, and cuttings from
trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens or other waste materials produced in the
normal course of doing business or everyday living).
      (2)   The term RUBBISH shall not include recognized industrial
byproducts.
   WASTE. Unwanted solid, liquid, or gaseous materials.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975)
§ 52.02 RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY.
   The Police Department or such other persons as may be appointed by the Mayor
and City Council shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter and other duties as the City Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-2) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975)
§ 52.03 USE REQUIRED.
   Every owner and occupant of premises within the prescribed limits of the
city must use the franchise refuse collection and disposal system of the city,
if one exists, and shall deposit or cause to be deposited in accordance with
this chapter all rubbish and garbage that is of such nature that it is
perishable, may decompose, or may be scattered by wind or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-3) (Ord. 466, passed 3-27-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 REFUSE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Department of Sanitation created. There is hereby created a Department
of Sanitation.
   (B)   Compulsory system created. There is hereby established a compulsory
system of refuse collection, transportation, and disposal which shall be solely
operated and carried on by the city through its Department of Sanitation and
its agents and/or employees.
   (C)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person other than duly -
authorized agents and/or employees of the Department of Sanitation to engage in
the business of collecting, transporting, hauling, or conveying any refuse over
the streets or alleys, or to dump or dispose of the same.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-4) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05 ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer to accumulate in
or about any yard, lot, place, or premises, or upon any street, alley, or
sidewalk adjacent to such lot, yard, place, or premises, owned or occupied by
such person any garbage or refuse so as to cause such yard, lot, premises, or
the street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent thereto to remain or be in such
condition so as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive odor, offensive
atmosphere, or rodent harborage, or thereby to be or to become or cause to
create a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-5) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.06 BURNING; DUMPING.
   (A)   Burning. No person shall burn, incinerate, bury, dump, collect,
remove, or, in any other manner, dispose of rubbish or garbage, except as
hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Interior incinerator. Any person may use an incinerator in the
interior of a building between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., provided
such incinerator meets the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and such
rules and regulations as provided by state and/or federal regulations.
      (2)   Open burning. No open burning of any rubbish is permissible, unless
done pursuant to the rules and regulations of the state and the United States.
   (B)   Dumping. No person shall throw, discard, or deposit any rubbish,
garbage, or refuse in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or vacant ground or
in or upon any canal, sewer, drainage ditch, or watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-6) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.07 REFUSE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Containers required. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant
of any place where garbage or rubbish is created or accumulated to at all times
keep or cause to be kept portable metal containers or their equivalent for the
deposit therein of rubbish and garbage, and, except as otherwise provided, to
deposit or cause to be deposited all rubbish and garbage therein.
   (B)   Specifications.
      (1)   Watertight. All such containers shall be watertight and not easily
corrodible, rodent-proof and fly-proof, and shall be equipped with handles and
a close-fitting lid.
      (2)   Size. Such containers shall not be less than a 20-gallon capacity,
nor more than a 34-gallon capacity, and are limited to 50 pounds in weight.
      (3)   Metal containers. The containers, if metal, shall:
         (a)   Be of not less than 28-gauge metal, or the equivalent, and be
hot-dipped after fabrication to assure non-leaking cans; or
         (b)   Be a can that is guaranteed by the manufacturer, and so labeled,
to be leak-proof, regardless of manufacturing processes.
   (C)   Lid. The lid shall not be removed, except when necessary to place
garbage or rubbish in such container or to take the same therefrom.
   (D)   Sanitary condition. Such containers shall be kept in a sanitary
condition.
   (E)   Placement. All garbage or refuse cans shall be placed in a place
accessible to the collector or at such place as may be agreed upon by the owner
and the City Council, or at such place as may be designated by the inspector.
   (F)   Large receptacles. Receptacles of a larger size and type may be
designated by the City Council, and the City Council may require cans to be
placed upon the street curb, or another easily-accessible location, on
collection days.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-7) (Ord. 466, passed 3-27-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.08 COLLECTION PERIOD.
   Collectors shall collect rubbish and garbage from each customer at least
once every week, or as called for in the collection fee schedule set by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-8) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975)
§ 52.09 SPECIAL HANDLING.
   (A)   Kept separate. Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, wooden boxes,
brush, leaves, weeds, cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens must be
kept separately without depositing the same in the containers required by §
52.07.
   (B)   Bulk material. Bulk material, such as leaves, shall be in a can, box,
sack, or receptacle for ease of loading.
   (C)   Brush; bulky material. Brush or any bulky material shall be in bundles
not to exceed four feet in length.
   (D)   Compost piles. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization
purposes only and may be transported, kept, and used; provided, the same shall
not constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-9) (Ord. 466, passed 3-27-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.10 COLLECTION FEES.
   The city may enter into franchise agreements for the collection of garbage
and refuse, and may impose those fees for said collection as the city deems
reasonable and prudent.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-10) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 52.11 METHOD OF COLLECTION.
   If fees for collection of garbage and refuse within the city are
established, the city may implement any process of collecting such fees as it
deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-11) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975)
§ 52.12 PERMIT TO HAUL TO LANDFILL SITE.
   (A)   Permit required. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person
residing within the limits of the city to haul his or her garbage, refuse, or
rubbish to any sanitary landfill site approved by the county and state for the
purpose of disposal; provided, however, that such persons shall first secure a
permit for such hauling from the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Fee. The fee for permits issued by authority under this section shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Term. Such permits shall be for a term of one calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-12) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.13 VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall, for each violation, be subject
to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-13) (Ord. 426, passed 2-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 53: PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
Section
   
53.01   Library
§ 53.01 LIBRARY.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to Idaho Code Title 33, Chapter 26, a city
library is established.
   (B)   Organization and taxation. The city library has the power to levy and
cause to be collected a tax as allowed by Idaho Code, or may be funded out of
allocations from the city’s General Fund.
   (C)   Library Board. There shall be a Library Board of Trustees appointed by
the Mayor and City Council from among city residents, which Board shall operate
in accordance with provisions of Idaho Code Title 33, Chapter 26, regarding all
powers, duties, meetings, vacancies, and the appointment of library director
and other employees.
   (D)   Library personnel. Pursuant to provisions of Idaho Code § 33-2608,
employees hired by the Library Board of Trustees are subject to city personnel
policies and classifications unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Therefore,
it is declared that all personnel hired by the Library Board of Trustees for
the operation and maintenance of the city’s library shall be city employees,
and shall be subject to the library personnel policies, salary, and payroll
classifications, and vacation and sick leave benefit provisions.
   (E)   Administration. The city shall provide administrative assistance to
the Library Board of Trustees by providing payroll, benefits, and other
services to library personnel as requested and approved by the Library Board of
Trustees.
   (F)   Expenditures. All tax revenues received by the City Treasurer shall be
set apart from other city revenues in a separate account, under Idaho Code §
33-2603 and used solely for library expenditures. Annual budgets for all
library expenditures must be prepared by the Library Board of Trustees and
approved by the City Council.
   (G)   Donations. Donations or gifts provided to the city for the benefit of
the library shall be used only for library purposes and may be expended by the
Library Board of Trustees only in accordances with the city budget process. All
donations and gifts shall be budgeted along with other library accounts.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   TOY AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Codes Adopted
   
70.01   Vehicle Code adopted
CODES ADOPTED
§ 70.01 VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council to aid
and assist by whatever means possible for the utmost consistency in traffic
regulation among and between agencies of the state having such jurisdiction.
      (2)   Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho Code Title 49 by the cities
of the state is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the
state.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)
   (B)   Adoption. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of
the city that certain code, identified as the Idaho Code Title 49, and as the
same may hereafter be revised by the state legislature or amended by the
governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance
of the city fully as though set forth at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
   (C)   Copies on file. Three copies of Idaho Code Title 49, together with any
revisions or amendments, duly certified by the City Clerk/Treasurer, shall be
kept on file in the City Clerk/Treasurer’s office for use and examination of
and by the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)
(Ord. 395, passed 1-4-1971)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Operation of Motor Vehicles
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Speed limits
   
71.03   Traffic signs
   
71.04   Automatic traffic signals
   
71.05   U-Turns
   
71.06   Authority of Mayor to regulate
   
71.07   Parades and other public gatherings
   
71.08   Deposits in streets prohibited
   
71.09   Damage to streets prohibited
   
71.10   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Tank vehicles distributing flammable liquids, see §§
91.30 through
91.37.
OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURB. The boundaries of a street.
   DRIVER. Any person operating a motor vehicle.
   PARKED. Applies to a waiting vehicle or to waiting vehicles drawn up
alongside of one another not parallel to the curb, except outside the congested
district, where vehicles shall be PARKED parallel to the curb.
   STREET. That part of a public highway intended for vehicles, including
alleys, unless otherwise indicated.
   TERRA CONGESTED DISTRICT. Includes the following streets: Pine Street from
Fifth Street to Sixth Street; Cedar Street from Fourth Street to the Cedar
Street Bridge near the OWR&N Railway depot; Bank Street from Fifth Street to
100 feet east of Eighth Street; Hotel Street from Sixth Street to Eighth
Street; Fifth Street from River Street to Bank Street; Sixth Street from the
bridge near the NP Railway Depot to Bank Street; and Seventh Street from Cedar
Street to Hotel Street.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a highway.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)
§ 71.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, run, or drive,
or cause to be operated, run, or driven, a vehicle of any kind at any place
within the corporate limits of the city at a greater speed than 20 mph, or in
crossing a street, in turning a corner of a street, or within 100 yards of
school buildings at a greater speed than 12 mph, with the exception of those
areas posted not in accordance with this section and which the City Council has
deemed necessary for the public safety and welfare. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prohibit the officers, persons, apparatus, and vehicles
of the Fire District and Police Department of the city from proceeding at such
a rate of speed as may be necessary for the proper discharge of their
respective duties.
   (B)   Turning; crossing streets; passing. A vehicle, in making turns or in
crossing other streets and crosswalks and in passing other vehicles, shall do
so with great caution.
   (C)   Crossing sidewalk. A vehicle shall not cross a sidewalk to or from any
alley, lot, or building, except very slowly and with great caution.
   (D)   Following emergency vehicles. A vehicle shall not be less than 300
feet away from any emergency vehicle or apparatus or equipment en route to an
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   Authority of Chief of Police. To inform users of the streets of the
provisions of this title relative to parking, traffic, and travel, the Chief of
Police is hereby directed and authorized to provide and to have placed on or
above the streets and alleys of the city suitable signs and markings wherever
deemed necessary.
   (B)   Placement prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person other than
the Chief of Police, or his or her duly-authorized agents, to erect, place, or
exhibit any traffic sign or standard upon any public highway of the city or to
attempt by signs or written or printed instructions to regulate traffic or the
parking of vehicles.
   (C)   Malicious injury; removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maliciously remove or injure any public traffic sign erected upon any public
highway, or any inscription on such, or deface the same in writing, or in any
other manner, or to remove any light placed upon a disabled vehicle, or upon an
obstruction or defect in the highway. A violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   Chief of Police to install. The Chief of Police, as directed by the
Mayor and City Council, shall install automatic signal lights for the
controlling of traffic at intersections of the streets and alleys of the city
as deemed necessary.
   (B)   Specifications. Such automatic signal lights shall be of a standard
variety with alternating red and green lights, except that when deemed
advisable, a standard variety of blinking lights may be used.
   (C)   Applicability. When such automatic signal lights are installed and
operating, the movement of all traffic at such intersections, both pedestrians
and vehicles, shall be governed by such automatic signal lights.
   (D)   Visibility. Each such light shall be so installed that it shall be
plainly visible from all streets entering the intersection at which such light
is installed, and shall have facing each street entering such intersection
alternating red and green lights.
   (E)   Red light. When such lights display red toward a street, all persons
and vehicles approaching such intersection on said street shall come to a
complete stop, and shall remain stopped and not cross such intersection until
the green light facing such street shall be illuminated.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 U-TURNS.
   U-turns will be permitted only at the intersections of streets in the city.
No U-turns shall be permitted at the intersections of alleys and streets or at
intersections in the city where warning signs prohibiting the same have been
posted by order of the Chief of Police with the approval of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.06 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO REGULATE.
   The Mayor, when he or she considers the public safety requires it, may
further regulate or prohibit, in whole or in part, traffic on any public
highway for a period of time not exceeding ten days.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)
§ 71.07 PARADES AND OTHER PUBLIC GATHERINGS.
   (A)   Directed by police. At theaters and public gatherings, or under
unusual circumstances, vehicles shall stand or move as directed by the police.
   (B)   Designate routes. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to designate
routes for parades on the public highways and to police the same, and to adopt
and enforce such measures as, in his or her judgment, are necessary to keep the
highway to be traveled upon free from obstruction.
   (C)   Processions. No vehicle shall be driven or moved so as to pass through
or into, or to interfere with, any civic, military, or funeral procession,
except at the direction of a traffic officer.
   (D)   Persons not participating. All persons not participating in any parade
or procession shall keep off the highway temporarily closed for such parade or
procession. No person shall break through or interrupt any regularly-ordered
parade or procession; provided, no parade or procession shall be permitted to
interfere with the governmental functions of the Fire Department, Police
Department, or ambulances.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.08 DEPOSITS IN STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Oil; gasoline. No oil, gasoline, or like fluid shall be knowingly,
willfully, or negligently spilled or allowed to drip from any vehicle on the
pavements of the city.
   (B)   Load. No person while hauling shall permit the vehicle of which he or
she is in charge to spill, drop, or lose any portion of its load.
   (C)   Glass; nails; tacks.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any crockery or
glass, nails, tacks, or any other article that would tend to injure the rubber
tires of any vehicle in or upon any public highway.
      (2)   Any person who, through accident, may cause to be thrown or to be
placed in or upon any public highway any glass, nails, or other material likely
to injure the rubber tires of any vehicle shall remove the same immediately.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.09 DAMAGE TO STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drag or haul any timber or other article along or over any
public highway in such a manner that a portion of the same shall rest upon or
come in contact with the surface of such highway; nor shall any person on any
planked, paved, or macadamized public highway lock the wheels of any vehicle by
the method commonly known as rough lock; nor by any method whereby anything
more than the tire of such wheel, or a smooth shoe, shall come in contact with
the surface of the public highway.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.10 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Jurisdiction
   
72.02   Authority
   
72.03   Interpretation
   
72.04   Fifteen-minute and two-hour zones
   
72.05   Parallel parking
   
72.06   Unlawful acts designated
   
72.07   Prohibited parking
   
72.08   Temporary no parking zones
   
72.09   Disability-related parking
   
72.10   Alleys and loading zones; parking and deliveries
   
72.11   Enforcement
   
72.12   Use of funds
   
72.13   Vehicle ownership as evidence
   
72.14   Violation
§ 72.01 JURISDICTION.
   Law enforcement officials are empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter according to the authority conveyed by the laws of the state, and they
may enter upon private property open to the public when necessary to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.02 AUTHORITY.
   The city or its designee shall be directed and authorized to mark off
individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated and described in this
chapter, and in such other zones as may hereafter be established, such parking
spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the surface of
the street, as prescribed in Idaho Code § 49-208(a).
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.03 INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands, and, for other matters of similar
nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial
vehicles, limited parking zones, and the granting of extended parking
privileges for construction and maintenance vehicles in limited parking zones.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.04 FIFTEEN-MINUTE AND TWO-HOUR ZONES.
   (A)   Hours restricted. No owner or operator of any vehicle shall on Monday
through Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., allow to cause
said vehicle to be continuously parked longer than two hours in any parking
space posted for two hour parking in the delineated areas on the map designated
as Exhibit A in §
73.06, and incorporated herewith as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Violation. Any vehicle parked for in excess of the two-hour
restriction may be subject to having the vehicle removed. Any costs associated
with removal shall be the responsibility of the violator.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-4) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Motor vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway
on all streets and avenues with the right-hand wheels within 18 inches of the
curb or edge of the roadway at locations where there is adequate right-of-way
available, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. On one-way streets, motor
vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb on all streets and avenues with
either the right-hand wheels or the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the
curb.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-5) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 UNLAWFUL ACTS DESIGNATED.
   It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
person:
   (A)   Park overtime. To cause or permit any vehicle to be parked overtime or
beyond the period of legal parking time established in this chapter, unless
such person has previously obtained and has in effect a valid parking permit as
issued by the Chief of Police upon compliance with requirements established by
resolution of the City Council;
   (B)   Park across markings. To park any vehicle across any line or marking
of a parking space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely
within the area designated by the lines or markings; or
   (C)   Remove chalk lines. To remove, by any means, the chalk lines or
markings made by the city or its agents for the purpose or necessity for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Any such violation shall
constitute an infraction and the same shall be assessed by a fine accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-6) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   Locations prohibited. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any
of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   On a crosswalk;
      (5)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
      (7)   In an alley.
   (B)   Pedestrian, nonmotorized vehicle areas.
      (1)   No person shall drive, operate, or park a vehicle upon any
officially-marked bicycle lane, bicycle path, foot path, or other separate
right-of-way specifically set aside for use by pedestrians or nonmotorized
vehicles, except at an intersection or when entering or leaving a roadway at a
driveway, private road, or alley.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles
meeting the conditions specified in Idaho Code Title 49, or authorized
maintenance and construction vehicles while actually engaged in work upon a
roadway or nonmotorized right-of-way.
   (C)   Prohibited area; distance from curb. No person shall move a vehicle
not lawfully under his or her control into any such prohibited area or away
from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   (D)   Handicapped parking.
      (1)   No person shall park any vehicle in a parking space designated for
handicapped parking, except for a vehicle that is momentarily in the space for
the purpose of allowing a handicapped person to enter or leave the vehicle,
unless the vehicle is displaying a special license of the handicapped, or an
official handicapped card issued by the state, or an official temporary
handicapped card issued by the state or another state.
      (2)   There shall be one required handicapped parking space on each block
within that area set out in the map designated as Exhibit A in §
73.06, and incorporated herewith as if set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-7) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.08 TEMPORARY NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Authority; signs, barricades. The Police Department is authorized to
indicate temporary zones where vehicles shall not be parked when, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, it is necessary to prevent temporarily the
parking of vehicles on any street or portion of such street. The Chief of
Police may do so either by placing appropriate signs or placing barricades or
officers at such places.
   (B)   Parking prohibited.
      (1)   Special permit. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle
at such times and at such designated places unless the person so parked has
obtained a valid special permit issued by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   Removal of illegally-parked vehicle. The Police Department is
authorized to remove such illegally-parked vehicles, and the violator thereof
shall pay the cost of such removal and a citation may be issued wherein the
violator shall pay a fine for an infraction.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-8) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.09 DISABILITY-RELATED PARKING.
   (A)   Use restricted. Parking a vehicle, on public or private property open
to the public, in a space reserved for disabled persons, which space is marked
in conformance with the requirements specified in Idaho Code § 49-213, or any
subsequent Idaho Code section which specifies the manner of marking or signing
disabled parking, is prohibited, unless a vehicle is momentarily in the space
for the purpose of allowing a person with a disability to enter or leave the
vehicle, or unless a special license plate, card, or temporary card for the
disability as prescribed in Idaho Code § 49-410Cite, or any subsequent Idaho
Code sections which provide for the issuance of a special license plate, card,
or temporary card for person with a disability, is displayed on the vehicle.
   (B)   Violation. The violator of the provisions of this section is guilty of
an infraction, and shall receive a fine consistent with Idaho Code §§ 49-213
and 49-410.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-9) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.10 ALLEYS AND LOADING ZONES; PARKING AND DELIVERIES.
   No vehicles, including motor vehicles, shall be parked in the alleys or
loading zones, as described in Exhibit A in §
73.06, except for the purpose of loading or unloading, which shall be done as
expeditiously as possible and shall not exceed 15 minutes elapsed time in any
one block, unless a special permit is obtained from the Chief of Police. And,
while loading or unloading, all vehicles shall use their hazard or flashing
warning lights.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-10) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or other persons designated by
the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-11) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.12 USE OF FUNDS.
   The fines received for parking violations shall be used to defray the city’s
expenses for the proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets of the
city and to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation, and control of the
parking of vehicles in parking zones.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-12) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.13 VEHICLE OWNERSHIP AS EVIDENCE.
   (A)   Registered owner.
      (1)   Prima facie evidence. In any prosecution against the registered
owner of a motor vehicle charging a violation of any regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle under any ordinance of the city, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of parking, the owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle was the person
who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, the violation occurred. For the purposes of this section, proof that a
person is the registered owner of a vehicle is not prima facie evidence that
the registered owner has violated any other provision of law.
      (2)   Written lease; rental agreement. Proof of a written lease or of a
rental agreement for a particular vehicle described in the complaint on the
date and time of the violation, which lease or rental agreement includes the
name and address of the person to whom the vehicle is leased or rented, shall
rebut the prima facie evidence that the registered owner was the person who
parked or placed the vehicle at the time and place where the violation
occurred. Such lease or rental agreement, when presented to the Chief of
Police, may be accepted as proof that the registered owner was not the
violator.
   (B)   Rented or leased vehicle. In any prosecution against the lessee or
renter of a motor vehicle charging a violation of any regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle under any ordinance of the city, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any provision of the ordinances, together with proof that the defendant named
in the complaint was, at the time of parking, the lessee or renter of the
vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the lessee or renter of the
vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and
for the time during which, the violation occurred. For the purposes of this
division (B), proof that a person is the lessee or renter of a vehicle is not
prima facie evidence that the lessee or renter has violated any other provision
of the law.
   (C)   Bona fide sale or transfer. Any charge under such ordinance shall be
dismissed when the person charged has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the
vehicle as evidenced by a valid written instrument showing that possession was
delivered thereof to the purchaser, and has complied with the requirements of
Idaho Code Title 49, Chapter 4, prior to the date of the alleged violation, and
has advised the court of the name and address of the purchaser and the date of
the sale, written proof of which shall be presented to the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-14) (Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995)
§ 72.14 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Violations. Any person violating any of the traffic or parking
provisions set out in this chapter, or those subsequently passed involving
traffic or parking with the city and where not previously specified, shall have
committed an infraction, unless an other penalty is provided by state law, and,
upon being found to have violated a provision of this chapter or those
subsequently passed, shall be penalized as allowed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-13)
   (B)   Bond. Any person violating any of the parking provisions set out in
this chapter shall be assessed a reasonable bond for each violation as set out
by Idaho Code. If none is set out in Idaho Code, then in an amount to be set by
the then-current bond schedule submitted to the District Court.
   (C)   Citation. Any police officer or other persons designated by the city
or Chief of Police observing any of the foregoing violations shall issue a
citation describing such violation and the charge assessed for the violation to
the person committing the violation. The members of the Police Department, or
other persons designated by the city or Chief of Police, are authorized to
refrain from instituting a prosecution charging the person with an infraction
or, where applicable, a misdemeanor if such person pays the charge herein
assessed to the city cashier within ten days of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-14)
(Ord. 95-08, passed 11-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73: TOY AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
73.01   Definition
   
73.02   Operators; qualifications
   
73.03   Allowing or encouraging unlicensed operators
   
73.04   Equipment
   
73.05   Regulations for operation
   
73.06   Designated streets
   
73.07   Special events
Skateboards and Other Toy Vehicles
   
73.20   Use prohibited
   
73.21   Exhibits; demonstrations
Bicycles
   
73.35   Definition
   
73.36   Exercise of police power
   
73.37   Registration
   
73.38   Serial number
   
73.39   Lighting equipment
   
73.40   Use restricted
   
73.41   Prohibited acts
   
73.42   Traffic rules
 
   
73.99   Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SNOWMOBILE. Every self-propelled device upon a combination of skis, skids,
tracks, or endless belts in and upon, or by which, any person or property is,
or may be, transported or drawn upon snow or snow-covered surface areas, and
expressly includes devices known as SNOWMOBILES or SKIMOBILES.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-1) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994)
§ 73.02 OPERATORS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city limits without a valid
motor vehicle operator’s license.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-2) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 ALLOWING OR ENCOURAGING UNLICENSED OPERATORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit, allow, or encourage
the operation or driving of a snowmobile by a person not holding a valid motor
vehicle operator’s license.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-3) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 EQUIPMENT.
   No snowmobile shall be operated in the city unless it is equipped with the
following:
   (A)   A headlight. At least one and not more than two head lamps sufficient
to render clearly- discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of 250 feet
ahead;
   (B)   A taillight and/or brake lights. Tail lamps and brake lamps, which,
when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible to the rear at a distance
of 250 feet;
   (C)   Brakes. At least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot; and
   (D)   A muffler. A muffler in good working order and in constant operation
to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall
use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-4) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION.
   (A)   Sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to operate or park a snowmobile on any
sidewalk in the city.
   (B)   Speed. No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of 20mph
in the city.
   (C)   Passengers; weights. No snowmobile shall carry more than one operator
and one passenger or weights in excess of the capacity recommended by the
manufacturer thereof.
   (D)   Towing.
      (1)   No sled, toboggan, inner tube, trailer, snowmobile, or any other
similar equipment or device shall be towed by a snowmobile within the city
limits.
      (2)   No person on skis, snowboards, or similar devices shall be towed
behind a snowmobile.
   (E)   Under the influence. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a
snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicants.
   (F)   Prohibited areas. No person shall operate or park a snowmobile in or
upon the following areas and places:
      (1)   City parks (unless otherwise designated by this chapter);
      (2)   School property, alleyways, NP Railway depot grounds, and Wallace
Public Library grounds; and
      (3)   Any privately-owned property without the express permission of the
property owner.
   (G)   Careless, negligent manner. No person shall operate a snowmobile
carelessly and heedlessly or in a negligent manner, or without due caution and
circumspection and at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or be likely to
endanger any person or property or to cause injury or damage to either, or to
harass, chase, or annoy any wild game or birds or domestic animals.
   (H)   Traffic rules. All snowmobile drivers shall abide by the same traffic
rules required of motorized vehicle operators in the city, except for speed
limits designated in division (B) above.
   (I)   Lights. All snowmobiles shall be operated with the headlights and tail
lights on at all times.
   (J)   Noise. No snowmobile shall be operated whose motor is louder than 72
decibels. No excessive or unnecessary revving of the snowmobile shall be
permitted.
   (K)   Single file. All snowmobiles shall be operated only in single file on
the extreme right-hand side of the designated street routes described in §
73.06(A).
   (L)   Use of city streets. The operation of snowmobiles on the streets of
the city shall be limited to ingress and egress to and from the city on said
designated routes described in §
73.06(A), which city streets are not to be used as a place of recreation for
snowmobiles.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-5) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 95-B, 12-13-1994)
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   Designated city street routes and areas for use upon which to operate
a snowmobile are identified in division (B) below.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-6)
   (B)   The following map is designated as Exhibit A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c62ae7bf251653eaee3ce2959c8f11512172fee1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1257.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 6-5-9)
(Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 93-5B, passed 12-13-1994)
§ 73.07 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. Any organizations or individuals desiring to hold
special snowmobile events shall submit a written request for a city permit
which can be issued after approval of the permit by the City Council.
   (B)   Liability insurance. The organizations or individuals shall carry
special event liability insurance as determined by the permit. A copy of said
insurance policy shall be provided to the City Clerk/Treasurer prior to the
special event.
   (C)   Release of liability. Every participant shall be required to sign a
release of liability provided by the organizations or individuals holding the
city harmless from any injuries or damage sustained as a result of
participation in the special event before he or she shall be allowed to
participate or before the permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-7) (Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-1994)
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES
§ 73.20 USE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate or cause to be
operated any skateboard, roller
skates, rollerblades, human-powered scooters, or other toy vehicles on any
sidewalk and street within the city:
   (A)   From Bank Street to Frontage Road;
   (B)   From Fourth Street to Burke Road; and
   (C)   On Hotel Street behind the courthouse.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-2) (Ord. 93-1, passed 4-20-1993) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.21 EXHIBITS; DEMONSTRATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the Mayor and/or City
Council from allowing bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, human-powered
scooters, or other toy vehicles to serve as exhibits or demonstrations.
   (B)   Such exhibits or demonstrations shall be by permit or other ordinance
only.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-3) (Ord. 93-1, passed 4-20-1993)
BICYCLES
§ 73.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Any two-wheeled vehicle with a tandem arrangement of the wheels,
containing a saddle or seat for the rider, steering handles, pedals, and cranks
or levers for its propulsion by the feet.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-1)
§ 73.36 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
   This subchapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city
in its governmental capacity for the protection and preservation of the health,
welfare, and order of the city, and all of its provisions shall be liberally
construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-2)
§ 73.37 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate, allow,
or permit any bicycle to stand on the streets or alleys of the city, unless
such bicycle has been registered with the City Clerk, and without displaying
the proper number plate thereon as hereafter provided.
   (B)   Time of registration. Before June 1 of each year, every bicycle in the
city must be registered with the City Clerk showing the proper name and address
of the owner, and the make, serial number, and general description of the
bicycle, and the name of the person or dealer from whom such bicycle was
purchased.
   (C)   Number plates.
      (1)   At the time of registration, a number plate shall be assigned to
such bicycle, which number plate must be attached to the rear of said bicycle
in plain view. Said number plate shall be displayed at all times during the
current registration year.
      (2)   Any number plate issued shall expire on the June 1 of the year
succeeding that in which issued.
   (D)   Sale or transfer. In case of a sale or transfer of a bicycle from one
individual to another, the registration of such bicycle, together with the
number plate originally assigned to it, shall be transferred to the new
purchaser or transferee, and the number plate originally assigned to such
bicycle must remain attached thereto until the end of the current registration
year.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-3) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.38 SERIAL NUMBER.
   No bicycle shall be sold or registered unless it shall have imposed, cut, or
impressed on some portion thereof a serial number or manufacturer’s number. Any
person who has in his or her possession a bicycle from which the serial number
or manufacturer’s number has been removed or defaced shall apply to the Chief
of Police, who, if he or she is satisfied that said bicycle was not stolen,
shall issue a number to be stamped on said bicycle and registered as a serial
number therefor. Thereafter, the City Clerk may register said bicycle and issue
number plates therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-4) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.39 LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon the streets,
alleys, or public places of the city during the nighttime without having such
bicycle equipped with a headlight attachment to the front thereof and a
reflector at least one and one-half inches in diameter attached to the rear
thereof. The headlight shall have a capacity sufficient to be seen at a
distance of at least 300 feet and shall be lighted at all times said bicycle is
ridden upon the streets, alleys, or public places of the city in the nighttime.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-5) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.40 USE RESTRICTED.
   Bicycles shall be permitted only on city streets and shall not be parked in
such a manner so as to obstruct or impede the movement of pedestrians, motor
vehicles, or other vehicles, or to cause damage to trees, shrubs, other plants,
or other property.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-6) (Ord. 93-1, passed 4-20-1993) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.41 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Double riding. It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to ride on
a bicycle at the same time, unless such bicycle is manufactured with double
seats or saddles, steering handles, pedals, and cranks or levers.
   (B)   Holding on to vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person riding on
a bicycle to take hold of or hang on to another vehicle for the purpose of
being drawn along by such other vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit the rider or operator of a bicycle to take hold of, or hang on to any
vehicle driven by any such person for the purpose of drawing or towing such
vehicle.
   (C)   Riding on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any
bicycle upon any public sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city.
   (D)   Parking in doorways. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave unattended any bicycle in any doorways entering public places from the
streets or alleys in the city.
   (E)   Racing. It shall be unlawful for any person to run or engage in, or to
cause to be run or engaged in, any bicycle race within the corporate limits of
the city; provided, however, that road races may be run and engaged in under
the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police, who is hereby given the
authority to designate the streets that maybe traversed and used in such road
races.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-7) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.42 TRAFFIC RULES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway, street, or alley within the
city shall be subject to all the rules and regulations applicable to the driver
of any other vehicle, except such rules and regulations as by their very nature
can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1-8)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
73.01 through
73.07 for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-8)
   (C)   A violation of §§
73.20,
73.21, or
73.35 through
73.42 shall constitute a misdemeanor, which shall be punished in accordance
with Idaho Code Title 49 and §§ 49-1503 and 50-302. In that event, the maximum
punishment for any offense shall be by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-4) (Ord. 93-1, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 93-5, passed 2-22-
1994)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Arterial highways
      
II.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. ARTERIAL HIGHWAYS.
   There is hereby established a main arterial highway, designated as the “I-90
Business Route,” for the convenience, safety, and information of the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Queen Street. Traffic on Queen Street and on the streets or alleys
connecting Queen Street and King Street shall be restricted to one direction
only. Vehicles shall enter Queen Street from the north entrance to said street
and move southward turning onto King Street.
   (B)   River Street. River Street from the I-90 Business Route to Second
Street shall be restricted to one direction only.
   (C)   Second Street. Second Street from the I-90 Business Route to River
Street shall be restricted to one direction only.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE REGULATIONS
      
92.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
93.   PUBLIC ROADS AND WAYS
      
94.   NOISE REGULATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Purpose
   
90.002   Applicability
   
90.003   Definitions
   
90.004   Animal control authority; interference
   
90.005   Restitution
   
90.006   Exemptions
Licensing and Vaccinations
   
90.020   License required
   
90.021   Collars and tags
   
90.022   Revocation of permits and licenses
   
90.023   Rabies, diseases, and quarantine
Dangers and Nuisances
   
90.035   Animals running at large
   
90.036   General nuisances
   
90.037   Feces removal
   
90.038   Vicious animals prohibited
   
90.039   Requirements for keeping vicious animals; change in status
Capture and Impoundment
   
90.050   Seizure, impound
   
90.051   Redemption of impounded animal
   
90.052   Disposition of unclaimed animals
   
90.053   Traps
   
90.054   Fines, costs, and impound fees
Care of and Cruelty Towards Animals
   
90.065   Parent liable for animal owned by child
   
90.066   Number of animals owned
   
90.067   Fighting among animals
   
90.068   Care and wellness
Fowl and Farm Animals
   
90.080   Disallowing of farm, exotic, wild, or deleterious animals
   
90.081   Regulation
   
90.082   Definitions
   
90.083   Purpose
   
90.084   Investigation and enforcement
   
90.085   Limitations on keeping fowl
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
general welfare, peace, good order, comfort, and convenience of the city and
its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-1)
   (B)   The city, through its Mayor and City Council, finds, determines, and
declares that this chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation and
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the city’s citizens and
inhabitants.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-31) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 90.002 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies to the importation and/or possession of all deleterious
exotic, wild, or domestic animals within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-2) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 90.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any member of the animal kingdom, except humans, whether wild or
domesticated.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the custodian of the animal and upon any
public street, highway, or grounds or upon private property other than the
private property of the custodian without the owner’s consent. However, AT
LARGE shall not mean that the animal was off the premises of the custodian when
under the immediate control of the custodian by means of an enclosure, leash or
rope not to exceed 12 feet in length, or by other means of immediate effective
control by the custodian.
   CUSTODIAN. The person, individual, association, firm, joint venture, trust,
corporation, or any other entity owning or otherwise having the care, custody,
or control of any animal.
   DELETERIOUS EXOTIC ANIMALS. Any live animal, or hybrid thereof, that is not
native to the state or who has otherwise been determined to be dangerous to
humans or the environment, other than livestock, agriculture, or wildlife.
   DOG. Any wild or domesticated carnivorous mammal being a member of the
scientific family Canidae, or Canis familiaris, whether male or female or
neuter.
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, domestic bison, swine, horses, mules, asses, domestic
corvidae, sheep, goats, camelids, and ratites.
   NEUTERED. Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction.
   NUISANCE DOG OR ANIMAL. Any person who keeps or harbors any animal, dog, or
dogs that frequently and habitually howl, yelp, or bark, shall be considered a
NUISANCE. Likewise, any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on
private property other than the custodian’s, or on public walks and recreation
areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the
custodian, or that causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions to
exist, or that chases vehicles, or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons
or other domestic animals.
   OWNER. Any person, business, firm, corporation, or their agent, owning or
keeping any dog or wild animal; the occupant of any premises on which a dog or
animal customarily resides shall be considered to be the OWNER or keeper of the
animal.
   POSSESS. To confine, control, keep, have, hold, house, or own for any period
of time.
   PREMISES. The property upon which the custodian keeps or maintains his or
her animal(s), whether such property is owned, rented, leased, or otherwise
occupied or made available to the custodian.
   RESTRAINT. An animal shall be considered under RESTRAINT if it is within the
real property limits of its custodian or secured by a leash, rope, or lead not
to exceed 12 feet in length.
   RUN OR RUNNING. Being present, and does not refer solely to the actual
activity of rapid movement.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Includes:
         (a)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious, terrorizing, or
threatening manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack, or
threatening to attack, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds,
places, or private property not owned or possessed by the owner of the animal;
         (b)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack, unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;
         (c)   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise
attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; and/or
         (d)   Any animal owned or harbored, primarily or in part, for the
purpose of fighting or an animal trained for fighting.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the definition of a VICIOUS ANIMAL, no animal may
be declared vicious if the injury or damage is sustained by a person who was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the animal; or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
animal; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime; or if the animal was
protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-3) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 90.004 ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY; INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the animal
control authority or law enforcement authority of the city in the performance
of any duty as herein provided. Any person violating this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine, imprisonment, or
both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with the law.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-7) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 RESTITUTION.
   Any owner of any animal within the city who is convicted of violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be responsible, in addition to any fine or
penalty otherwise imposed, to reimburse the city for restitution for any costs
incurred in the seizing, impounding, veterinary services, feeding, boarding,
returning to, or disposing of such animal resulting from a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-27) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Police dogs. This chapter shall not apply to dogs or animals used by
the Police Department or a law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Trespass; tort. No animal shall be declared vicious for injury or
damage sustained by any person who was committing a willful trespass or other
tort upon the premises of the animal’s owner.
   (C)   Teasing, tormenting, or assaulting. No animal shall be declared
vicious for injury or damage sustained by any person who was teasing,
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-18) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
LICENSING AND VACCINATIONS
§ 90.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Ownership license. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor,
keep, or possess a dog within the city, over the age of four months, without
first procuring a license as provided by this chapter.
   (B)   License application, fees. All dog licenses shall be issued for one
calendar year from January 1 to December 31, regardless of when the tag is
purchased. The owner or person having charge of a dog within the city shall
make application in the City Clerk’s office and pay a license fee according to
the schedule set by the City Council.
   (C)   Fees.
      (1)   Unneutered or unspayed. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall collect a
fee to be established by resolution of the City Council for unneutered or
unspayed dogs.
      (2)   Neutered or spayed. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall collect a fee to
be established by resolution of the City Council for neutered or spayed dogs.
         (a)   No dog shall be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof
that such surgery was performed.
         (b)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall maintain a copy of said proof of
spay or neuter in the records of the city and shall collect such proof at the
time the license is issued for the dog.
      (3)   Replacement of dog licenses or tags. Upon satisfactory proof to the
City Clerk/Treasurer that a dog license or tag has been lost, a new tag of a
different number may be issued upon payment of a fee, to be established by
resolution of the City Council, and the transaction shall be noted upon the
original receipt and records of the city.
   (D)   Proof of vaccination. Upon receipt of such application and with proof
that the dog has received a rabies vaccination within the last 36 months, a
receipt and numbered metal tag will be issued.
   (E)   Guide dogs. Dog license fees shall be waived for any guide dog that
has been properly trained for the purpose of and is used to guide blind or
partially-blind persons, a person with impaired hearing, or any other disabled
person who requires a guide dog. Proof of such training shall be provided upon
application for license.
   (F)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned,
kept, or harbored by him or her to wear a license tag issued to any other dog,
to wear an imitation of the dog license tag issued by the city for that year,
or to fail to apply for a new dog license upon change of ownership of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-4) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.021 COLLARS AND TAGS.
   Every dog shall wear a substantial and durable collar, to which shall be
securely attached the required dog license tag.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-5) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.022 REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   The city may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the
permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or with other
law governing the protection and keeping of animals, whether local, state, or
federal.
   (B)   If an applicant or owner is shown to have withheld or falsified any
material information on the application for a permit, license, or tag, the city
may refuse to issue or may revoke a permit, license, or tag.
   (C)   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit, license, or tag
for an animal establishment that the city shall be permitted to inspect any and
all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time
during normal business hours.
      (1)   Where a permit is revoked for any cause, or pending appeal of any
such action, the city shall have the power of entry on the premises and into
all areas where animals are being kept.
      (2)   A person denied a permit, license, or tag may not reapply for a
period of at least 30 days.
      (3)   Each application shall disclose any previous denial or revocation
of any permit, license, or tag and shall be accompanied by the regular permit,
license, or tag fee for unaltered animals and altered animals at a rate to be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-6) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.023 RABIES, DISEASES, AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person, other than a licensed veterinarian,
to keep or harbor any animal afflicted with rabies.
   (B)   The law enforcement authority, the animal control authority, or the
owner of the animal shall secure disposition of any animal afflicted with
rabies.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal showing symptoms of
rabies, or which has bitten any person, causing an abrasion of the skin, to
surrender the animal for confinement and isolation at the animal shelter or to
a licensed veterinarian for a period not less than 14 days.
      (1)   If, at the end of that period, the animal shall be determined free
of rabies, it shall be released to the owner upon payment of fees accrued by
the animal for care and keeping.
      (2)   If such fee is not paid, the animal shall be subject to disposal,
as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any animal with
a contagious or infectious disease to run at large upon the public streets or
any other public place within the city, or to expose such animal in any public
building or place whereby the health, safety, and well-being of the public may
be affected, nor shall such animal be shipped or removed from the premises of
the owner of such animal without the permission of the Panhandle Health
District, the law enforcement or animal control authority.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-9) (Ord. 2013-02, 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
DANGERS AND NUISANCES
§ 90.035 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   Any person who owns, harbors, or has in his or her control a dog, licensed
or unlicensed, which is found at large upon the streets or alleys of the city,
in any public place in the city, or upon any other premises without the consent
of the person in possession of such premises is responsible for such animal
being at large and is in violation of this section, except:
   (A)   When such animal is controlled by a leash not exceeding 12 feet in
length; or
   (B)   When such animal is confined in a motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-8) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.036 GENERAL NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and
control of his or her animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance.
Every person shall be guilty of allowing an animal to become a nuisance when
the animal:
   (A)   Causes excessive, continuous, or untimely howling, yelping, barking,
or noise that disturbs any person;
   (B)   Molests passersby or chases vehicles;
   (C)   Habitually attacks other domestic animals;
   (D)   Trespasses upon public or private property in such a manner so as to
cause damage to the property;
   (E)   Is dangerous or vicious; or
   (F)   Is running at large, whether deemed vicious or dangerous.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-10) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
Cross-reference:
   Additional animal nuisance regulations, see §
92.03
§ 90.037 FECES REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any pet or animal to allow said pet or
animal to defecate upon any public property, or private property open to the
public, without immediately removing or causing to be removed from the property
all feces deposited thereon by said pet or animal. If such feces is not
immediately removed, then the owner of said pet or animal shall be deemed in
violation of this subchapter and such violation shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable as set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-25) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.038 VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep or
harbor, within the corporate limits of the city, any animal deemed to be
vicious, as defined in this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to animals owned by any police agency, police officer, or military
organization which are used in the performance of law enforcement or search and
rescue.
   (B)   In the event that an officer has probable cause to believe that an
animal is vicious, the animal control authority or law enforcement authority
shall notify the owner of the dog, if known, that the animal must be removed
from corporate city limits within 24 hours of the time of notification. If said
animal is at large, every effort should be made to impound the dog.
   (C)   (1)   Officers are hereby empowered to make inquiry as deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section, and any
such officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious animal whose
owner fails to comply with the provisions hereof.
      (2)   In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to surrender the
animal to the officer, said officer shall make application for a search warrant
to seize the animal upon execution of the warrant.
   (D)   If, at the time of notification, the owner of an animal deemed to be
vicious should contest the determination of the investigating authority, he or
she shall have the opportunity to appeal the decision to the City Council.
      (1)   A notice of appeal and request for hearing shall be filed by the
owner of the animal; and shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk/
Treasurer, within ten days from the determination that the animal is vicious.
      (2)   Upon receipt of said written notice of appeal and request for
hearing, the City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the issue before the
City Council within ten days of receipt of the notice of appeal and request for
hearing. The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not
apply.
         (a)   At this public hearing, the owner shall be given the time and
opportunity to present evidence of why the animal should not be determined to
be vicious. The owner may be represented by legal counsel, may present oral and
written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. The investigating authority
shall also have the time and opportunity to present evidence as to why the
animal was determined to be vicious.
         (b)   The City Council shall issue a declaration as to the viciousness
of the animal within seven days after the close of the hearing and shall notify
the owner, in writing, of the declaration. The declaration shall set forth
specific grounds for the City Council’s declaration in the form of findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and declaration.
      (3)   (a)   The decision of the City Council shall be a final decision.
         (b)   The adversely-affected party may then appeal the City Council’s
final decision to the District Court, in accordance with state law.
         (c)   During the appellate period, however, the animal shall be
treated as vicious and the owner shall comply with all conditions and
requirements of this chapter in handling vicious animals.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-15) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.039 REQUIREMENTS FOR KEEPING VICIOUS ANIMALS; CHANGE IN STATUS.
   The owner of a vicious animal shall be subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   Confinement.
      (1)   Required. All vicious animals shall be securely confined indoors or
in an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner.
      (2)   Specifications. The pen or structure must have minimum dimensions
of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top attached
to the sides. If no bottom is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded
into the ground no less than two feet so that the animal cannot escape from the
pen or structure. If the animal escapes, it shall be automatic authority for
the city to have the animal removed from the city limits.
      (3)   Lighting; maintenance. All pens or structures must be adequately
lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (4)   Protection from elements. The enclosure must also protect the
animal from the elements.
   (B)   Leash; muzzle. The owner of the vicious animal shall not allow the
animal to go outside of its kennel, pen, or structure, unless the dog is
appropriately muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash not more than four
feet in length, and under the physical control of the owner at all times. The
muzzle must not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or
respiration, but must prevent the animal from biting any human or other animal.
   (C)   Signs. The owner of a vicious animal shall display, in a prominent
place on the owner’s property near the enclosure, kennel, pen, or structure, or
other clearly-visible area, a warning sign indicating that there is a vicious
animal on the premises. The sign shall be readable from the public highway or
thoroughfare. The owner shall also display the sign with a symbol warning
children of the presence of a vicious animal. Similar signs shall be posted on
the dog’s enclosure, kennel, pen, or structure.
   (D)   Insurance. The owner of a vicious animal shall provide proof to the
City Clerk/Treasurer of a certificate of insurance evidencing that the owner of
the animal has procured public liability insurance for at least $50,000,
insuring the owner for any injury or damage which may be caused by the vicious
animal.
   (E)   Violation. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of
divisions (A) through (D) above shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable
according to law, and the animal shall be immediately removed from the city
limits or otherwise euthanized.
   (F)   Notice. Within three days of declaring a dog vicious, the law
enforcement authority shall notify the dog’s owner, in writing, of the
declaration. The notice shall identify the requirements and conditions for
maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this chapter. If the owner cannot be
located, the dog may be immediately impounded and notice of the declaration and
impoundment of the dog shall be posted on the owner’s property, or sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner’s last known address.
Once the owner of an animal is notified that the animal has been deemed
vicious, the animal must be removed from the city. If the animal must be
impounded or placed with a licensed veterinary doctor, the actual costs are the
responsibility of the owner of the dog, whether or not the animal is later
deemed not to be vicious.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-16)
   (G)   Change in status.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of an animal within the
city limits who is harboring or possessing, or who owns a vicious animal, to
immediately notify the animal control officer, law enforcement authority, or
County Police Department if the vicious animal is unconfined, has escaped its
kennel, pen, or enclosed structure, house, or yard, and which is otherwise on
the loose, running at large, or has attacked a human being or domestic animal;
or, if the owner of a vicious animal sells, gives away, adopts, or otherwise
transfers ownership or custody of the vicious animal, the owner shall notify
the animal control officer, law enforcement authority, or County Police
Department within 48 hours of the transfer of custody of the animal and shall
provide, to the law enforcement authority, the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner.
      (2)   The previous owner shall notify the new owner of the animal’s
designation as a vicious animal and of the requirements and conditions for
keeping the vicious animal if the animal remains within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-21) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
CAPTURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.050 SEIZURE, IMPOUND.
   (A)   Duty to impound. It shall be the duty of the city’s law enforcement
authority or animal control authority to seize all animals running at large
within the city limits, whether vicious, a nuisance, or neither, except cats.
   (B)   Conditions. The city’s law enforcement authority or animal control
authority may order the seizure or impoundment and destruction of an animal
where:
      (1)   The animal has attacked, bitten, or injured a human being or
domestic animal;
      (2)   The animal is a vicious animal, as defined in this chapter, and the
owner has failed to comply with the requirements and conditions for keeping a
vicious animal as defined herein; or
      (3)   When the animal control officer or law enforcement authority deems
the animal poses a threat of serious harm to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
   (C)   Notification to owner of impounded dogs. Not later than 24 hours after
the impounding of any dog, the owner, if known, shall be notified by telephone
or in person that the animal has been impounded and its place of shelter. In
all cases, whether the owner is known or not, written notice shall be posted at
the City Hall, describing the animal and place or location it was impounded
from and its place of shelter.
   (D)   Redemption by owner; fees. An owner may recover possession of a dog
seized by the city upon payment to the City Clerk/Treasurer of a fee, to be
established by resolution of the City Council, plus the cost per day for board
and shelter for the dog for each day the dog has been impounded.
   (E)   Citation; fee. The city’s law enforcement authority or animal control
authority shall be entitled to issue a citation for any violation of this
chapter by any animal within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-11) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.051 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.
   Any animal impounded because it was found running at large or without a
license may be redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or destruction of such
dog by paying all charges against the same, as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-12) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 90.052 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   All animals apprehended and impounded under the provisions of this
chapter shall be held up to 72 hours from the posting of notice of impound. If,
at the end of that period, such animal has not been redeemed, it may be given
up for adoption.
   (B)   Any animal which appears to be suffering from rabies, infected with
mange, or infected by any other infectious or dangerous disease may not be
released, except to a licensed veterinarian, or who is otherwise unclaimed may
be destroyed.
   (C)   Any fees incurred for impoundment and/or medical attention are the
responsibility of the owner of the dog. If that owner is not known, it will be
the responsibility of the new adoptive owners.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-13) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 90.053 TRAPS.
   (A)   Police and animal control officers are hereby authorized to place
humane animal traps on public property, or on private property, upon permission
of the owner.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to disturb,
injure, or damage such traps or animals confined within.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-14) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.054 FINES, COSTS, AND IMPOUND FEES.
   The city is hereby entitled to charge a fee for the keeping and selling of
any animal, which fees shall be retained by the city as payment toward the
costs and expenses incurred. The fees shall be incurred as follows:
   (A)   For impounding and keeping any animal other than a dog, the charges
shall be the actual costs incurred by the city;
   (B)   For impounding and keeping any dog for a period of time up to 72
hours, the fee shall be equal to housing the animal for 72 hours;
   (C)   For each day an animal is kept, an additional charge, equal to the
actual cost for housing the dog, shall be assessed. A fraction of a day shall
be deemed a full day;
   (D)   The actual veterinary and hospital expenses incurred in caring for the
animal; and
   (E)   In addition to the foregoing, any person redeeming any dog shall,
prior to or at the time of the redemption, take out a license for the same and
fulfill all licensing requirements of this chapter, unless such animal shall
already have a valid license.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-20) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013)
CARE OF AND CRUELTY TOWARDS ANIMALS
§ 90.065 PARENT LIABLE FOR ANIMAL OWNED BY CHILD.
   In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian
of such minor shall be liable for all injuries, property damage, fines, and
impoundment fees caused or incurred by said animal.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-17) (Ord. 2013-02, 7-10-2013)
§ 90.066 NUMBER OF ANIMALS OWNED.
   Any resident of the city shall be limited to a total of five dogs per
household. Any number over five dogs shall be considered a kennel, which is not
an allowed usage in a residential area.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-19) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.067 FIGHTING AMONG ANIMALS.
   No person shall possess, harbor, or maintain care or custody of any animal
for the purpose of fighting, nor shall any person train, torment, badger, bait,
or use any animal for the reason of causing or encouraging the animal to attack
human beings or domestic animals.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-22) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.068 CARE AND WELLNESS.
   Owners will supply to their animals adequate food, water, and shelter from
the elements. If any officer or animal control officer observes poor care for
an animal, the owner will be notified with a time frame in which to comply. The
animal will be removed from the owner’s care if conditions are not met. Costs
for any veterinarian care incurred under such conditions will be charged to the
owner.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-23) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
FOWL AND FARM ANIMALS
§ 90.080 DISALLOWING OF FARM, EXOTIC, WILD, OR DELETERIOUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to own, harbor,
keep, or possess any farm animal of any type, or a wild and/or exotic or
deleterious animal of any nature within the city limits. No monkey, horse,
mule, cow, calf, steer, bull, swine, chicken, tiger, bobcat, lion, bear or bear
cub, leopard, cougar, poisonous snake, reptile, or other deleterious animal,
except house cats, shall be allowed to run at large, or to be herded in any
public places within the city limits, or upon any private premises open to the
public, except when participating in a lawful or authorized parade or circus,
and even then, said animal shall be secured by a rope, leash, halter, or other
suitable restraint device, and then only on a public thoroughfare.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-24) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.081 REGULATION.
   The city does hereby regulate the domestication of chickens and other fowl
within the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-1) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-11-2018)
§ 90.082 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BROODING. The period of fowl growth when supplemental heat must be provided
due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.
   CHICKEN, DUCK, GOOSE, PEAFOWL, GUINEA FOWL. Carry their common definitions.
   COOP. The structure for the keeping or housing of fowl permitted by this
subchapter.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Mayor or anyone whom the Mayor appoints to rule on
or enforce this subchapter.
   EXERCISE YARD. A fenced area that provides space for exercise and foraging
for the birds when supervised, but is not fully-enclosed or covered like a run.
   FOWL. A domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat.
   GAME BIRD. Any fowl which is regulated under the hunting laws of the state.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
   RUN. Means a fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the
fowl can roam unsupervised.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-2) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-11-2018)
§ 90.083 PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a
sustainable activity that can also be a rewarding pastime. Therefore, it is the
purpose and intent of this subchapter to permit the keeping and maintenance of
hens and certain other fowl for egg and meat sources in a clean and sanitary
manner that is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety,
and welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-3) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-11-2018)
§ 90.084 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement officers shall have authority in the investigation and
enforcement of this subchapter, and no person shall interfere with, hinder, or
molest any such officer in the exercise of such powers.
   (B)   The officer shall make investigations as are necessary to ensure
compliance with this subchapter throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-4) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-11-2018)
§ 90.085 LIMITATIONS ON KEEPING FOWL.
   (A)   A lot may contain no more than six fowl on any one lot in any area of
the city.
   (B)   Roosters, peafowl, and guinea fowl are strictly prohibited within city
limits.
   (C)   The slaughtering of fowl, other than game birds, including ducks and
geese, is prohibited within city limits, unless such activity is done fully
within the confines of a closed structure and not in public view.
   (D)   Every lot containing fowl must have a functioning coop located on the
lot. Coops must be constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum
standards:
      (1)   Located in the rear or side yard;
      (2)   Set back at least three feet from the rear or side property lines;
      (3)   Interior floor space shall be three square feet per bird;
      (4)   One standard door to allow humans to access the coop, and one door
for fowl;
      (5)   Climate control via adequate ventilation and/or insulation to
maintain the coop temperature between 32ºF to 85ºF;
      (6)   One nest box per every three fowl;
      (7)   Coop construction and materials must be adequate to prevent access
by rodents;
      (8)   Coops shall be constructed and maintained in a manner showing
efficient competency; and
      (9)   A run or exercise yard is required attached to or adjacent to each
coop.
         (a)   Runs must be constructed and maintained to meet the following
minimum standards:
            1.   Location shall be rear or side yard;
            2.   Size shall be ten square feet per bird. If the coop is
elevated two feet so the fowl can access the space beneath, that area may count
as a portion of the minimum run footprint;
            3.   Cover shall be adequate to keep fowl in and predators out; and
            4.   Substrate shall be composed of material that can be easily
raked or regularly replaced to reduce odor and flies.
         (b)   Exercise yards must be externally fenced and are required if a
run does not exist to provide at least ten square feet per bird. Exercise yards
must provide a minimum of 100 square feet per fowl.
   (E)   Fowl must not be housed in a residential house or an attached or
detached garage, except for brooding purposes only.
   (F)   All premises on which fowl are kept or maintained shall be kept clean
from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract rodents. The coop and its
surroundings must be cleaned frequently enough to control odor. Manure shall
not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition or
causes odors detectible on another property. Failure to comply with these
conditions may result in the officer removing fowl from the premises.
   (G)   All grain and food stored for the use of the fowl shall be kept in a
rodent-proof container.
   (H)   Fowl shall not be kept in such a manner so as to constitute a nuisance
to the occupants of adjacent property and must be done in such a manner so as
to comply with all state and local laws regarding nuisances.
   (I)   Dead fowl must be disposed of in a timely and sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-5) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-11-2018) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The law enforcement or animal control authority is hereby
empowered to enforce §§
90.001 through
90.006,
90.020 through
90.023,
90.035 through
90.039,
90.050 through
90.054, and
90.065 through
90.068 by:
         (a)   Charging those found in violation of §§
90.001 through
90.006,
90.020 through
90.023,
90.035 through
90.039,
90.050 through
90.054, and
90.065 through
90.068:
            1.   Current animal impoundment fees; and/or
            2.   Owners of animals without proof of rabies vaccination will be
given notification to comply with §§
90.020 through
90.023 within 60 days or they will be issued a fine to be established by
resolution of the City Council, to be paid within five days. After five days,
the animal must be immediately removed from corporate city limits if the
vaccination is still not obtained.
         (b)   Apprehending animals found to be at large; and
         (c)   Investigating complaints of violation of §§
90.001 through
90.006,
90.020 through
90.023,
90.035 through
90.039,
90.050 through
90.054, and
90.065 through
90.068.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-26)
      (2)   Any person violating any portion of §§
90.001 through
90.006,
90.020 through
90.023,
90.035 through
90.039,
90.050 through
90.054, and
90.065 through
90.068 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists shall be
considered a separate violation. Impoundment of an animal in violation does not
preclude the charging of the owner of the animal in violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-28)
   (C)   A dog not licensed as described in §
90.020(B) by February 1 shall incur a penalty at a rate to be established by
resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-4)
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating any of the sections of §§
90.080 through
90.085 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person violating any conditions of §§
90.080 through
90.085 shall reimburse the city for all costs borne by the city to enforce §§
90.080 through
90.085, including, but not limited to, those costs incurred by the city in the
abatement of violations, and the removal or destruction of fowl kept on
noncomplying lots within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-6) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-10-2013; Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-
11-2018)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Uniform Fire Code adopted
   
91.02   Storage of inflammables
   
91.03   Fireworks
   
91.04   Bonfires
Explosives
   
91.15   Storage of explosives restricted
   
91.16   Permit required
   
91.17   Inspections
   
91.18   Restrictions on transit
   
91.19   Inflammable liquids
Flammable Liquids
   
91.30   Self-service gasoline or fuel-dispensing systems
   
91.31   Definitions
   
91.32   Certification of tank vehicles
   
91.33   Attendance of vehicles
   
91.34   Required equipment
   
91.35   Rear bumpers
   
91.36   Required marking or placard
   
91.37   Static electricity charges
   
91.38   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
consistent with nationally- recognized good practice for the safeguarding to a
reasonable degree of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials,
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises within the city, the Uniform Fire Code,
including only the following listed appendices: Appendix 1-A (6); and Appendix
11-A (1), (3), (4), (9), (10), (13), (16), (18), (19), and (23), prepared by
the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs’
Association, Inc., most current edition, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length
herein.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)
   (B)   Three copies of the Uniform Fire Code, the most current edition, and
as the same may hereafter be amended, duly certified by the City Clerk shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination of and by
the public.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)
(Ord. 511, passed 5-8-1990)
§ 91.02 STORAGE OF INFLAMMABLES.
   The standards as set forth by the State Department of Environmental Quality
and the Environmental Protection Agency shall be and the same are adopted by
reference as if they were an ordinance of the city and incorporated herein as
if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1) (Ord. 98-06, passed 11-10-1998)
§ 91.03 FIREWORKS.
   Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 26, and any amendments which may from time to
time be made, is hereby adopted and incorporated as if it were an ordinance of
the city, and shall be known as the city’s “Fireworks Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 7-8-1) (Ord. 99-03, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 91.04 BONFIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw, or
any other combustible material in any street, alley, or vacant lot, except by
special written permission of the Chief of the Fire Department, when such
burning shall be done in screened metallic receptacles approved by him or her
and under such proper safeguards as he or she may direct as to time and
weather; provided, the Chief of the Fire Department may issue a general permit,
by publication, during certain seasons of the year for the burning of leaves or
other like material where conducted during daylight and with an adult on
constant attendance.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXPLOSIVES
§ 91.15 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, or to
keep or store, either for himself, herself, or for others, anywhere within the
limits of the city any powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine, or any other high
explosive, except as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.16 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Power to grant; application. The Chief of the Fire Department may, in
said Chief’s discretion, upon written application made to him or her, grant
permits for the keeping or storing of not more than 100 pounds of powder,
dynamite, or nitroglycerine, or other high explosives. The application shall
state the exact location within the limits of the city where it is intended
that such high explosives shall be kept or stored.
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The Chief of Fire District I, in granting
permits provided for in this subchapter, may make such reasonable rules and
regulations as to the storing of the said explosives as will ensure the safe
handling and storing of the same.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2)
§ 91.17 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Fire District I, or any person designated by said Chief, shall
have the right and authority at any and all reasonable times to inspect any
buildings, premises, or property within the limits of the city where he or she
has good reason to believe high explosives are stored without having first
secured the permission provided for in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)
§ 91.18 RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSIT.
   (A)   It is further provided that the explosives covered by this subchapter,
while in transit either by vehicle or over the lines of any railroad, may be
taken by the person having the same in charge through the limits of the city;
provided, the vehicle, car, or cars in which the same are contained shall not
be set out or left standing within the limits of the city for more than 30
minutes; provided, however, railroads may set out such car or cars containing
such explosives and allow the same to stand in that portion of their yards
situated west of the center line of Third Street in the city extended northerly
in its own direction, not to exceed 24 hours.
   (B)   Refer to §§
91.30 through
91.37 for regulations for vehicles transporting or distributing flammable
liquids.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.19 INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   Nothing in this subchapter contained shall be so construed as to apply to
the keeping or storing of coal oil, gasoline, naphtha, or benzine.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-5)
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
§ 91.30 SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE OR FUEL-DISPENSING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install and/or maintain any and all types of
self-service gasoline or other volatile liquid or fuel-dispensing devices
within the official city limits, unless such dispensing device is located upon
a business premises where an owner, officer, principal, agent, or employee of
such business is in attendance upon such business premises at any and all times
when such self-service gasoline, volatile liquid, or fuel-dispensing device is
being operated and/or is available for operation for the dispensing of
gasoline, volatile liquid, and/or fuel within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and contrary to the safety and well-being of the
citizens and residents of the city to maintain and/or operate any and all types
of self-service gasoline or other volatile liquid or fuel- dispensing devices
upon any business premises within the limits of the city without the principal
owner, officer, agent, or employee being physically present and in attendance
upon such business premises when such gasoline, volatile liquid, or fuel is
available for dispensing or is being dispensed from a self-service gasoline or
other volatile liquid or fuel-dispensing device.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-1) (Ord. 440, passed 6-21-1977) Penalty, se §
10.99
§ 91.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASS I FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Liquids having a flash point below 25°F closed-
cup tester, such as, for example, ether, gasoline, and benzol.
   CLASS II FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Liquids having a flash point above that of Class
I and 70°F or below closed-cup tester, such as, for example, alcohol and amyl
acetate.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any truck, trailer, or semitrailer that is used for the
transportation of flammable liquids in bulk quantity.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-1) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980)
§ 91.32 CERTIFICATION OF TANK VEHICLES.
   All tank vehicles used for the transportation of Class I or Class II
flammable liquids in bulk quantity exceeding 100 gallons shall be inspected by
the Chief of the Fire Department, and, unless certified by the Chief of the
Fire Department as to his or her compliance with this subchapter, they shall
not be operated within the city; provided, this certification shall not be
required for such vehicles bearing the license or approval of the Interstate
Commerce Commission.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-2) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.33 ATTENDANCE OF VEHICLES.
   No tank vehicle transporting flammable liquids in bulk of Class I or Class
II shall be left unattended on any street, alley, driveway, or parkway of the
city; provided, this shall not be construed to prevent a driver from momentary
absence from his or her vehicle in connection with the delivery of his or her
load, except during the time of actual discharge of liquid, at which time some
responsible person must at all times be present at such vehicle; and, providing
further, that the Chief of the Fire Department may, upon request, grant
permission for the parking or storage of such vehicles in areas or places
designated by him or her and for such periods of time as he or she may set.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-3) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.34 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Fire extinguishers. Every tank vehicle used in the distribution of
flammable liquids within the city limits shall be equipped with at least one
approved hand fire extinguisher of a type suitable for extinguishing flammable
liquid fires.
   (B)   Emergency electric lanterns or reflectors. No person shall operate at
any time within the city limits any motor vehicle used in the transportation of
explosives, any cargo tank truck used for the transportation of flammable
liquids or compressed gases, or any motor vehicle using a compressed gas as a
fuel unless there shall be carried in the vehicle three red electric lanterns
or three portable red emergency reflectors meeting the requirements of Idaho
Code § 49-952, and there shall not be carried in any compressed gas-propelled
vehicle any flares, fuses, or signal produced by flame.
   (C)   Disabled vehicles; warning devices. Whenever any motor vehicle used in
the transportation of explosives or any cargo tank truck used for the
transportation of any flammable liquid or compressed flammable gas, or any
motor vehicle using compressed gas as a fuel, is disabled upon a highway at any
time or place within the city limits, the driver of the vehicle shall
immediately display one red electric lantern or portable red emergency
reflector, placed on the highway at the traffic side of the vehicle, and two
red electric lanterns or portable red reflectors, one placed approximately 200
feet to the rear of the disabled vehicle in the center of the traffic lane
occupied by the vehicle. Flares, fuses, or signals produced by flame shall not
be used as warning devices for disabled vehicles of the type mentioned in this
section.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-4) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.35 REAR BUMPERS.
   Every tank vehicle used in the distribution of flammable liquids and
operated upon the streets or alleys of the city shall be provided with
properly-attached rear steel bumpers of a type and so arranged as to adequately
protect the draw-off valves or faucets of such vehicles in the event of a
collision.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-5) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980)
§ 91.36 REQUIRED MARKING OR PLACARD.
   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and the rear with the
word “explosives” in letters not less than eight inches high, and there shall
be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24 inches
square, marked with the word “danger” in white letters six inches high.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-6)
§ 91.37 STATIC ELECTRICITY CHARGES.
   All tank vehicles used in the distribution of flammable liquids and operated
upon the streets or alleys of the city shall have the tank, chassis, axles, and
springs adequately bonded to prevent the accumulation of static electric
charges.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-7) (Ord. 465, passed 3-11-1980)
§ 91.38 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A violation of §
91.02 shall be a misdemeanor and subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2)
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violation of §
91.04 shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-2)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.19, or any officer of any firm of corporation who violates or permits to be
violated any of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.19, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-6)
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
91.30 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-2)
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §§
91.32 through
91.37 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-8)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Jurisdiction
   
92.03   Animals
   
92.04   Nuisances affecting public safety
   
92.05   Enforcement; powers of Chief of Police
   
92.06   Failure to remove or comply
   
92.07   Liability
   
92.08   Property owner to abate
   
92.09   Responsible party unknown
   
92.10   Notice to abate
   
92.11   Failure to abate
   
92.12   Hearing
   
92.13   Entry upon private property
   
92.14   Abatement
   
92.15   Disposition of discarded vehicle
 
   
92.99   Penalty
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. Includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the
city.
   COSTS. The expense of removing, storing, restoring, selling, or
investigating a discarded vehicle or other nuisance.
   DISCARDED VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto a valid
license plate and is in one or more of the following conditions for over 30
days:
         (a)   Inoperative;
         (b)   Wrecked;
         (c)   Dismantled or partially dismantled;
         (d)   Abandoned; and/or
         (e)   Junked.
      (2)   DISCARDED VEHICLES may be deemed to include major parts, including,
but not limited to, automobile bodies, automobile body parts, engines and
engine components, transmissions, and other drive train parts.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparing, cooking, or consumption of food.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or is indecent
or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property,
so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
      (2)   Further, the open accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle
is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to invite plundering and vandalism, to create fire hazards, to
constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of
minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. Any agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, owner, or person having possession, control, or title of property or
of property where a vehicle or other nuisance is located.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A building, way, place, or accommodation, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the general public.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and
solid market and industrial wastes.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. The person responsible for abating a nuisance, and shall
include:
      (1)   The person in charge of property, as defined in this section; and
      (2)   The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a
nuisance, as defined in this section or in any other ordinance of this city.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cardboard, tin or aluminum cans, yard clippings, leaves, dirt (other than the
natural soil in place), wood, glass, bedding, crockery, remnants of wood,
decayed, weathered, or broken construction materials which may no longer be
suitable for safe or approved construction, worthless and useless articles
which are in such a state or such a quantity as to be unsightly, against the
general welfare, unhealthful, dangerous to persons or property, or so as to
interfere with the abatement of weeds and similar materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VEHICLE OWNER. Any individual, firm, corporation, or association with a
claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or any interest, legal or
equitable, in a vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.02 JURISDICTION.
   The jurisdiction of this chapter relating to public nuisances shall be upon
all property inside the city limits and shall extend three miles beyond the
city limits, both public and private.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.03 ANIMALS.
   (A)   Livestock and poultry. Except for common household pets, no person
shall keep or maintain livestock or poultry within the limits of the city.
Animals being maintained at the time of passage hereof are exempt from
enforcement. Once said animal is removed or expires, no animal shall take its
place.
   (B)   Animal carcasses. No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or
controlled by him or her to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on
private property, for a period of time longer than is necessary to remove and
dispose of the carcass, but in no event longer than 24 hours.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
Cross-reference:
   Additional animal nuisance regulations, see §
90.036
   Keeping of chickens and other fowl, see §§
90.080 through
90.085
§ 92.04 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   Abandoned iceboxes. No person shall leave in a place accessible to
children an abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or similar container
without first removing the door.
   (B)   Attractive nuisances.
      (1)   Prohibited. No owner or person in charge of property shall permit
thereon:
         (a)   Unsafe machinery, equipment, vehicles, or other devices which
are attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children;
         (b)   Lumber, logs, or pilings placed or stored in a manner so as to
be attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children; or
         (c)   An open pit, quarry, cistern, or other excavation without
safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.
      (2)   Exception. This section shall not apply to authorized construction
projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing
children.
   (C)   Scattering rubbish. No person shall deposit upon public or private
property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, or any substance that
would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the
cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to injure a person,
animal, or vehicle traveling upon a public way.
   (D)   Trees and bushes.
      (1)   Trimming required. No owner or person in charge of property that
abuts upon any public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on his or her
property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of
an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public
sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on his or her premises, including the
adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above
the sidewalk and not less than 14 feet above the roadway.
      (2)   Dead or decaying trees. No owner or person in charge of property
shall allow to stand any dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public,
persons, or property on or near the property.
   (E)   Fences.
      (1)   Barbed wire. No owner or person in charge of property shall
construct or maintain a barbed wire fence thereon, or allow barbed wire to
remain as part of a fence, along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may
be placed about the top of other fencing not less than six feet and six inches
high.
      (2)   Electric fence prohibited. No owner or person in charge of property
shall construct, maintain, or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or
public way.
   (F)   Surface waters; drainage.
      (1)   Sidewalks. No owner or person in charge of any building or
structure shall suffer or permit rainwater, ice, or snow to fall from the
building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the
sidewalk.
      (2)   Drainpipes. The owner or person in charge of property shall install
and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system
so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is
not carried across or upon the sidewalk.
   (G)   Dangerous excavations.
      (1)   Barriers. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow an
excavation to remain unguarded without suitable barriers.
      (2)   Warning lights. In addition to the barriers required by division
(G)(1) above, any person creating, maintaining, or in charge of such excavation
shall ensure the installation and operation of warning lights encompassing the
excavation and reasonably noticeable to passersby.
   (H)   Littering prohibited.
      (1)   To throw, deposit, or accumulate prohibited. No person shall throw,
deposit, or accumulate litter in or upon any public place or private premises
within the city, except for collection, or except while such person is
temporarily engaged in clearing said public place or private premises of litter
or improving said public place or private premises.
      (2)   Prohibited deposits. No person shall deposit or cause to be
deposited in any city-owned receptacle located in a public place the garbage or
litter which was accumulated in the residence or place of business occupied by
said person.
   (I)   Garbage and refuse containers. No owner or person in charge of a
property shall allow the storage or accumulation of garbage, refuse, or rubbish
to be accumulated, unless contained in a sealed or sealable container designed
for such purpose. A sealed or sealable garbage bag or sack alone is not
sufficient; it shall also be sealed in a container.
   (J)   Refuse area enclosure.
      (1)   Enclosure area. All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four feet in height,
or within an enclosed building or structure.
      (2)   Vehicular access. Adequate vehicular access to and from such area
for the collection of trash and/or garbage shall be provided.
   (K)   Unsightly conditions.
      (1)   Exteriors. The exterior of all structures and yards shall be
maintained in such manner that there is no detrimental effect on the property
of others.
      (2)   Prohibited items. There shall be no keeping, depositing on, or
scattering over the property of any of the following:
         (a)   Junk, trash, or debris;
         (b)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, or
similar items;
         (c)   Stagnant water or excavations; or
         (d)   Any device, decoration, design, structure, or vegetation which
offends the visual sensibilities of a reasonable person by reason of its
condition.
   (L)   Structures. Any structure or part of a structure which, because of
fire, wind, or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer
habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have
been intended, must be repaired or demolished within 30 days of such an
incident or notice to the property owner, whichever is sooner.
   (M)   Vacant buildings. In any area within the city, any vacant dwelling,
garage, or other outbuilding shall be kept securely locked and the windows kept
glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent vandalism or
other types of tampering or fire hazard.
   (N)   Discarded vehicles. It shall be unlawful to store or permit the
storing of a discarded vehicle upon any private property within the city,
unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building, or unless it is in
connection with and upon the property of a business enterprise dealing in
junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ENFORCEMENT; POWERS OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered, whenever a public nuisance, as
defined in the foregoing sections, is discovered upon private property, to:
   (A)   Make an investigation to discover the owner of the public nuisance and
the person in charge of the property upon which the public nuisance is located,
and give a written notice to said person, either in person or by certified
mail, that the public nuisance is in violation of this chapter;
   (B)   If the nuisance is a discarded vehicle and if the owner of the vehicle
is not found, to place a notice upon the vehicle in clear view. The notice
shall state that a certain discarded vehicle or public nuisance is in violation
of this chapter, and that within three days of the day of the sending or
posting of the notice:
      (1)   The vehicle or public nuisance must be removed from the city;
      (2)   The vehicle must be removed to the storage yard of a business
dealing in junked vehicles lawfully; or
      (3)   The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building.
   (C)   The notice shall also state that the alternative to compliance with
division (B) above is to petition the City Clerk/Treasurer, in writing, within
ten days of the receipt or posting of the notice, requesting appearance before
the City Council to show cause why such vehicle or public nuisance should not
be immediately abated, as provided in this chapter. The notice shall also state
that failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the
vehicle or public nuisance at the owner’s or responsible person’s expense, and
that violation of the chapter is a misdemeanor violation and punishable
pursuant to §
92.99.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 FAILURE TO REMOVE OR COMPLY.
   If the responsible party refuses to remove or cause to be removed any
vehicle or other public nuisance found to be in violation of this chapter, the
Chief of Police shall pray for a court order to seize the vehicle or other
property constituting a public nuisance, and/or criminally charge the
responsible party with violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 LIABILITY.
   Any person who creates or maintains any nuisance, or who causes the same to
exist or to continue to exist or any person who knowingly permits a nuisance to
be created, maintained, or to exist, on premises owned by him or her or under
his or her control, shall be liable.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-7) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 PROPERTY OWNER TO ABATE.
   It shall be the duty of the owner and/or tenant of any lot, building, or
premises whereon any nuisance exists, or the lessee, manager, or person in
charge thereof, to remove, repair, abate, or destroy the same without delay.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-8) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.09 RESPONSIBLE PARTY UNKNOWN.
   Whenever any nuisance exists for the abatement, creation, or removal of
which no person can be found who is responsible therefor, it shall be the duty
of a duly-authorized representative of the city to remove, repair, abate, or
destroy the same, or to cause the same to be done.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-9) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.10 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   The City Clerk/Treasurer, or other duly authorized representative, shall
notify, in writing or in person, the owner of any such vehicle, lot, place, or
area within the city or the agent of such owner, to abate the nuisance
indicated in the notice; provided, such written notice shall be by certified
mail, addressed to said owner or agent of said owner, at his or her last known
address, or delivered in person. If the owner of a discarded vehicle is not
found, said notice shall be placed upon the vehicle in clear view.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-10) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.11 FAILURE TO ABATE.
   Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any such owner or agent of such owner
to abate the listed nuisance within ten days after the date of such notice, or
in the event the same is returned to the city by the Post Office Department as
unable to make delivery thereof, the city is hereby authorized and empowered to
abate the nuisance and remove it at the expense of the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-11) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 HEARING.
   (A)   Request for hearing. The notice shall also state that the alternative
to abatement is to petition the City Clerk/Treasurer, in writing, within ten
days of the receipt or posting of the notice, and request appearance before the
City Council to show cause why such nuisance should not be immediately abated,
as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-12)
   (B)   Hearing scheduled. Pursuant to a request, the City Council shall set a
time during the next City Council meeting for a hearing to show cause why the
nuisance should not be immediately abated.
      (1)   Evidence, testimony, and findings. The City Council shall receive
the evidence and testimony of the Chief of Police or his or her agent and other
interested persons concerning the existence, location, and condition of the
nuisance. After hearing the evidence, the City Council shall determine if the
condition in question is in fact a violation of this chapter and make its
finding known by vote or executive order of the Mayor.
      (2)   Consolidate hearings. The City Council may consolidate hearings if
more than one nuisance is involved.
      (3)   Notice of findings. Persons receiving the notice specified in this
chapter shall be notified, in writing, of the decision of the City Council.
      (4)   Extension of time. The City Council may extend the time frame given
to abate a nuisance or vehicle deemed to be in violation of this chapter for
good cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-13) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.13 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police or his or her agent is authorized at all reasonable
times to enter upon private property and examine any vehicle for the purpose of
determining whether or not it is in a discarded condition. However, before
entering upon private property, he or she shall obtain the consent, in writing,
of an occupant thereof, if known, or obtain a search warrant authorizing his or
her entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to
prevent the service of said search warrant.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-14) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.14 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Costs. Whenever the city has paid for the abatement of a nuisance or
has used its own employees and equipment for the abatement of a nuisance as set
forth in this chapter, the actual costs thereof, plus interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of completion of the work, shall be charged to the
owner of such property, who shall be personally liable for such charges.
   (B)   Notice of costs; lien. The owner of the property shall be given 30
days’ written notice to make such payment, and, if not paid, such charges shall
be a lien against such property in the same manner as mechanic’s and
materialperson’s liens provided for by state law.
   (C)   Remedies. An authorized representative of the city may or shall, at
his or her option, either:
      (1)   Cause such lien to be recorded in the County Clerk/Treasurer’s
office in the manner provided by law for mechanic’s and materialperson’s liens;
      (2)   Certify such charges to the proper city officer for collection in
the manner provided by law for the collection of taxes and assessments; or
      (3)   File a civil suit in the name of the city against said debtor to
collect said charges.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-15) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.15 DISPOSITION OF DISCARDED VEHICLE.
   Once the Chief of Police is forced to impound a discarded vehicle, it shall
be treated the same as an abandoned vehicle, and procedures as set forth in the
Idaho Code will be followed.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-16) (Ord. 95-04, passed 5-30-1995)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to abate a nuisance within the city limits after reasonable notice
to the landowner, tenant, or person responsible for maintaining or allowing the
nuisance shall be a misdemeanor and may be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000
for any single offense and may be confined in the county jail for a period of
not more than six months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be
imposed, and, in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs
as the court may assess. Failure to abate such nuisance from day to day shall
constitute a separate offense for each day.
(Prior Code, §§ 4-1-3, 4-1-17) (Ord. 95-04A, passed 9-5-1995)
CHAPTER 93: PUBLIC ROADS AND WAYS
Section
Street Construction and Excavation
   
93.001   Standards adopted
   
93.002   Permit required
   
93.003   Fees
   
93.004   General requirements
   
93.005   Prosecution of work; extension
   
93.006   Barricades; warning signs
   
93.007   Use of area by city
   
93.008   Notice of completion
   
93.009   Responsibility for accidents
   
93.010   Restoration; failure to restore
   
93.011   Inspection
   
93.012   Extension of time; revocation
   
93.013   Violations
Sidewalks
   
93.025   Definitions
   
93.026   Policies
   
93.027   Construction
   
93.028   Immediate repair
   
93.029   Hearings
   
93.030   Application
   
93.031   Supervision, line, and grade
   
93.032   Violations
Street Lighting
   
93.045   Financing of cost
   
93.046   Minimum lighting required
   
93.047   Sufficiency
   
93.048   Inadequate lighting
   
93.049   Quarterly assessment
   
93.050   Service fees
   
93.051   Billings
Snow and Ice Removal
   
93.065   Definitions
   
93.066   Public nuisance
   
93.067   Duty to remove
   
93.068   Interference with removal
   
93.069   Notice
   
93.070   Abatement
   
93.071   Violations
   
93.072   Exemption
STREET CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION
§ 93.001 STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating and controlling
roadway and street construction within the city the State Roadway Design
Manual, 2013 Edition, the State Right-of-Way Manual, 2018 Edition, the State
Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, 2018 Edition, the State
Bridge Design LRFD Manual, 2022 Edition, the State Bridge Hydraulics Manual,
2021 Edition, the State Manual for Bridge Evaluation, 2021 Edition, and other
various manuals regarding standards relating to the design, construction, and
excavation of roadways, streets, and bridges, prepared by the State
Transportation Department, and all changes and alterations issued by the State
Transportation Department or by the city, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length
herein.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1)
   (B)   All reference to the state, the State Transportation Department, or
the State Highway Engineer will be read to mean the city or its designated
Engineer, Architect, and/or appointed City Construction Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2)
   (C)   Three copies of the aforementioned manuals, and as the same may
hereafter be amended, duly certified by the City Clerk/Treasurer, shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for use and examination of
and by the public.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) (Ord. 509, passed 2-13-1990)
§ 93.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall make or perform any general
construction, excavation, opening, digging, or construction, or alter any
public streets, alleys, curbs, or sidewalks within the city for any purpose
which would include gaining access to, constructing, or repairing any utilities
service, gas, or electric transmission line, sewer line, water line, pipe,
cable, conduit, duct, or tunnel, or any extensions thereto situated beneath or
adjoining any public street, alley, sidewalk, or curb within the city, without
having first secured a permit for such work from the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (B)   Application. Such person shall make application to the City Council
giving the location of the proposed work to be done on the street, alley, curb,
or sidewalk, and the purpose for which the same is to be used.
   (C)   Required information. The application shall further set forth the
plans and profiles showing work to be done, location, limits of work, location
of pavement replacement types, estimated dates of beginning and completion of
work, together with such further information as the City Council may require.
   (D)   Issuance of permit. If the City Council grants the request and the
request is approved by the City Building Inspector, the City Clerk/Treasurer
shall issue a permit for the work to be done.
   (E)   Supervision. All such work shall be done under the supervision and
direction of the City Engineer and the Street and Alley Committee and shall
conform to the requirements set forth herein.
   (F)   Bond. No permit shall be issued unless the person shall first deposit
with the City Clerk/Treasurer a bond covering the costs of repairing such
streets, alleys, curbs, or sidewalks as estimated by the City Engineer, which
bond shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (G)   Emergency, disaster work. In the event of an emergency or disaster
that shall require immediate excavation, opening, digging, construction, or
alteration in any public street, alley, curb, or sidewalk for the purpose of
providing uninterrupted service to and/or to ensure the protection of the
health and welfare of the residents within the city, then and in the event of
such emergency or disaster, application for a permit shall be made on the next
working day, or the City Council may elect to waive such application for a
period deemed appropriate by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.003 FEES.
   The fee to be charged for such permit shall be determined by using the fee
schedule in the current Uniform Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.004 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Performance of work. All work shall be performed in a good manner
showing efficient competency, and so programmed as to cause the minimum of
interference with traffic and inconvenience to the public.
   (B)   Access. Free and unobstructed access shall be provided to all
mailboxes, fire hydrants, water gates, valves, manholes, and other public
service structures and property as may be required for emergency use.
   (C)   Traffic. The working area shall be confined so as not to obstruct
roadways and walks unnecessarily. It shall be the duty of the permittee making
any excavation in any public street, alley, sidewalk, or curb to maintain safe
travel for vehicle and pedestrian traffic upon all streets, alleys, curbs, and
sidewalks.
   (D)   Slope of approach. Whenever a curb is cut under the provisions
hereunder where a combination curb and sidewalk exists, the standard slope of
the sidewalk, under the specifications for sidewalks in the city, shall be
maintained for the full width of the sidewalk, except that one foot may be used
for the slope of approach; and where a curb is cut where a sidewalk is ten feet
or more in width, the standard slope of the sidewalk shall be maintained on at
least six feet of the sidewalk next to the property line.
   (E)   Downtown Improvement District. All work shall be performed in
conformance with the Downtown Improvement District. A copy of all such
specifications may be obtained from the City Clerk/Treasurer’s office during
regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-3) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.005 PROSECUTION OF WORK; EXTENSION.
   After the work has been started, it shall be diligently and continuously
prosecuted until completed, and all work shall be completed within a reasonable
time of the date specified in the permit, unless an extension of time for good
cause shown is approved, in writing, by the City Council. A request for an
extension shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer and
approved, in writing, by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-4) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.006 BARRICADES; WARNING SIGNS.
   During the performance of the work, the permittee shall provide and maintain
fences, barricades, warning and directional signs, flares, red lights,
watchpersons, and flagpersons as may be required by existing traffic laws and
regulations to ensure full and complete safety to the general public, as
provided by §§
156.155 through
156.158, being further requirements regarding signs.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-5) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.007 USE OF AREA BY CITY.
   At all times during the performance of work, the city shall have the right
to use all or any part of the area occupied by the permittee under the permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-6) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.008 NOTICE OF COMPLETION.
   Notice of completion shall be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer by the
permittee within ten days after completion of the work.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-7) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.009 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   The permittee shall be responsible for all claims and liabilities
arising out of work performed under the permit or arising out of the
permittee’s failure to perform the obligations with respect to the permit.
   (B)   The permittee shall and by acceptance of the permit agrees to defend,
indemnify, save, and hold harmless the city, its officers, and its employees
from and against any and all suits, claims, or actions brought by any person
for and on account of any bodily injuries, diseases, illnesses, or damage to
persons and/or property sustained or arising from the work performed under the
permit, or in consequence of the permittee’s failure to perform the obligations
with respect to the permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-8) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.010 RESTORATION; FAILURE TO RESTORE.
   (A)   Following the issuance of the permit, the permittee shall have the
authority to proceed to make or perform the excavation, opening, digging,
construction, or alteration upon the public street, alley, sidewalk, or curb
for the purpose of performing general construction, gaining access to,
replacing, constricting, and/or repairing any utilities service, gas, electric
transmission line, sewer line, water line, or any extensions thereto situated
beneath or adjoining any public street, alley, sidewalk, or curb within the
city. Upon completion of such construction, replacement, or repair, such city
street shall be restored to a similar or like condition which existed at the
time the permit was applied for and issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-9)
   (B)   In the event any person shall fail to perform such street, alley,
curb, or sidewalk restoration work and restore the public street, alley, curb,
or sidewalk to a like or similar condition which existed at the time the permit
was applied for and granted, the city shall proceed to perform such restoration
work, or have the authority to hire any person to perform such work, and the
reasonable cost or value of such restoration work, including any reasonable
attorney fees incurred in the prosecution of this matter, shall constitute a
liability of the permittee and be paid by the permittee to the city upon
presentation of a written statement of the costs incurred.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-11)
(Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.011 INSPECTION.
   Upon completion of such work, the permittee shall cause the restored area of
the public street to be inspected within five days by the Public Works
Director, and obtain approval from the Public Works Director that such
restoration work meets the standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-10) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994)
§ 93.012 EXTENSION OF TIME; REVOCATION.
   (A)   Permit deemed void. Any permit issued hereunder shall be void if the
work is not commenced and completed within the date specified on the permit,
unless an extension of time for good cause is granted as hereafter provided.
   (B)   Extension of time. In order to obtain an extension, a request must be
made, in writing, and filed at the City Clerk/Treasurer’s office and approved
by the City Council. Further explanation can be found in §
93.005.
   (C)   Revocation. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked by the City
Council for noncompliance with any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-12) (Ord. 94-4, passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.013 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
SIDEWALKS
§ 93.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DETERIORATED SIDEWALK. Any sidewalk seriously heaved, cracked, spalled, or
broken. A sidewalk shall be presumed deteriorated when vertical differential
exceeds one-half inch and/or heave exceeds one degree.
   SIDEWALK. Any concrete, asphaltic paving, or brick material adjacent to a
public right-of-way or on private property which is designed for pedestrian
use.
   UNSAFE SIDEWALK. A sidewalk with such deterioration or other conditions
where the possibility of injury to pedestrian traffic can clearly be
determined.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.026 POLICIES.
   The following shall constitute the general sidewalk policies of the city.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of real property to
maintain in good repair and safe condition all sidewalks which are adjacent to
the owner’s property, including that portion of the sidewalk which runs to the
middle of any adjacent public alley. This duty requires owners to keep
sidewalks clear of all snow, ice, leaves, and other forms of debris as required
under city ordinance.
   (B)   When seating is provided by a business for customers on or adjacent to
sidewalks, the following additional requirements apply.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be kept clear for the safe passage of pedestrian
traffic. The portion of the sidewalk beginning at the outer edge of the curb on
the portion of the sidewalk abutting a public roadway used for vehicular travel
and extending no less than four feet towards the business/building shall be
clear of any and all objects on the ground to a height of eight feet, whether
permanent or temporary. In addition to other penalties, noncompliance with this
provision could result in the permanent removal of obstructions.
      (2)   Customer seating must be along that portion of the sidewalk nearest
to the business/building and not the portion abutting a public roadway used for
vehicular travel. In addition to other penalties, violations of this provision
may result in the inability of a business to sell alcohol under applicable
state or local laws.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.027 CONSTRUCTION.
   New construction or repair of sidewalks may be required under the following
circumstances.
   (A)   Where no sidewalks exist on a street, the City Council may require
construction by the property owner.
   (B)   Where a special need exists due to heavy pedestrian traffic and
existing pedestrian walkways are inadequate, the City Council may require
construction of sidewalks.
   (C)   Where a dangerous situation exists as a result of an unsafe sidewalk,
the city may require immediate repair or replacement by the property owner.
   (D)   Where a deteriorated sidewalk exists which does not yet meet the
definition for an unsafe sidewalk, the City Council may require replacement
after a public hearing.
   (E)   Funding for new sidewalks may be obtained by any method deemed proper
by the City Council, including local improvement districts, and the procedures
set forth in this code of ordinances and the Idaho Code. The city will attempt
to find and utilize all possible resources to finance construction, including
grants and the use of available city funds. In areas where the city has ordered
the replacement of a sidewalk, the city will be responsible for that portion of
the cost related to the replacement of sidewalk within the public alley right-
of-way as well as the area of sidewalk at intersections which is within ten
feet of the intersecting curb lines.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.028 IMMEDIATE REPAIR.
   (A)   Where it has been determined by the City Engineer that an unsafe
sidewalk exists, the city is empowered to require the adjacent property owner
to repair or replace said sidewalk within 60 days of receipt of written notice.
   (B)   The property owner shall have the right to appeal the decision of the
city to require repair or replacement and may exercise this right by filing a
written request for appeal with the City Council within 30 days of receipt of
written notice from the city which requires the repair, restoration, or
replacement of the sidewalk.
   (C)   Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council at such time and place
as is convenient for the City Council; however, it need not be heard at a
regularly-scheduled hearing. All action by the city regarding the subject
portion of said sidewalk shall be stayed pending such a hearing.
   (D)   Should the property owner fail to repair or replace said sidewalk
within 60 days of written notice, the city is empowered to proceed with the
replacement of said sidewalk, utilizing city employees to perform such work or
by contracting with a licensed contractor for said work.
   (E)   Upon completion of said work, the city shall forward to the property
owner a billing itemizing all expenditures for work performed, including a 12%
administrative overhead expense item.
   (F)   Should the property owner fail to pay said bill in full within 30 days
of receipt thereof, a 14% per annum finance charge shall be assessed to said
bill at the annual percentage rate, during the period the bill remains unpaid.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to approve a payment contract not to exceed six
months in duration and requiring the 14% per annum finance charge. Should the
property owner fail to enter into and fulfill a payment contract, said costs
(including financing charges estimated to the tax payment date) shall be
forwarded to the County Treasurer and County Assessor for inclusion with
property taxes for the property in question, pursuant to state law. Said
assessment shall constitute a lien on said property.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.029 HEARINGS.
   All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall:
   (A)   Provide for a minimum of five days’ written notice of hearing. Notice
shall be deemed adequate if served upon the property owner of record
personally, by certified or regular United States mail, or by publication in
the official newspaper; and
   (B)   Provide that all persons having any interest known to the city will
have the right to comment and present evidence.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.030 APPLICATION.
   Persons desiring to construct sidewalks and curbs shall make written
application to the city and comply with all building and construction
regulations otherwise applicable.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.031 SUPERVISION, LINE, AND GRADE.
   All sidewalks and curbs constructed within the corporate limits of the city
shall be constructed under the supervision of, and subject to, the inspection
of the City Engineer or his or her representative, ensuring conformity with
appropriate lines and grades, and incorporating best practices to meet industry
standards for construction at that time. The city shall make the City Engineer
available to provide guidance on best practices and industry standards to any
applicant seeking to construct sidewalks or curbs within the corporate limits
of the city.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.032 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter, including the
failure to properly repair or replace a deteriorated sidewalk after notice and
applicable time to correct the defect has lapsed, shall constitute a new and
separate offense each day the violation continues to exist. Penalties for a
violation of this subchapter are outlined in divisions (B) and (C) below.
Additionally, maintaining or permitting a defective sidewalk to exist,
obstructing or permitting debris or other material to obstruct a sidewalk, or
otherwise allowing a sidewalk to come into violation of this subchapter shall
constitute a public nuisance and be subject to those processes for abatement
allowable under Idaho Code.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and punished as outlined in §
10.99(A)(2).
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter having been
previously found guilty of any provision of this subchapter within the five
years preceding such offense shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as outlined in §
10.99(A)(1).
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
STREET LIGHTING
§ 93.045 FINANCING OF COST.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, IMPROVED REAL PROPERTY
shall include real estate which:
      (1)   Has city water service;
      (2)   Is paved;
      (3)   Is landscaped; or
      (4)   Has erected thereon any construction for which a building permit
would be required.
   (B)   Financing. The cost of all street lighting within the city shall be
financed by fees assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real
property. The fees assessed shall be included in the general utility billing as
a separate item and as hereafter set forth; provided, however, that the costs
of lighting to illuminate parks and playfields shall be excluded and paid from
the City Street Fund.
   (C)   Assessment. Fees for street lighting hereafter provided are hereby
assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real property.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-1) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 93.046 MINIMUM LIGHTING REQUIRED.
   At a minimum, street lighting shall provide lighting sufficient to promote
public safety and the protection of improved real property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-2) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 93.047 SUFFICIENCY.
   The sufficiency of street lighting at any particular location within the
city shall be determined within the sound discretion of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-3) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 93.048 INADEQUATE LIGHTING.
   In areas where the lighting does not meet the minimum standards as herein
provided, proper lights shall be installed to meet such standards as soon as
practicable.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-4) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 93.049 QUARTERLY ASSESSMENT.
   If the City Council determines that designated funds are necessary for the
repair, replacement, or maintenance of street lighting, the City Council may
establish a quarterly fee by resolution to be assessed to all owners and
occupants of all improved real property parcels within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-5) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 93.050 SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   Annual assessment. Such service fees are assessed effective October 1
of each year.
   (B)   Street Light Repair and Maintenance and Operation Fund. All billings
for fees and fees levied and assessed under this subchapter shall be made by
the City Clerk/Treasurer and all monies received under this subchapter shall be
delivered to the City Clerk/Treasurer, who shall deposit the same to a special
account, to be known as the Street Light Repair and Maintenance and Operation
Fund.
   (C)   Payment.
      (1)   Due. Such fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk/Treasurer
within 15 days after mailing of said billings.
      (2)   Delinquencies; late charge. In the event any such fee billed is not
paid when due after 30 days, the same shall be deemed to be delinquent and a
late penalty charge of 10% of the amount of such fee shall be added thereto. If
the fees shall remain delinquent and unpaid for a period of 90 days, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall certify the delinquency to the County Tax Collector, and
the delinquency and penalty shall be placed by the County Tax Collector upon
the tax roll and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties
as other city taxes.
   (D)   Liability for payment. The owners and occupants of improved real
property shall be jointly and severally liable for such fees, and the fees
shall become a lien upon and against the property against which the charge is
levied to the extent permitted by the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the city and may be collected in any manner permitted or hereafter permitted by
such laws and ordinances.
   (E)   Determination of fees.
      (1)   Amount. The foregoing fees are fixed and determined in amounts
determined reasonably sufficient to pay the costs of street lighting within the
city.
      (2)   Change or amendment. Such fees shall be changed or amended by the
City Council from time to time, as determined necessary to finance such costs.
Any changes or amendments to such service fees may be made and fixed by the
City Council by resolution.
      (3)   Copies on file. Three copies of such resolution, duly certified by
the City Clerk/Treasurer, shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer for the use of and examination by the public.
   (F)   Violation. In addition, the city may elect to enforce this subchapter
in accordance with Idaho Code § 50-302. In that event, the maximum penalty for
any offense shall be as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-6) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.051 BILLINGS.
   (A)   Billings for fees levied and assessed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be made quarterly or at such other intervals as may be
determined by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, and shall be fixed at
such intervals as will correspond to billing of the same improved real property
for sewer services.
   (B)   Such billing shall be billed on the same statement; provided, however,
that the billings for such services shall be segregated. Such fees shall be due
at the same time as fees for sewer service.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-7) (Ord. 92-5, passed 11-10-1992)
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 93.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. The owner of record as determined from the records of the County
Assessor’s office or such other records or information as the city may
determine appropriate.
   SNOW REMOVAL SEASON. That period of time from November 1 to March 31 during
which snow removal operations are presumed to occur daily.
   TENANT OR OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies property or land.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.066 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   The accumulation of snow and/or ice on sidewalks within the city which
affects safe pedestrian usage of said sidewalks is a matter of public interest
which the city seeks to prevent or eliminate wherever practicable.
   (B)   Therefore, the city hereby declares that the accumulation of snow and/
or ice on sidewalks within the city which affects safe pedestrian usage of said
sidewalks is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.067 DUTY TO REMOVE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant, occupant, or person in
control of any land, building, or lot within the city to remove natural snow
and/or ice from adjacent sidewalks in order to allow the safe passage of
pedestrians upon said sidewalks, and to abate any nuisance set forth in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The following shall constitute the proper guidelines for placement of
snow and ice from adjacent sidewalks.
      (1)   Snow and/or ice removed from sidewalks adjacent to commercial or
residential buildings or land should be placed first in adjacent properties’
yards, and, if this is not possible, it should be placed in the median between
the sidewalk and street. If no median exists and the placement of snow and/or
ice on adjacent property is not possible, then it may be pushed to the center
of the street as a windrow, taking care to leave no ridges between the curb and
the windrow.
      (2)   Snow removed from parking lots of businesses must not be deposited
in streets, and should instead be pushed into an empty space in said parking
lot.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.068 INTERFERENCE WITH REMOVAL.
   In an effort to assist citizens and keep public rights-of-way open and safe
for travel, the city may undertake its own snow removal efforts and direct
citizens, using clearly-marked signs conspicuously posted on public property,
in order to better facilitate those efforts during snow removal season.
Therefore, citizens should not interfere with these operations and are required
to comply in this process.
   (A)   Interference with snow removal. Compliance with all posted signs is
required. In the absence of such signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park, abandon, or otherwise leave unattended any vehicle or trailer on any city
right-of-way at any time or in any manner which will obstruct or hinder any
city employee, city contractor, or state employee during snow removal
operations, or which will leave any vehicle in such a position that it is
subject to damage by snow removal operations. This provision shall not prohibit
the stopping of vehicles for periods of time sufficient to load or discharge
passengers from such vehicles. Owners of vehicles parked in violation of this
section shall be subject to citation, towing, or both, and shall also be held
liable for any damage to snow removal equipment which may occur due to contact
with said vehicle. The city and the state shall not be liable for damage to any
vehicles or property parked in violation of this section.
   (B)   Snow deposited on right-of-way prohibited. Snow may not be dumped,
placed, or pushed into a city street or public right-of-way, except in limited
circumstances, as described in §
93.067.
   (C)   Private property. Snow removed from private property may not be piled
so as to block or cover any fire hydrant, snow pole, street sign, culvert
inlets and outlets, or other drainage structures.
   (D)   Placement respective to street. Snow moved to a windrow in the street
must not infringe on intersections of streets, alleys, or crosswalks. In
addition, all ridges between the curb and windrow must be moved to the windrow.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.069 NOTICE.
   Upon a determination that a parcel of property within the city is in
violation of this subchapter, the city or its designee shall cause notice, in
writing, to be served upon the owner, tenant, occupant, or person in control of
said property, or to be posted upon the property which is in violation of this
subchapter. Said notice shall require the owner, tenant, occupant, and/or the
person in control of said property to abate said nuisance within 24 hours of
the time of service or posting of notice.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.070 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the property owner, tenant, occupant, or person in control of a
property in violation of this subchapter fails to abate the nuisance within 24
hours, the city may abate the nuisance and cause the sidewalk adjacent to said
property to be cleared of snow and ice.
      (1)   The total cost of the abatement shall be billed to the owner of the
property for payment.
      (2)   In the event payment for said costs is not made within 30 days, or
if the owner or the whereabouts of the owner is not known, the cost of
abatement may be certified by the City Clerk and forwarded to the County
Treasurer for inclusion in the county’s property tax assessment pursuant to
applicable Idaho Codes.
      (3)   Pursuit of abatement costs by the city shall not preclude
prosecution of violations of this subchapter.
   (B)   Within ten days of receipt of billing for the costs of abatement, the
owner may request a hearing before the City Council if the owner believes such
costs were erroneous or unjust. Thereafter, the City Council shall confirm,
modify, or annul the costs associated with abatement and notify the owner of
said decision.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021)
§ 93.071 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The following persons are in violation of this subchapter and have
committed a public offense:
      (1)   The owner, tenant, occupant, or individual responsible for
maintaining the sidewalk adjacent to his or her property who has allowed snow
or ice to remain on the sidewalk adjacent to his or her property for a period
of 24 hours after notice has been provided, as set forth herein; and
      (2)   Any person who interferes with snow removal processes, including
failing to comply with city signage related to snow removal, or otherwise
depositing or moving snow in any manner prohibited under this subchapter.
   (B)   Violations of the provisions of this subchapter shall carry the
following penalties:
      (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction and punished as outlined in §
10.99(A)(2); and
      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter having been
previously found guilty of any provision of this subchapter within the five
years preceding such offense shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as outlined in §
10.99(A)(1).
   (C)   Each 24-hour period after notice during which an owner, tenant,
occupant, or person responsible for maintaining a property in violation of this
subchapter shall fail, refuse, or neglect to remove snow and/or ice from the
sidewalk adjacent to his or her property shall give rise to a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.072 EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The duties placed upon persons in this subchapter to remove snow and/
or ice applies to natural snowfall only; it does not extend to snow displaced
onto sidewalks by city snowplows after natural snowfall has previously been
removed.
   (B)   Failure to remove snow and/or ice deposited or displaced onto
sidewalks by city snowplows shall not constitute a public offense or subject
persons to violations under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-10-2021)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE REGULATION
Section
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Noise limitation
   
94.04   Sound reproduction devices
   
94.05   Signaling device
   
94.06   Construction activities
   
94.07   Mufflers
   
94.08   Air compression brakes
   
94.09   Animals
   
94.10   Exceptions
   
94.11   Special variance
   
94.12   Emergency exemption
   
94.13   Exemption within certain districts
   
94.14   Penalties
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, welfare, and
quality of life of the citizens of Wallace, Idaho. It is determined that
excessive sound can and does constitute a hazard to the health, safety,
welfare, and quality of life of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms used in this section shall, for the purpose of interpreting the
various sections within this chapter, have the following meanings:
   NOISE. Any unwanted sound.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound or vibration which:
      (1)   May disturb or annoy reasonable persons of normal sensitivities; or
      (2)   Causes or tends to cause, an adverse effect on the public health
and welfare; or
      (3)   Meets or exceeds 84 decibels when measured either at the property
line of a complaining party or 100 feet from the origin of the noise, whichever
is farther from the origin of the noise.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE SOUND. Any sound for which the content is unambiguously
communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable
speech, repetitive bass sounds, comprehension of musical rhythms, or
identification of the origin of the sound without the aid of a listening
device.
   SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICE. Any device, instrument, mechanism, equipment, or
apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, stereo,
electronic media player, musical instrument, television, loudspeaker, or other
sound making or producing device, including devices used for the amplification
of the human voice or other sound.
   UNAMPLIFIED NOISE. Any plainly audible sound not made, in whole or in part,
by a sound reproduction device.
   BUSINESS ACTIVITIES. Activities which would ordinarily be considered as
usual and customary to the type or manner of business engaged in. business
activities shall not be defined to include construction activities on or at a
business location.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.03 NOISE LIMITATION.
   No person shall make, or cause to be made or continued, any noise
disturbance.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.04 SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall use or operate, or permit to be used or operated, any
sound reproduction device to create a noise disturbance or produce a sound at a
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing by the person or persons
who are voluntary listeners thereof. It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section if the sound emanating from such device is:
      (1)   Plainly audible beyond the property boundary of the premises upon
which it is being used, beginning at the following hours below and ending at 7:
00 A.M. the following morning:
         (a)   Sunday - Thursday: 10:00 P.M.
         (b)   Friday - Saturday: 11:59 P.M.
      (2)   Plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more beyond the
property boundary of the premises upon which it is being used between the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
      (3)   Plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from such machine
or device if operated on a public street, park or other public place at any
time of the day or night.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.05 SIGNALING DEVICE.
   No person shall use any horn or signaling device in any automobile,
motorcycle, bicycle, or other motorized or non-motorized vehicle, except in
cases where the purpose of such use is to warn of danger. (Ord. 2024-02, passed
6-12-2024)
§ 94.06 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall engage in or permit any person to be engaged in construction
activities which create a noise disturbance at the property limits of the
construction site between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., without a
special variance.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.07 MUFFLERS.
   The city hereby adopts and incorporates Idaho Code § 49-937 as an
appropriate regulation to prevent excessive noise caused by motor vehicles.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.08 AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   The use of air compression brakes, commonly known as "Jake Brakes," by
vehicles or trucks as defined in Idaho Code § 49, chapter 1, within the city is
prohibited except under emergency circumstances when such use is necessary to
prevent an imminent accident or injury to persons or property.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.09 ANIMALS.
   Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal which makes any sound
continuously for over 15 minutes or intermittently for over 30 minutes and in
so doing, creates a noise disturbance which is plainly audible across a real
property boundary in a residential zone is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.10 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Unamplified, noncommercial public speaking and public assembly
activities conducted at conversational voice levels on any public property or
public right of way.
   (B)   The production of music in connection with any parade or event
authorized under any provision of law or where a permit has been obtained from
the city for such purpose.
   (C)   The use of sound amplifying devices in connection with any permitted
athletic competition or recreational event held on athletic fields, stadiums,
or public places in the city.
   (D)   The operation of yard or construction equipment, such as but not
limited to lawn mowers, edgers, weed trimmers, blowers, chain saws, welders,
air compressors, or power tools, which are used between the hours of 7:00 A.M.
and 10:00 P.M.
   (E)   The use of burglar alarms, fire alarms, or other safety warning
devices which are required by law.
   (F)   Noise emanating from common areas of multi-unit residential dwellings
or multi-use apartment buildings, whose use has been approved by the persons
who have lawful authority to manage the common areas. This exemption only
applies in relation to persons complaining about sounds from other areas within
the same multi-unit or multi-use building.
   (G)   Noise caused by the removal of snow from parking lots, public
property, public rights of way, and private property shall not be a violation
of this chapter.
   (H)   Noise caused by commercial deliveries to a licensed business.
   (I)   Noise causing a noise disturbance solely by virtue of the decibel
limits prescribed in this chapter shall not constitute a violation if occurring
on the following dates:
      (1)   December 24th
      (2)   December 25th
      (3)   December 31st
      (4)   January 1st
      (5)   July 4th
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.11 SPECIAL VARIANCE.
   The city council shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to
grant special variances as follows:
   (A)   Any person seeking a special variance shall file an application with
the city clerk. The application shall contain information which demonstrates
that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is sought
into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on
the applicant, on the community, or on other persons.
   (B)   The city council shall hold a hearing to determine whether to grant or
deny the application and if granted, what conditions shall apply.
   (C)   The city council shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community, and other persons of not granting the variance against the adverse
impact on the health and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on the
property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.12 EMERGENCY EXEMPTION.
   In the case of an emergency involving damage or injury to property,
construction activities directly connected with the abatement of such emergency
may be undertaken without obtaining a variance, for a period not to exceed 72
hours from the commencement of such emergency, after which time application for
a special variance must be made for said abatement construction activities
otherwise in violation of this chapter to continue.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.13 EXEMPTION WITHIN CERTAIN DISTRICTS.
   Business activities taking place at a licensed business solely within any of
the following zoned districts are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Light manufacturing district;
   (B)   Heavy manufacturing district;
   (C)   Commercial district;
   (D)   Business district (except between the hours of 2:00 AM through 7:00 AM
which shall not be subject to such exemption).
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
§ 94.14 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Criminal enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter may be sought
against the property owner or occupant of the property from which the noise
originates and/or the individual responsible for creating the noise violation.
Every person who, after having been warned that they are in violation of this
chapter at any point within the preceding year, fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, has committed a violation. Every violation shall be
deemed a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, which any
violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or
permitted. Penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
as follows:
      (1)   A first violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a fine of $300.
      (2)   A second or subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter
is a misdemeanor subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, confinement in the
county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Additionally, any person so convicted shall pay those costs
related to enforcement as the court may deem appropriate.
   (B)   Civil enforcement. In addition to taking whatever criminal action is
deemed necessary, the city may take steps to civilly enjoin, restrain, or abate
any violation of this ordinance or may initiate any civil legal action
available in a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (1)   In the event the city prevails in any civil enforcement action, the
violator shall be responsible for all costs including a reasonable sum for
attorney's fees and any costs incurred in abating the violation.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council or other
public official from taking such legal action as may be necessary to restrain
or prevent any violation of this chapter or the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 6-12-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS REGISTRATION
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
113.   MOBILE CONCESSIONS
      
114.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS REGISTRATION
Section
   
110.01   Applicability
   
110.02   Business registration required
   
110.03   Exemptions from business registration required
   
110.04   Registration application
   
110.05   Registration fee
   
110.06   Inspection of premises
   
110.07   Display of registration
   
110.08   Non-transferable
   
110.09   Significant business changes
   
110.10   Multiple businesses or business location
   
110.11   Compliance with laws
   
110.12   Suspension or revocation of registration
   
110.13   Appeal
   
110.14   Penalties
§ 110.01 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and
retail businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits
or professions that conduct business from a physical structure, building, or
residence within the city, with the object of gain, profit, benefit or
advantage, unless an exemption applies as outlined herein. The registration is
not intended to repeal any license or franchise provisions of any other
ordinance of the City of Wallace, nor is the registration to be considered a
waiver of any other requirements of compliance with any federal, state and
local laws.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.02 BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any business within the City of Wallace for which
registration is required by this chapter on or after January 1, 2025, without
having registered the business in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such registration shall be valid for the calendar year in which it was
issued, so long as the ownership, management, nature of the business or
location of the business remains unchanged.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.03 EXEMPTIONS FROM BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following activities shall be exempt from the business registration
requirements contained within this chapter:
   (A)   Activities by persons who make occasional sales of their own household
property which does not result in the necessity to file the same as income on
their tax retum(s), and not more than four times per calendar year;
   (B)   Delivery of goods by vehicle to a location within the Wallace city
limits when the sale of goods took place outside the city limits;
   (C)   Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual labor not included as
temporary employees of a regularly conducted business;
   (D)   The business of leasing homes or rooms, so long as the owner has
obtained a valid short term rental permit pursuant to
chapter 114 of this code;
   (E)   Activities by government and public utility agencies;
   (F)   Minors under the age of 18 conducting business;
   (G)   Sales of goods or services by mail, telephone, or internet where the
seller operates from premises located outside the city limits and the only
event occurring within the city limits is receipt of goods or services;
   (H)   Provision of internet or wireless phone services where the provider
operates from premises located outside the city limits and the only event
occurring within the city limits is receipt of the services;
   (I)   Home offices in a residential zone, which do not publicly advertise
their business at the location and are not open to the public, and for which
the primary purpose of the structure in which they are contained is
residential.
   (J)   Church operations and functions; and
   (K)   Fraternal organizations and lodges.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.04 REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (A)   Form. A business registration application shall be developed by the
city and shall include but is not limited to:
      (1)   The name, residence address, email address, and phone number of the
owner and manager of the business;
      (2)   The name, street and mailing address, and phone number of the place
of business;
      (3)   Emergency contact name, address, and phone number;
      (4)   Business email address and website (if any);
      (5)   A general description of the nature of the business to be conducted
at such address which includes but is not limited to: the estimated number of
employees, any hazardous materials to be used or kept on site and the location
of those materials, the type of waste planned to be discharged (i.e. industrial
waste, fats, oils, grease), the approximate square footage dedicated to
business per floor, and whether any surveillance video equipment is on the
premises.
      (6)   Additional information as requested by the city which is necessary
for the health and safety of emergency service personnel or utility service
providers.
   (B)   Date of submission. An approved business registration must be obtained
prior to the date on which operations will commence for new businesses and
shall be renewed annually thereafter. Businesses already registered which are
seeking renewal shall submit a renewal application no later than 30 days before
the expiration of their current business registration.
   (C)   Decision. After receiving a completed business registration
application, the city clerk shall determine whether the applicant has met all
requirements of this chapter. Applications which satisfy all requirements of
this chapter, remit the appropriate registration fee, and otherwise demonstrate
compliance with the Wallace city code, shall be approved by the city and a
certificate of registration shall be issued to the applicant within 30 days.
Applications which are incomplete or are otherwise violative of the Wallace
city code, shall be denied. The city clerk will provide applications to the
fire chief for discretionary inspection of the business premises. If the city
clerk is uncertain whether an application satisfies all of the requirements of
this chapter or is otherwise in compliance with the Wallace city code, they may
table a determination on the matter until the next regularly scheduled city
council meeting, at which time the Wallace city council shall determine whether
a certificate of registration shall be issued.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION FEE.
   (A)   Established by resolution. A registration fee in an amount set by
resolution of the city council is due at the time the registration application
is submitted to the city clerk and/or prior to the issuance of a business
registration. The city may differentiate between fees for initial registration
and fees for renewals of previously registered businesses. Since the fee is
based on the costs associated with processing the application, a reduced fee
will not be applied to mid-year applications. For businesses existing in the
City of Wallace at the time of passage of this chapter, a complete registration
application must be submitted to the city clerk prior to December 1, 2024, with
the established registration fee which will cover registration for the
remainder of 2024 and 2025.
   (B)   Exemptions. The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Persons or organizations qualifying as a nonprofit business,
including charitable activities, within the meaning of section 501(C) of the
United States internal revenue code (possession of a certificate of such status
from the internal revenue service shall be submitted at the time of application
to qualify for this exemption);
      (2)   Any agency of the United States government and any political
subdivision of the State of Idaho;
      (3)   Festivals, community events not sponsored by a governmental entity,
and flea markets, so long as the operator of the event has an active business
registration or special event permit (if one is otherwise required by city
code); or
      (4)   Subcontractors, so long as the general contractor has an active
business registration.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.06 INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
   (A)   Preliminary Inspection. The fire chief, or their designee, may inspect
the premises upon which business will be conducted to help ensure it is
sufficiently compliant with the international fire code, and other applicable
federal, state, and local laws. The fire chief, in their discretion, may
recommend changes prior to future business registrations being accepted in
order to provide businesses with a period for which to bring non-compliant
structures into compliance.
   (B)   Ongoing inspections. The business shall allow the fire chief, or their
designee, and any other designated agent of the city, to inspect the facilities
of any business location, during the hours that the business is open to the
public, to verify compliance with applicable laws and regulations, to ascertain
the accuracy of the information provided in an application, and/or to ensure
ongoing compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.07 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION.
   Every business registered with the city shall receive a certificate of
registration which bears the signatures of the mayor and city clerk as
attestation to its authenticity. Every business required under this chapter to
register shall display such certificate of registration in a prominent location
upon the business premises. No person shall loan, sell, give or assign to any
other person or allow any other person to use or display, or to have in their
possession any certificate of registration which has been issued to said
business.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.08 NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   A certificate of registration issued under this chapter is not transferable
from one person to any other person, regardless of whether a lawful sale of a
business has occurred. Additionally, such certificate of registration may not
be transferred from one location to another without submission of a new
application to and approval by the city.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.09 SIGNIFICANT BUSINESS CHANGES.
   (A)   Requirement for new application. Whenever the ownership, nature of the
business or location of any business within the city is changed, a new
registration application reflecting the change shall be presented to the city
clerk within 30 days of said change.
   (B)   Requirement to update information. Whenever the management of the
business changes, the city clerk shall be notified in writing within 30 days by
the business owner or their agent of the name, residence address and phone
number of the new manager.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.10 MULTIPLE BUSINESSES OR BUSINESS LOCATION.
   (A)   Separate certificates of registration required. Each business location
shall be deemed a separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main
location of the business. In every case where more than one business, trade, or
profession shall be pursued or carried on in the same place, whether by the
same person or at the same time, a certificate of registration must be obtained
for each business accordingly.
   (B)   Waiver of additional registration fees. Notwithstanding the
requirement in subsection (A) to obtain separate certificates of registration,
the city may waive the registration fee associated with subsequent
registrations where a business owner has already paid a registration fee
associated with a separate business location for the same business, or where an
owner is conducting more than one business, trade, or profession in the same
place.
   (C)   Exemption. In instances where a business location is used solely for
the retail sale of goods, the act of subletting space within the business
location or allowing additional vendors to offer goods for sale in that
business location, so long as all activities involve the retail sale of goods,
shall not trigger the requirement to obtain separate certificates of
registration for each additional vendor or subletter.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.11 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   No business shall be conducted or operated in such a way so as to constitute
a public nuisance as that may be defined under state or local law. Businesses
shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
generally, including the international fire code (as adopted by the state of
Idaho). Failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations relating to the
business operation, or failure to permit any inspection as is contemplated in
this chapter, may result in an application denial, registration suspension or
revocation, or prosecution otherwise.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.12 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   In the event it is brought to the attention of the city that a violation has
taken place, before revoking or suspending such certificate of registration,
the city shall cause notice to be served upon the business, setting forth in
general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed and
such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the city which date
shall not be less than five days or more than ten days from the date of the
service of the notice, and upon or following the hearing, if the city shall
find that the provisions of this chapter have been violated or the certificate
of registration was issued in error, the city is authorized to revoke or
suspend such certificate of registration and no refund of any unused portion of
the registration fee shall be made to the business.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.13 APPEAL.
   Any applicant who has made application for registration under the provisions
of this chapter and who has been denied a certificate of registration, or any
person holding a certificate of registration which is revoked or suspended
under the provisions of this chapter, may request a hearing before the city
council. The written appeal setting out the basis for the appeal must be
submitted to the city clerk within 15 business days of the application denial,
suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
§ 110.14 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Criminal penalties. Any person operating a business within the city
without a certificate of registration which is otherwise subject to the
requirements for licensure shall be guilty of a criminal violation as follows:
      (1)   A first violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a fine of $300;
      (2)   A second or subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter
is a misdemeanor subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, confinement in the
county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Additionally, any person so convicted shall pay those costs
related to enforcement as the court may deem appropriate.
   (B)   Separate offenses. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed for each and every week during which a violation occurs or continues
to occur.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-11-2024)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Liquor Control
   
111.01   Alcohol on city property prohibited; exceptions
   
111.02   Permits
   
111.03   Carrying of open containers prohibited
   
111.04   Licenses and terms
   
111.05   Delegation of authority to city clerk
Liquor by the Drink
   
111.15   Purpose
   
111.16   License required
   
111.17   Application
   
111.18   License fee
   
111.19   Qualifications
   
111.20   Issuance
   
111.21   Limitations
   
111.22   Violations
Beer
   
111.35   Definitions
   
111.36   Alcoholic content
   
111.37   License required
   
111.38   Application
   
111.39   License fees
   
111.40   Reserved
   
111.41   State and county licenses required
   
111.42   Reserved
   
111.43   City Council action
   
111.44   Prohibited places of sale
   
111.45   Posting of license
   
111.46   Transferability and revocation
   
111.47   Hours of sale
   
111.48   Minors
   
111.49   Peddling prohibited
Wine
   
111.60   Retail sale
   
111.61   Sale by the drink
 
   
111.99   Penalty
LIQUOR CONTROL
§ 111.01 ALCOHOL ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to consume any beer, wine,
or intoxicating liquor, or to have in his or her possession any opened or open
containers or receptacles containing beer, wine, or intoxicating liquor on any
public park, property, grounds, sidewalks, streets, and other thoroughfares
within the city or at any other place therein, including any motor vehicle
moving or parked, other than at a private residence or open premises licensed
for the sale and consumption of beer, wine, or liquor.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Public law enforcement facilities may possess alcohol or alcoholic
beverages for evidentiary purposes, and except as set forth under §
111.02(A).
      (2)   Any establishment that is licensed to sell beer, wine, or liquor
and that has previously obtained a permit for on-site sale and consumption from
the city, and that is in compliance with the criteria set forth by resolution
of the City Council, and except as set forth under §
111.02(A).
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-9-2000) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council may authorize permits for the on-site sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property, public sidewalks, and
other public rights-of-way, which property, sidewalks, or other public rights-
of-way are contiguous to a permitted outdoor eating facility, upon the
following conditions being met:
      (1)   Fulfillment of all criteria as set forth by resolution of the City
Council; a copy of said resolution can be obtained from the City Clerk at City
Hall, at 703 Cedar Street, Wallace, Idaho; and
      (2)   Until such time as criteria are adopted, no permit shall be issued
for the on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property, public
sidewalks, and other public rights-of-way.
   (B)   On-site sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property,
public sidewalks, and other public rights-of-way, as set forth in division (A)
above, shall take place at all times of the year, but only during those times
specified on the permit, and shall be strictly adhered to. However, all permits
shall expire December 31 of each year, regardless.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 111.03 CARRYING OF OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or drink from any opened
glass or opened metal container in or on any city property, public street, or
sidewalk within the city limits, regardless if the on-site sale and consumption
is pursuant to a permit, and, even then, shall conform with the criteria set
forth by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The owner of every establishment which sells beverages in glass or
metal containers in the city shall post two copies of division (A) above in his
or her establishment. Copies may be obtained at the City Hall, 701 Cedar
Street, Wallace, Idaho.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-9-2000) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 LICENSES AND TERMS.
   (A)   The city council may establish licenses which govern the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine, and liquor, within
the city.
   (B)   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the 31st
day of December for the year in which it was issued.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-16-2024)
§ 111.05 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Any licensing powers of the city council outlined throughout title XI,
chapter 111, Wallace city code, including those regarding the processing,
transfer, and revocation of applications and permits, including the granting or
denying thereof, may be delegated to the city clerk, except that those
requirements contained within the code related to public hearing processes
shall not be required when such licensing powers have been delegated to the
city clerk.
   (B)   If such licensing power is delegated, an applicant aggrieved by a
decision of the city clerk regarding a license, transfer, or renewal thereof,
may appeal the city clerk's decision to the city council, which appeal shall be
filed with the city within 28 days of said determination of the city clerk for
which the aggrieved party seeks relief. Any appeal of a decision under title XI
shall be in writing and shall set forth the basis both in fact and in law for
the appeal, providing all evidence supporting the appellant's claim to the city
council at the time of filing such appeal.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-16-2024)
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
§ 111.15 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is passed pursuant to and under the authority of provisions
of Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 9.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-1) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947)
§ 111.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be lawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink at retail
within the corporate limits of the city after having first procured a license
as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-2) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947)
§ 111.17 APPLICATION.
   Applications for a license shall be in writing, signed, and sworn to by the
applicant upon application forms furnished by the City Clerk/Treasurer and
presented to the Mayor and City Council at the next meeting of the said City
Council for its approval, rejection, or further consideration.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-3) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947)
§ 111.18 LICENSE FEE; TERM.
    The license fee imposed and collected shall be 75% of the current state fee
for the license year.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-4) (Ord. 359, passed 12-12-1960; Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-
16-2024)
§ 111.19 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications
necessary to obtain a license from the Director of the State Department of Law
Enforcement, as prescribed by Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 9, and maintain such
qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued.
   (B)   The possession of a license regularly issued by the State Department
of Law Enforcement shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s
qualifications to receive a license hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-5) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947)
§ 111.20 ISSUANCE.
   Upon filing the application for license as herein provided, and upon
producing evidence of the issuance of a license to the applicant by the
Director of the State Department of Law Enforcement, and upon approval by the
Mayor and the City Council of such application and the payment of the license
fee as herein provided, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue to the applicant a
license to sell liquor by the drink at retail within the city for such calendar
year or the remainder thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-6) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947)
§ 111.21 LIMITATIONS.
   No person shall be granted more than one license for any one year, and such
license shall be nontransferable.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-7) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.22 VIOLATIONS.
   Violation of any of the provisions of Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 9, shall
be deemed a violation of this subchapter. A revocation or suspension of the
state license by the Director of the State Department of Law Enforcement shall
be deemed prima facie evidence for revocation or suspension of the license
issued in this subchapter hereunder. A violation of the terms of this
subchapter, in addition to being grounds for revocation or suspension of the
license issued hereunder, shall be penalized as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-8) (Ord. 294, passed 6-20-1947; Ord. 350, passed 9-14-1959)
Penalty, see §
111.99
BEER
§ 111.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER. Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt, and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation, or
any group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as in
singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed
by the context.
   RETAILER. The person licensed to sell beer to the consumers at the premises
described in the license. (Prior Code, § 3-2B-1)
§ 111.36 ALCOHOLIC CONTENT.
   Beer containing not more than 6% of alcohol by weight may be manufactured,
imported, and/or sold and distributed in and into the city limits or possessed
therein in the manner and under the conditions prescribed by this code, and not
to be inconsistent with any state statute or regulation thereof. It shall be
unlawful to sell and dispose of, or to possess for the purpose of sale, beer of
any kind or character of an alcoholic content greater than herein prescribed or
other than in the manner permitted by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-2) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.37 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail to the consumer any
beer within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license
therefor from the city. A separate license shall be required for each place of
business where beer is sold.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-3) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.38 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Form.
      (1)   Every person who shall apply for a city license or permit to sell
beer at retail shall tender the license fee to, and file written application
for license or permit with, the City Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   The application shall be on a form prescribed by the City Clerk/
Treasurer, which shall require such information concerning the applicant, the
premises for which the license is sought, and the business to be conducted
thereon by the applicant as the Clerk/Treasurer may deem necessary or
advisable, and which shall enable the Clerk/Treasurer to determine that the
applicant is eligible and has none of the disqualifications for a license, as
provided for in this section.
   (B)   Required information. Such information shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and place of residence of the applicant and length of his
or her residence within the state, and, if the applicant is a partnership, the
names, places of residence, and lengths of residence within the state of each
partner, and, if the applicant is a corporation or association, the date and
place of incorporation or organization, the location of its principal place of
business in state, the name of its registered agent, and the names and places
of residence of its officers, directors, or members of its governing board, and
of the person who manages or will manage the business of selling beer at
retail; and
      (2)   The particular place for which the license is desired, designating
the same by a street and number, if practicable, or by such other apt
description as definitely locates such place, and the name of the owner of the
premises for which license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-4; Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-16-2024)
§ 111.39 LICENSE FEES.
    The annual fees for licenses herein provided for shall be as follows:
   (A)   Retailers’ license fees, where such retailers sell draft beer, bottled
and/or canned beer, or sell draft beer only, for consumption on the premises
where sold, shall be $100;
   (B)   Retailers’ license fees, where such retailers sell only bottled and/or
canned beer not for consumption on the premises where sold, shall be $75.
   (C)   Retailers’ license fees, where such retailers sell only bottled beer
and/or canned beer, none of which is consumed on the premises where sold, shall
be $25.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-5; Ord. 2024-04, 10-16-2024)
§ 111.40 RESERVED.
§ 111.41 STATE AND COUNTY LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No license shall be issued to any person until he or she shall have first
filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer evidence showing that he or she has applied
for and received both a state and county license issued to him or her pursuant
to the laws of the state, unless no such process exists for the issuance of a
county license.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-7; Ord. 2024-04, 10-16-2024)
§ 111.42 RESERVED.
§ 111.43 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Action on applications. The City Council shall grant or deny the
application within 30 days of the time it is filed with the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (B)   Hearing required. Prior to any revocation, suspension, or denial, the
applicant or licensee shall be afforded a hearing, according to Idaho Code §
23-1016.
   (C)   Denial of application. Whenever the Mayor and City Council deny an
application, they shall specify in writing:
      (1)   The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      (2)   The reason for the denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer, or renewal thereof.
   (D)   Record of proceedings.
      (1)   In all cases where the City Council is considering applications for
licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of
the proceedings shall be made.
      (2)   If the application for a license, transfer, or renewal is denied, a
transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be kept for a period of
not less than six months after a final decision on the matter.
      (3)   Upon written request and within the time period provided for
retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his or
her expense.
      (4)   The City Council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes
of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise
provided by law.
      (5)   The City Council shall also provide for the keeping of any evidence
submitted at the proceedings. Evidence shall be retained indefinitely or as
otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-9) (Ord. 482, passed 12-13-1983)
§ 111.44 PROHIBITED PLACES OF SALE.
   No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of selling,
possessing for sale, or offering for sale beer at any private dwelling,
including apartment houses, lodging houses, or private rooms used for dwelling
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-10)
§ 111.45 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of each person to whom a license is issued under this
subchapter to keep the same at all times posted in a conspicuous place in his
or her place of business, and in case such license is transferred, a notice of
such transfer shall be attached to and posted with the original license.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-11)
§ 111.46 TRANSFERABILITY AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Transfer. No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred
except by permission of the City Council, and such transfer shall be made only
upon written application to the City Council, and such application shall
contain the same information required in making an original application.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-12)
   (B)   Power to revoke. The City Council shall have the power to refuse a
license to any applicant and/or revoke a license at any time when, in the
judgment of said City Council, the business interests and the welfare of the
city and/or of the inhabitants thereof will be served by the denial or
revocation thereof.
      (1)   Inspection. For the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any
licensee is conforming to the provisions of this and other ordinances of the
city, state, or federal government, the city’s police shall have the right at
all reasonable times to inspect the place where beer is sold under the license
issued.
      (2)   Revocation of state or federal license. The revocation or
suspension of a state or federal license to deal in beer shall ipso facto
revoke or suspend any license issued to such licensee under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-16) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.47 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Hours prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person in any place licensed to sell beer or where beer is sold or dispensed to
be consumed on the premises, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell,
dispense, or give away beer between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. A
violation of the provision described in division (A)(1) above shall constitute
an offense and be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Consumption of beer already served.
      (1)   Any patron present on the licensed premises after the sale of beer
has stopped as provided in division (A) above shall have a reasonable time, not
to exceed 30 minutes, to consume any beverage already served.
      (2)   Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises after the time provided for
in this division (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-13) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.48 MINORS.
   Any person who is 19 years of age or older may sell, serve, possess, or
dispense beer in the course of his or her employment; otherwise, it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or dispense beer to or by any person
under 21 years of age, proof of which shall be a validly issued state,
district, territorial, possession, provincial, national, or other equivalent
government driver’s license, identification card, or military identification
card bearing a photograph and date of birth, or a valid passport.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-14) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.49 PEDDLING PROHIBITED.
   No license shall be issued hereunder for the sale of, nor shall any person
acting under such license sell, beer by peddling or in any way soliciting
orders for the same, and no sale shall be made except in the place for which
the license has been granted; provided, however, that any licensee may accept
orders left at his or her place of business by a purchaser and make delivery
thereof; or, unless the licensee has obtained an appropriate permit either
through the county or the state to sell outside his or her place of business.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-15) Penalty, see §
111.99
WINE
§ 111.60 RETAIL SALE.
   (A)   Purpose. Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 13, authorizes the retail sale
of wine containing not more than 16% alcohol by persons other than the state
liquor dispensary, and authorizes the city councils of the various cities
throughout the state to adopt ordinances authorizing such sale; it is hereby
declared to be the purpose and intent of the Mayor and City Council to
authorize issuance of retail licenses for the sale of wine within this city
pursuant to the terms and conditions of such Act.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-1-1)
   (B)   Sale permitted. The retail sale of wine containing not more than 16%
alcohol by volume shall be permitted and is hereby authorized in the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-1-2)
   (C)   License required; fee. Before any person shall engage in the retail
sale of wine as defined in Idaho Code § 23-1303(a), such person shall apply to
the City Council for a retail wine license and shall pay an annual license fee
therefor in the sum of 75% of the current state fee. No retail wine license
shall be issued to an applicant who does not possess the qualifications set
forth therefor in Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 13Cite.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-1-3)
   (D)   Transfer of license; fee.
      (1)   Application. No retail wine license may be transferred to another
person, including executor, administrator, or trustee in bankruptcy of the
estate of the licensee, unless the transferee shall first have obtained the
approval of the City Council to such transfer upon application containing the
substantially same information required of an applicant for a city retail wine
license.
      (2)   City Council approval. If the transferee possesses all of the
qualifications and none of the disqualifications for such license, the City
Council shall approve the transfer, which approval shall be attached and made a
part of the license.
      (3)   Fee. The fee for each transfer of a retail wine license shall be
established by resolution of the City Council, which fee shall accompany the
application for transfer.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-1-4)
   (E)   Revocation; suspension. The retail license of any retailer who
violates any of the laws, rules or regulations of the state, the United States,
or the city relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, beer, or wine shall be
subject to revocation or suspension by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-1-5)
(Ord. 401, passed 6-22-1971)
§ 111.61 SALE BY THE DRINK.
   (A)   License required. Any wine by the drink licensee licensed by the
Department of Law Enforcement to sell wine by the drink pursuant to a retail
wine license issued by the Department of Law Enforcement and who shall have
also been issued a license for the retail sale of wine by the drink by the the
county shall be thereafter authorized to sell wine by the drink within the city
upon making application for and obtaining approval and issuance of a license,
to be issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-2-1)
   (B)   License fee.
      (1)   The annual license fee to be paid to the City Clerk/Treasurer for
said wine by the drink licensee shall be $100. This fee is included if
applicant possesses a current and valid liquor license as set forth under §
111.16.
      (2)   The annual license fee to be paid to the city clerk/treasurer for
retail wine by the bottle shall be $100.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-2-2)
   (C)   Violation. Any individual who sells wine by the drink within the city
without first obtaining and possessing a valid wine by the drink license as
herein provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2C-2-3)
(Ord. 420, passed 1-8-1974; Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-16-2024) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The penalties for any violation of §§
111.01 through
111.03 or the criteria set forth in the resolution passed by the City Council
for obtaining and/or retaining a permit shall be considered a misdemeanor and
shall carry a fine not to exceed $1,000 may be fined in a sum not to exceed
$1,000 for any single offense and may be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than six months, and the immediate cancellation of the
permit. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and, in
addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may
assess.
      (2)   Neither the adoption of this chapter, nor the repeal of any
ordinance, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of such
ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, or be construed as a
waiver of any license or penalty due under any such ordinance, or in any manner
affect the validity of any action heretofore taken by the City Council or the
validity of any such action to be taken upon matters pending before the City
Council on the effective date hereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
   (C)   Failure to post copies, as described in §
111.03, shall be unlawful, a violation of which shall be an infraction and
shall carry a fine not to exceed $300, and shall result in the immediate
cancellation of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
111.35 through
111.49 shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2B-17) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-9-2000)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Authority; purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Solicitation permits
   
112.04   Application process
   
112.05   Bond requirements
   
112.06   Exhibition of permit
   
112.07   Prohibited conduct
   
112.08   Exemptions
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 AUTHORITY; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s general
police power and the authority granted to cities by the State Constitution and
Idaho Code.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the activities of
peddlers and solicitors in order to protect against criminal activity,
including fraud and burglary, to minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens
and the disruption of privacy, and to otherwise preserve the public health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. This chapter is not intended
to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by the First Amendment but
merely to regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Each natural person applying for a solicitation permit pursuant
to this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any commercial display, enterprise, promotion, exhibit,
or other activity offering products, goods, wares, merchandise, provisions, or
services for sale or rent.
   PEDDLER/SOLICITOR. Any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle, or any other
type of conveyance who contacts any other person, unsolicited, at any
residence, business, or dwelling within the city, for the purpose of selling
any product, good, ware, merchandise, provision, or service, or for the purpose
of taking orders for the future sale or delivery of any product, good, ware,
merchandise, provision, or service.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 112.03 SOLICITATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Requirement to obtain permit. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or
solicitor to engage in an act of peddling or soliciting within the corporate
limits of the city without first receiving a solicitation permit authorizing
said activity.
   (B)   Term of permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall be good for
the calendar year in which the permit was approved. Each applicant desiring to
continue conducting activities regulated by this chapter must reregister with
the city annually and receive a new solicitation permit each year.
   (C)   Record of permits issued. The City Clerk must keep a complete list of
all applicants authorized to engage in business activities as a peddler or
solicitor within the city for the current calendar year.
   (D)   Transferability of permits. Solicitation permits obtained pursuant to
this chapter are valid only for the applicant applying for the permit and may
not be transferred, sold, or otherwise assigned to any other person.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Applicants seeking to register under this chapter must complete the
following requirements before consideration can be made.
   (A)   Permit application. Applicants must file an application with the City
Clerk on an application form provided by the city. Application forms may be
obtained through the office of the City Clerk and should contain the following
information, along with any other information the city deems pertinent:
      (1)   Applicant name, permanent home address, and other personal
identifying information needed to contact or identify the applicant;
      (2)   Description of the nature of the business to be conducted, the
goods or services to be sold or provided, and any methods of solicitation to be
used;
      (3)   Description and identifying information of any vehicles to be used
in the course of soliciting or peddling;
      (4)   Business and address of the applicant’s employer, together with an
explanation of the exact relationship between the applicant and employer;
      (5)   Information related to the applicant’s criminal history;
      (6)   State sales tax license number and/or state business filing number,
if applicable; and
      (7)   Copy of current government-issued photo identification.
   (B)   Background check. Applicants must provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history information from the State Police Bureau
of Criminal Identification. The city is authorized to receive criminal history
information from the state police for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of
applicants. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or
other use of the criminal history information is prohibited. Persons convicted
of a felony offense within five years prior to the date of application are
prohibited from peddling or soliciting within the city limits. Background check
applications can be obtained through the office of the City Clerk, and
applicants are responsible for all fees associated with the background check
process.
   (C)   Fees. An application fee, background check fee, and permitting fee
will all be required of applicants to obtain a solicitation permit. The amount
of said fees may be established by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   The application fee and background check fee shall be due at the
time of application and required before an application will be reviewed.
      (2)   The permitting fee shall be due after a successful applicant has
been notified of his or her approval and be required before a solicitation
permit will be issued to the vendor.
   (D)   Review process. Once a completed application packet has been received
by the City Clerk, the city will begin the review process and submit the
background check application to the appropriate authority. Once the background
check has been completed, the city will notify the vendor within 14 days of the
city’s decision whether to grant the solicitation permit. Permits that are
granted will be available for pickup at the office of the City Clerk once an
applicant has been notified of their issuance.
   (E)   Approval of application. An applicant who has met all of the
requirements of this chapter should be issued a solicitation permit, unless the
city makes specific findings that the issuance of a permit would be contrary to
the public health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (F)   Appeal of denial. An applicant aggrieved by a denial of the city to
issue a permit under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five
days from the date of denial and must be in writing, setting forth the reasons
such permit should not have been denied. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 14 days after the filing thereof and shall render its decision
immediately following the hearing. An aggrieved applicant may further appeal
the decision of the City Council by doing so in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 112.05 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Bond requirement. Before any permit may be issued, applicants must
file proof of a bond with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Bond amount. The amount of the bond is to be established by resolution
by the City Council.
   (C)   Form of bond. Bond may be in the form of a surety bond, cashier’s
check, or a letter of credit from a financial institution running to the city.
   (D)   Action against bond. Subsequent action on the bond may be brought by
the city for an applicant’s failure to comply with any provision of this
chapter. Forfeiture of the bond is a civil remedy and does not foreclose the
possibility of criminal prosecution, as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Return of bond. Upon expiration of any permit issued under this
chapter, the City Clerk shall return the bond within 90 days after receipt of a
written request by the applicant for its return, unless the City Clerk receives
notice that any provision of this chapter has not been complied with, in which
case, the bond will be returned only upon order by a court.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 112.06 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Applicants who have received a permit to conduct business pursuant to this
chapter must, at any time while engaged in the act of peddling or soliciting
within the city, visibly display the city-issued solicitation permit on the
outside of their clothing in such a way that it is plainly visible upon
contact.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall provide false information on a permit application or
background check application.
   (B)   No person, registered or not, shall solicit or peddle business at any
home or business when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that
solicitation or peddling is prohibited.
   (C)   No person, registered or not, shall continue with solicitation or
peddling at any home or business when requested to leave by the owner,
authorized agent of the owner, or any other person that resides or works on the
premises.
   (D)   No person, registered or not, may solicit or peddle at any home or
business before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
   (E)   No person, registered or not, may misrepresent the purpose of his or
her solicitation or peddling, or make misrepresentations or false statements
when conducting activities regulated by this chapter.
   (F)   No person, registered or not, may represent that the city endorses the
activities of any peddler or solicitor.
   (G)   No person, registered or not, shall solicit or peddle on any city
property, right-of-way, or in any area within the city, except those areas
designated by the City Council, during special events and/or festivals or at
other times designated as restricted by the City Council. Notice of these
restricted times shall be posted at the City Hall and on the city’s website.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following exemptions apply to the requirements of this chapter. Unless
otherwise provided by law, this chapter is not intended to restrict or prohibit
the activities of the city or its agents, any peace officer lawfully engaged in
the course of his or her duties, or any other individual acting under court
order.
   (A)   Exemption from solicitation permit. The following individuals and
activities are exempted from registering with the city and obtaining a permit
to solicit or peddle within the city, but are otherwise required to comply with
all other provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Any religious or charitable organization, including individuals
acting on behalf of an educational entity or public school, engaging in any
activities for nonprofit purposes or soliciting charitable donations;
      (2)   Any political group engaging in activities or seeking funds or
memberships;
      (3)   Any bona fide public or private auction;
      (4)   Any person, partnership, or corporation selling or dealing only
with retail merchants within the city, and being exclusively wholesale sellers
and dealers;
      (5)   The sale of farm, garden, art, or craft products by the persons
producing or making such products;
      (6)   The sale of newspaper subscriptions; and
      (7)   Garage, yard, or similar sales of goods by individuals at their
residence or place of business not exceeding three days in length nor more than
twice in one calendar year, which sales shall not include business inventory.
   (B)   Exemption from background check requirement. Any applicant, having
submitted to a background check and receiving a permit pursuant to this
chapter, shall be exempt from re-submitting an additional background check for
a period of five years.
   (C)   Other exemptions. Any applicant may petition the City Council, and,
upon good cause shown, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, exempt the
applicant from any or all of the background check, application fee, bonding, or
permit requirements under this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter
is subject to revocation of any solicitation permit issued by the city and is
guilty of a criminal violation as follows:
   (A)   A first violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a fine of $300;
   (B)   A second violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor
and may be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000 for any single offense and may
be confined in the county jail for a period of not more than six months. Either
or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and, in addition thereto,
any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 113: MOBILE CONCESSIONS
Section
   
113.01   Authority; purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Permit required
   
113.04   Application process
   
113.05   Insurance
   
113.06   Exhibition of permits
   
113.07   Specific requirements for concessions on public property
   
113.08   Specific requirements for concessions on private property
   
113.09   Exemptions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 AUTHORITY; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s general
police power and the authority granted to cities by the State Constitution and
the Idaho Code.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of persons and property in the city by
regulating the operation, location, and permitting of mobile concessions.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any commercial display, enterprise, promotion, exhibit,
or other activity offering products, goods, wares, merchandise, provisions, or
services for sale or rent.
   CONCESSIONS PERMIT. A permit, issued by the city, authorizing a vendor to
operate a concession within the city.
   MOBILE CONCESSION. A mobile food cart, mobile food concession, and mobile
retail concession, as defined by this chapter.
   MOBILE FOOD CART. A cart, stand, or like device from which food and
beverages are sold, and, if readily mobile, which is designed to be propelled
by human power alone.
   MOBILE FOOD CONCESSION. A service establishment offering food or beverages
for sale for immediate consumption, prepared on-site or off-site, and which is
operated from a vehicle, mounted on a trailer that can be towed by a vehicle,
or otherwise capable of being moved under its own power without significant
disassembly.
   MOBILE RETAIL CONCESSION. An establishment displaying, selling, vending,
hawking, or renting goods, wares, merchandise, or services, other than food and
beverages, which is operated from a vehicle, mounted on a trailer that can be
towed by a vehicle, or otherwise capable of being moved under its own power
without significant disassembly.
   VENDOR. The owner of a concession or the applicant applying for a permit
under this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 113.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requirement to obtain concessions permit.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any vendor to operate any concession
within the city without first having obtained a concessions permit.
      (2)   A separate application and permit shall be required for each
individual concession that is operated by a vendor.
   (B)   Term of concessions permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall
be good for the calendar year in which the permit was issued. Each vendor
desiring to continue conducting activities regulated by this chapter must
reapply with the city annually.
   (C)   Record of permits issued. The City Clerk must keep a complete list of
all vendors approved to engage in concession activities within the city for the
current calendar year.
   (D)   Transferability of permit. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are
valid only for the vendor applying and may not be transferred, sold, or
otherwise assigned to any other vendor.
   (E)   Other permits. Vendors operating mobile concessions within the city
must also obtain any other permits required by state or local law, including
any permits required by the Panhandle Health District, and the same shall be
displayed for public view on each mobile concession in accordance with this
chapter and the rules or regulations established by the agency requiring the
permit.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Vendors seeking to obtain a concessions permit under this chapter must
complete the following requirements before consideration can be made.
   (A)   Application. Vendors must file an application with the City Clerk on
an application form provided by the city. Application forms may be obtained
through the office of the City Clerk and should contain the following
information, along with any other information the city deems pertinent:
      (1)   If the vendor is an individual, the individual’s name, permanent
home address, and other personal identifying information needed to contact or
identify the vendor;
      (2)   If the vendor is an association, company, partnership, or
corporation, the legal name of the entity and any dba’s that the entity
associates as, along with the legal name, permanent home address, and other
personal identifying information of the responsible party who will be acting to
manage the mobile concessions while in operation;
      (3)   Description of the food, beverage, good, ware, merchandise, or
service offered for sale or rent by the vendor;
      (4)   Description and identifying information of any vehicles to be used
in the course of operating mobile concessions;
      (5)   Information relevant to identify the criminal history of the vendor
or those individuals who will be acting to manage the mobile concessions while
in operation;
      (6)   A letter of certificate of approval from the Panhandle Health
District, if required by the rules and regulations of the District for the
operations to be conducted;
      (7)   Proof of a state food handler’s certification for all workers
required by law to possess the same for the operations to be conducted;
      (8)   Proof of liability insurance for any mobile concessions operated on
public property;
      (9)   Proof of workers’ compensation insurance, unless otherwise exempt
under state law;
      (10)   State sales tax license number and/or state business filing number
and/or state seller’s permit, where applicable; and
      (11)   Copy of current government-issued photo identification of the
vendor or those individuals who will be acting to manage the mobile concessions
while in operation.
   (B)   Background check. Vendors must provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history information from the State Police Bureau
of Criminal Identification for the vendor and any employees who will be
operating mobile concessions within the city. The city is authorized to receive
criminal history information from the state police for the purpose of
evaluating the fitness of vendors for permitting. As required by state and
federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history
information is prohibited. Persons convicted of a felony offense within five
years prior to the date of application are prohibited from operating mobile
concessions within the city. Background check applications can be obtained
through the office of the City Clerk, and vendors are responsible for all fees
associated with the background check process.
   (C)   Fees. An application fee, background check fee, and permitting fee
will all be required of applicants to obtain a concessions permit. The amount
of said fees may be established by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   The application fee and background check fee shall be due at the
time of application and required before an application will be reviewed.
      (2)   The permitting fee shall be due after a successful applicant has
been notified of his or her approval and be required before a concessions
permit will be issued to the vendor.
   (D)   Review process. Once a completed application packet has been received
by the City Clerk, the city will begin the review process and submit the
background check application to the appropriate authority. Once the background
check has been completed, the city will notify the vendor within 14 days of the
city’s decision whether to grant the concessions permit. Permits that are
granted will be available for pickup at the office of the City Clerk once a
vendor has been notified of their issuance.
   (E)   Approval of application. A vendor who has met all of the requirements
of this chapter should be issued a concessions permit unless the city makes
specific findings that issuance of a permit would be contrary to the public
health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (F)   Appeal of denial. A vendor aggrieved by a denial of the city to issue
a permit under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five days
from the date of denial and must be in writing, setting forth the reasons such
permit should not have been denied. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 14 days after the filing thereof and shall render its decision
immediately following the hearing. An aggrieved vendor may further appeal the
decision of the City Council by doing so in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Liability insurance. All vendors operating mobile concessions on
public property within the city shall provide proof of liability insurance in
the minimum amount of $2,000,000, naming the city as an additional insured, and
shall agree in writing to hold the city harmless from any injury or damage
resulting from the operation of the concession. Before any permit may be
issued, vendors must file proof of this policy with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Workers’ compensation insurance. All vendors operating mobile
concessions within the city shall carry workers’ compensation insurance, as
required by state law.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 113.06 EXHIBITION OF PERMITS.
   Vendors must have, and display for public view, all permits required by this
chapter at all times when operating mobile concessions within the city.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.07 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCESSIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No vendor may operate mobile concessions on public property, unless done in
accordance with this chapter and the specific requirements herein.
   (A)   Every vendor must possess a valid state seller’s permit, unless
otherwise exempted by law.
   (B)   Each concession must comply with all local ordinances involving
signage and sign codes.
   (C)   Each mobile concession must have attached, or located immediately
adjacent thereto, a trash or garbage disposal container capable of holding all
trash and garbage generated by the operation of the concession. The container
shall be emptied periodically as necessary in order to ensure, at all times,
public access and use of the container. Each vendor or his, her, or its
employee shall, at all times, keep his, her, or its concession and the
immediate area surrounding (within 25 feet) free of litter, grease, garbage,
and other debris which results from his, her, or its operation.
   (D)   Mobile concessions shall not use city utilities or property,
including, but not limited to, picnic tables, benches, electrical power,
garbage or trash containers, or potable water, without written permission from
the city.
   (E)   Mobile concessions situated on public property, including public
streets, shall not remain stationary for any continuous period exceeding three
days.
   (F)   Every vendor must comply with all local Fire Code requirements and
each mobile food concession shall contain at least one functional fire
extinguisher approved by the Fire Department.
   (G)   Disposal of wastewater and grease must be in compliance with those
regulations set out in the state’s Plumbing Code and otherwise in the this code
of ordinances.
   (H)   (1)   All mobile food concessions, excluding mobile food carts,
operating on public property within the city must be confined to the following
geographical area boundary (which map is available in the office of the City
Clerk upon request):
         (a)   The area on Seventh Street immediately adjacent to Magnuson Park
between Cedar Street and the alley between Cedar Street and Bank Street; and
         (b)   The area on Cedar Street between Seventh Street and the Barnard
Building.
      (2)   At no time should a mobile food concession block any alley or
street or park in any way so as to restrict the free movement of vehicle
traffic.
      (3)   Mobile food concessions will be required to relocate from locations
specifics in divisions (H)(1) and (H)(2) above during events/festivals.
Permitted mobile concessions may choose to do one of the following during an
event/festival:
         (a)   Work with the event or festival organizers to be included in
event and/or festival concessions and relocate to an area specified by the
organizer;
         (b)   Relocate to Seventh Street between Bank and Hotel alongside the
CDA Press building; or
         (c)   Choose to move the mobile concessions and cease operating within
the city limits during the duration of the event/festival.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCESSIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No vendor may operate mobile concessions on private property within the
city, unless done in accordance with this chapter and the specific requirements
herein.
   (A)   Every vendor must possess a valid state seller’s permit, unless
otherwise exempted by law.
   (B)   Mobile concessions must comply with all local ordinances involving
signage and sign codes.
   (C)   Mobile food concessions must have attached, or located immediately
adjacent thereto, a trash or garbage disposal container capable of holding all
trash and garbage generated by the operation of the concession. The container
shall be emptied periodically as necessary in order to minimize the transfer of
litter, grease, garbage, and other debris onto public property.
   (D)   Mobile concessions shall not use city utilities or property,
including, but not limited to, picnic tables, benches, electrical power,
garbage or trash containers, or potable water, without written permission from
the city.
   (E)   Mobile concessions must comply with all local Fire Code requirements,
and each mobile food concession shall contain at least one functional fire
extinguisher approved by the Fire Department.
   (F)   Disposal of wastewater and grease from mobile food concessions must be
in compliance with those regulations set out in the state’s Plumbing Code and
otherwise in this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Mobile concessions operating on private property within the city must
be located on property within a nonresidential zone.
   (H)   Mobile concessions must be in compliance with minimum setbacks for
buildings or structures as outlined otherwise in this code of ordinances.
   (I)   If operating a mobile food concession on private property not owned by
the vendor, the vendor must have a written contract/agreement with the property
owner detailing the method and process of wastewater, grease, and trash
disposal from any mobile food concession.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following exemptions apply to the requirements of this chapter. Unless
otherwise provided by law, this chapter is not intended to restrict or prohibit
the activities of the city or its agents.
   (A)   Exemption from concessions permit. The following are exempted from
obtaining a permit to operate mobile concessions within the city, but are
otherwise required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Vendors operating mobile concessions as part of a festival or event
for which the festival or event director has previously obtained a waiver of
the permitting requirements contained in this chapter from the City Council.
Vendors operating pursuant to this exemption may also be granted relief from
operating within the geographical area boundaries outlined in §
113.08; and
      (2)   Vendors engaged solely in the sale of farm or garden products
produced or made personally by the vendor.
   (B)   Exemption from background check requirement. Any vendor or employee of
the vendor, having successfully passed a background check pursuant to a permit
application under this chapter, shall be exempt from resubmitting an additional
background check for a period of five years; and
   (C)   Other exemptions. Any vendor may petition the City Council and, upon
good cause shown, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, exempt the
vendor from any or all of the background check, application fee, insurance, or
permitting requirements under this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter
is subject to revocation of any concessions permit issued by the city and is
guilty of a criminal violation as follows:
   (A)   A first violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a fine of $300;
   (B)   A second violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor
and may be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000 for any single offense and may
be confined in the county jail for a period of not more than six months. Either
or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and, in addition thereto,
any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 114: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Special event permit required
   
114.03   Exemptions
   
114.04   General obligations for special events
   
114.05   Permit fees and deposits
   
114.06   Applications for special event permits
   
114.07   Decision
   
114.08   Alterations
   
114.09   Approval of applications for special event permits by city clerk
   
114.10   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
114.11   Violations
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms used in this section shall, for the purpose of interpreting the
various sections within this chapter, have the following meanings:
   CITY INFRASTRUCTURE. Any roads, properties, or assets owned or managed by
the City of Wallace.
   CITY SPONSORED SPECIAL EVENT. A special event that is wholly initiated,
financed, or executed by the City of Wallace or one or more of its departments.
   COORDINATOR. The individual(s) taking primary responsibility to coordinate a
special event, which duties may involve planning, advertising, setting up,
managing, and/or dismantling an event, or the supervision of those in charge of
the same.
   EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES. City resources or additional expenses expended by
the city specifically for a special event as a result of anticipated
attendance, heightened security, or other unique factors of a special event,
which would not otherwise be expended by the city absent the existence of the
special event. Extraordinary resources shall include any clean up after a
special event that is performed by the city to return a site utilized by the
special event to its normal state.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A preplanned single gathering, event or series of events,
related in nature, and conducted for the purpose of entertainment, recreation,
education, political, religious or cultural, or of any other similar nature,
including but not limited to events such as concerts, dances, assemblages,
processions, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, community events, weddings,
or mass participation sports (such as marathons and running events, fun run/
walks, bicycle races, skijoring, sports tournaments, etc.), and makes use of
city infrastructure.
   SPONSOR. An individual or organization that pays some or all of the costs
associated with a special event.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.02 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall sponsor or coordinate a special event that utilizes city
infrastructure without having first secured a special event permit, unless
otherwise exempt by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following shall be exempt from having to obtain a special event
permit:
      (1)   Funeral processions.
      (2)   Spontaneous events for the purpose of expressive activity that
occur in response to breaking or emerging news.
      (3)   Lawful picketing on sidewalks.
      (4)   City sponsored events as defined herein.
      (5)   Special events wholly held on private property.
   (B)   In determining whether an event is exempt, no consideration shall be
given to the content of any constitutionally protected expression connected
with the planned activity. No permit shall be required under this section, nor
any condition imposed on any permit, if requiring a permit or imposing the
condition would violate rights protected by the constitution of the United
States or by the constitution of the State of Idaho.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 115.04 GENERAL OBLIGATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The following general obligations shall apply to all special events
necessitating a permit, unless otherwise exempted by the city during the permit
application process.
   (A)   Coordinator's responsibilities. In addition to those obligations of a
special event coordinator outlined elsewhere in this chapter, coordinators
shall assume absolute responsibility for the following:
      (1)   Street closure signage shall be posted no less than five and no
more than ten days prior to the start of the street closure. Such posting shall
be visible to the motoring public throughout the perimeter of streets to be
closed. Signs shall not be posted on private buildings without owner's
approval.
      (2)   Street closure barriers that adequately prevent vehicular traffic
from entering the area of the event shall be installed on all streets subject
to closure. Such barriers may be available from the city.
      (3)   Notification to residents and businesses within the event area of
the event type, dates and duration, and parking restrictions in the area.
Notice can be provided via email, flyers delivered to residents/businesses
mailbox or physically posted on the property and shall be provided at least one
week prior to start date of event.
      (4)   Trash receptacles shall be placed near food vendor station(s), and
at any entry designating eating or drinking areas.
      (5)   Portable toilets to adequately serve the estimated number of
participants and attendees of the event shall be obtained. Unless variance is
granted by the city, the number of toilets considered adequate shall be as
outlined in the table below.
Number of Attendees Anticipated Number of Toilets Required**
Number of Attendees Anticipated Number of Toilets Required**
Less than 250                   1
251-499                         2
500-999                         4
1000-1999                       6
2000-2999                       8
3000 or More*                   10+
Notes
*Increase 1 toilet for every 500 additional attendees anticipated.
**At least 5% of all toilets (but in no event less than one) of all portable
toilets provided must be designed by the manufacture to be wheelchair
accessible.
 
      (6)   Adequate volunteers/staff for setup, break-down, parking lot (if
applicable), safety, and cleaning/replenishment of toilets at regular intervals
throughout the event. For multi-day events, toilets shall be pumped daily.
      (7)   Restore city streets/sidewalks within the street closure area to
their normal condition.
      (8)   Remove all signage from street posts, bulletin boards, and other
places of advertisement, within three days of event conclusion.
   (B)   Security. Neither the Shoshone County sheriff's office (SCSO) nor the
City of Wallace will be obligated to provide security for any special events
other than those solely sponsored by the city. All special event organizers are
responsible for providing and paying for their own security if the city and/or
the SCSO determines security is necessary based on the risk level the event
presents. Factors taken into consideration will be estimated attendance, type,
and length of event and whether alcohol is served. If requested, the SCSO may
provide recommendations for the amount of appropriate security.
   (C)   Traffic control. The Shoshone County sheriff's office (SCSO) and the
City of Wallace do not provide traffic control for any special events other
than those solely sponsored by the city. All special events are responsible for
providing and paying for their own traffic control if the city determines
traffic control is necessary based on estimated attendance, nature and size of
event, and length of event.
   (D)   Extraordinary resources. Special events which require the use of
extraordinary resources may be required to pay for such services. If after a
special event permit application is submitted, a determination by the city is
made that extraordinary city resources are likely to be incurred for the event,
an extraordinary resources deposit may be required as part of the approval
process for the special event permit. The amount of the deposit will be
determined by the city, subject to evaluation of anticipated extraordinary
resources that may be required. For costs exceeding the deposit amount, the
full cost of recovery for extraordinary resources shall be required no later
than 60 days following notice of demand for payment provided to the special
event coordinator. If the costs associated with extraordinary resources is
determined to be less than the deposit amount, a refund of that amount in
excess will be provided to the special event coordinator.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.05 PERMIT FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   A permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the city, together with any
deposits for extraordinary resources, shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any special event permit. Upon request of the coordinator, the city may waive
any fee contemplated herein if the special event is likely to contribute
significantly to the public good, the special event has insufficient financial
resources to pay such fee, and the special event is unlikely to generate
revenue sufficient to cover the costs associated with the special event, after
considering reasonable efforts to obtain event sponsors) and/or assess
registration fees or vendor fees to those participating in the special event.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.06 APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.
   The following provisions govern the general application processes for
special event permits.
   (A)   Obtaining applications. An application form for a special event permit
can be obtained at city hall by contacting the city clerk or by downloading the
application from the city's website.
   (B)   Contents of application. Application forms should contain at least the
following information:
      (1)   A description of the nature of the event.
      (2)   The name, mailing address, email, and phone number for the
coordinators of the event.
      (3)   A good faith estimate of the total number of attendees and/or
participants that are likely to be attracted by the special event, which may be
based on the past attendance of the same or similar events, or any other
relevant factor.
      (4)   If the event will require outside security, a designation of the
agency or entity responsible for providing security as outlined elsewhere in
this chapter.
   (C)   Supplemental information. Where applicable, the following documents
and/or information shall accompany an application for special event permits for
the application to be complete:
      (1)   Site map(s) showing proposed streets to be closed or route of
competitive race or parade. Additional maps showing stage, vendor, toilet
locations, trash receptacles, and other infrastructure necessary to account for
the health, safety, sanitation, and wellbeing of both event participants and
the general public.
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance listing the City of Wallace as an
additional insured entity.
      (3)   If alcohol will be served, a catering permit application must be
obtained and filed with the city.
   (D)   Application submission. Application for a special event permit may be
made no sooner than one (1) year, and no later than 45 days, prior to the start
date of the special event. The city is under no obligation to review
applications received less than 45 days prior to the start date of the special
event.
   (E)   Departmental review. If after receiving a completed special event
permit application, the city determines that further input is needed or desired
from outside agencies, the city may table a decision on the application and
request a departmental review from any outside agency to aid in its
consideration of the application.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.07 DECISION.
   Within 45 days of receipt of a completed special event permit application,
the city shall determine whether the coordinator has met all of the
requirements of this chapter, and whether it is in the best interest of the
city, considering the health, safety, sanitation, and wellbeing of both event
participants and the general public, to grant the special event permit. The
decision to approve, table or deny a special event permit shall be left to the
sole discretion of the city council, unless such authority has been delegated
otherwise.
   (A)   Approval of permit. If the city believes it is appropriate to grant a
special event permit, the city may place restrictions or contingencies it may
deem appropriate on the coordinator, including but not limited to the
requirement to remit a deposit for any reasonably foreseeable extraordinary
resources.
   (B)   Denial of permit. A special event permit may be denied by the city for
any reason, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The coordinator has made any false, material representations in the
application.
      (2)   The application is incomplete, or the coordinator/representative
fails to appear before the city council as scheduled.
      (3)   The special event will substantially interfere or conflict with
another event or activity already scheduled for a site.
      (4)   The event coordinator has failed to pay for any costs incurred from
a previously permitted event.
      (5)   The venue requested to host the special event is inadequate to meet
event hosts requirements for event type, duration, or projected participants or
attendees.
      (6)   Conditions set forth by the city cannot be met or will not be met
by the coordinator.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§114.08 ALTERATIONS.
   Any changes to the parameters of the special event that may conflict with or
significantly alter conditions approved by the city, must be brought before the
city council for review and approval prior to advertising said changes on any
medium, including social media, newspaper, radio, posters, flyers, email, etc.
Failure to do so may result in the revocation of the permit for the special
event.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.09 APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS BY CITY CLERK.
   An application for a special event permit, together with any associated fee
waiver request, may be approved by the city clerk, without hearing by the city
council, if each of the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The application for special event permit is fully complete and
includes all supplemental information as may seem reasonably necessary.
   (B)   The same coordinator has put on the same special event without
significant changes to the footprint and parameters, which special event has
been approved by the city council in the past two consecutive years.
   (C)   The application for special event permit does not request any changes
to any of the restrictions or contingencies previously placed on the special
event by the city council when approving the special event permit in preceding
years.
   (D)   If the application for special event permit requests a waiver of fees,
such fee waiver must have been approved by the city council in the past two
consecutive years.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A special event permit may be suspended or revoked by the city for any
of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violations of any provision of this chapter.
      (2)   Violations by the coordinator, or anyone acting on behalf of
coordinator, of any federal, state or local laws or ordinances during the
special event.
      (3)   Violations of any of the conditions of the permit.
      (4)   Substantive changes to site plans made by the applicant without
prior approval from the city.
      (5)   Unforeseen events that may pose risk to city infrastructure, event
attendees, or the general public.
      (6)   If found coordinator made false, material representations in an
application for a permit.
   (B)   In the event of notification to a coordinator of the suspension or
revocation of a permit, the coordinator, and anyone acting on behalf of
coordinator, must immediately cease all activities associated with the
promotion, facilitation, or coordination of the special event.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 114.11 VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Violations defined. At all special events, it shall be unlawful for
any person to:
   September 2025
      (1)   Conduct, present, stage or promote a special event without a
permit.
      (2)   Violate any provision of this chapter or any condition of a special
event permit.
      (3)   Serve or cause to be served alcohol in violation of state or local
laws.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Any person committing a violation as defined in
this section shall be guilty of a criminal violation as follows:
      (1)   A first violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a fine of $300.
      (2)   A second or subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter
is a misdemeanor subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, confinement in the
county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Additionally, any person so convicted shall pay those costs
related to enforcement as the court may deem appropriate.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-12-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Criminal Code adopted
   
130.02   Firearms
   
130.03   False alarms
   
130.04   Curfew
§ 130.01 CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code § 50-901, there is hereby adopted
said Idaho Code Title 18Cite, being the criminal laws of the state,
establishing principles of liability for conduct; establishing general
principles of justification for conduct; defining offenses involving danger to
persons; defining offenses against property; defining offenses against the
family; defining offenses against public administration; defining offenses
against public order and decency; establishing a uniform system of penalties,
including fines, forfeitures and imprisonment; and establishing criteria for
imposing sentences upon those convicted of an offense, and said laws shall be
and the same are hereby adopted as the Criminal Code of the city. One copy of
said laws shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for
reference to and inspection by the general public.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)
§ 130.02 FIREARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol,
rifle, or other firearm within the corporate limits of the city without a
special permit obtained from the City Council.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2) (Ord. 510, passed 3-13-1990) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in any false fire alarm,
or to procure any false fire alarm to be turned in, or in any manner to give
any false fire alarm, or to procure any false fire alarm to be given.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3) (Ord. 356, passed 4-10-1960) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW.
   (A)   Restrictions to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of 18 years to be in or upon the streets, alleys, or any unoccupied public
or private place within the limits of the city, or to enter or be or remain in
any motion picture theater, confectionery store, dance hall, pool hall, or any
other place of entertainment or business within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:
00 a.m. (official local time), except on Friday and/or Saturday nights, or
between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights,
unless such minor person is then and there accompanied by at least one of his
or her parents, by his or her guardian, or by some other person having the
legal custody of such minor person.
   (B)   Exceptions.
   (1)   Situational exceptions and travel. It is that the minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
   (2)   Written permit.
         (a)   Any parent, guardian, or other person having the legal custody
of any such minor child may give a written permit to such child to go upon any
lawful and necessary errand or to go to and to return from any place at which
such child may be employed, at any time of the day or night, and such permit,
when in the possession of such child, shall be an excuse and justification for
such child being upon such streets or alleys.
         (b)   Any such minor child upon the streets or alleys of the city
between the hours provided by division (A) above shall have such written permit
upon his or her person and in his or her possession for the inspection of any
police officer of the city. Any such permit given to such child shall be made
and dated as of the date of the use thereof, and no such permit shall be of any
force or effect except for or during the day of its issuance.
         (c)   It is hereby made the duty of the police or other peace officers
of the city to take up any and all such permits which do not conform with the
provisions of this chapter and thereupon to arrest the child having such permit
in his or her possession.
   (C)   Violation. Any child violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
and hereby is defined as and declared to be a juvenile delinquent person, and
shall be arrested and proceeded against and dealt with as provided by the
general laws of the state relating to juvenile delinquent persons.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-1)
   (D)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian
or other person having the legal care and custody of any such minor child to
allow such child to go or to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, or
unoccupied public or private places within the city, or to attend or to be
present in or at any motion picture theater, dance hall, pool hall,
confectionery store, or any other place of entertainment or business within the
city between the hours specified in divisions (A), (B), and (C) above, unless
such child is accompanied by such parent, guardian, or other person having the
legal custody of such child, or unless such child is then and there engaged in
the performance of a lawful and necessary errand and is in possession of a
written permit, as herein provided. Such parent, guardian, or other person
having legal care and custody of any such minor child shall be arrested and
proceeded against and dealt with as provided by the general laws of the state
relating to parental responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-2)
   (E)   Business operator’s responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any
owner, proprietor, clerk, or other person in charge of any motion picture
theater, dance hall, pool hall, confectionery store, or any other place of
entertainment or business within the said city to knowingly, willfully, or
negligently admit any such minor person to such motion picture theater, dance
hall, pool hall, confectionery store, or any other place of entertainment or
business within the city or to permit any such minor person to remain therein
or thereat at any time between the hours specified in divisions (A), (B), and
(C) above, unless such child is then and there accompanied by at least one of
his or her parents, by his or her guardian, or by some other person who has the
legal custody of such minor child, or unless such child is then and there in
possession of a permit as provided by divisions (B) and (C) above. Such owner,
proprietor, clerk, or other person in charge shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable in accordance with divisions (A), (B), and (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-3)
   (F)   Police to make arrests. Each member of the police force of the city,
whenever on duty, is hereby authorized, and it shall be his or her duty, to
arrest any person who shall knowingly, willfully, or negligently violate any of
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-4)
   (G)   Violation. Any adult person who shall knowingly, willfully, or
negligently violate any division or provision of this section, either by doing
that which is forbidden hereby or by failing to do that which is required
hereby, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-5)
(Ord. 350, passed 9-14-1959; Ord. 375, passed 1-9-1967; Ord. 393, passed 4-13-
1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   AREA OF CITY IMPACT
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES
      
152.   FLOOD CONTROL
      
153.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
154.   SITE DEVELOPMENT
      
155.   HISTORIC SITES
      
156.   ZONING
      
157.   MOUNTAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT (MO)
CHAPTER 150: AREA OF CITY IMPACT
Section
   
150.01   Legislative purpose
   
150.02   Geographic area
   
150.03   Comprehensive Plan
   
150.04   Subdivision Ordinance
   
150.05   Zoning Ordinances
   
150.06   Administration and enforcement
   
150.07   Renegotiation
§ 150.01 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   The purpose for establishing an area of city impact is to identify a logical
urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban fringe area is realizing, or
will realize, growth and development pressures that must be planned and managed
in an orderly fashion. The area of city impact recognizes trade area,
geographic factors, and the potential delivery of public services as being
associated with the city and comprised of areas that may reasonably be annexed
to the city in the near and distant future.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-1) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
§ 150.02 GEOGRAPHIC AREA.
   The officially adopted and agreed upon area of city impact for the city is
established by Ordinance 95-01-B, as contained in this section, and by the
county.
   (A)   Legal description. The following is the geographic description of
impact boundary as provided on the County Map:
      (1)   The start point is:
         (a)   Northwest corner of section 27;
         (b)   East to the intersection of sections 22, 23, 26, and 27;
         (c)   North to midpoint of section 23;
         (d)   East to the center of section 23;
         (e)   North through section 14 to the south border of section 11; and
         (f)   East to the intersection of sections 11, 12, 13, and 14, north
to the intersection with the continued westward line extended from the
intersection of sections 7, 8, 17, and 18.
      (2)   Then:
         (a)   North to the midpoint of section 8; and
         (b)   East to the west boundary of section 10.
      (3)   This will be the most northwest point of the boundary:
         (a)   Then south to the midpoint of section 16;
         (b)   West to the east boundary of section 18;
         (c)   South to the intersection of sections 17, 18, 19, and 20;
         (d)   West to the east boundary of section 13,
         (e)   South to the intersection of sections 19, 24, 25, and 30;
         (f)   West to the midpoint of section 24;
         (g)   South to the center of section 25;
         (h)   East to the west boundary of section 29. From this point; south
to the midpoint of section 31;
         (i)   West to the east boundary of section 25;
         (j)   South to the north boundary of sections 1 and 2; and
         (k)   West to the east boundary of section 3.
      (4)   This is the southernmost point of the boundary:
         (a)   Then west to the southwest corner of section 3;
         (b)   North to the south boundary of section 33;
         (c)   East to the west boundary of section 34; and
         (d)   North to the intersection of sections 21, 22, 27, and 28.
   (B)   Map. The following is the depiction of impact boundary on the county
map.
(P ri or Code, § 1-11-2) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995; Ord. 95-01-B, passed
1-9-1996)
§ 150.03 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Comprehensive Plan for the county and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by the city shall apply to the city area of city impact
within the unincorporated area of the city. Both the city and the county shall
amend their Comprehensive Plans to be consistent with this agreement, if
required.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-3) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
§ 150.04 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The Subdivision Ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by the city shall apply to the area of city impact within
the city limits. However, the Subdivision Ordinance of the unincorporated area
of the county outside of the city limits of the city shall be subject to the
county ordinances pertaining to the division of original parcels of record,
plat amendments, lot line adjustments, minor subdivisions, short plats, or
administrative lot splits.
   (B)   The county shall consult the city in those areas which may impact the
city even though the area may be outside of the city limits, and the city shall
be given the opportunity to contribute to any plan involving those areas.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-4) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
§ 150.05 ZONING ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances containing the Zoning Ordinance
and Zoning Map, and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by the
city, shall apply to the area of city impact within the city limits of the
city. However, the Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map, and subsequent amendments
thereto, as pertaining to the unincorporated area of the county, shall be
subject to the county ordinances involving such matters.
   (B)   The county shall consult the city in those areas which may impact the
city even though the area may be outside of the city limits, and the city shall
be given the opportunity to contribute to any plan involving those areas.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-5) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
§ 150.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The city shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
city’s ordinances listed in §§
150.03,
150.04, and
150.05 and shall receive all permit fees for inspections performed to recapture
the direct costs of inspections, administration, legal publications, and other
costs arising from the process. Appeal and hearing procedures shall follow
those adopted by the city presently and in the future.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-6) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
§ 150.07 RENEGOTIATION.
   The area of city impact agreement shall be reviewed by the city and the
county at least once every five years and shall be renegotiated at any time
upon the request of either party hereto. Renegotiation shall begin 30 days
after written request by either the city or county and shall follow procedures
for the original negotiation, as set forth in Idaho Code § 67-6526.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-7) (Ord. 95-01-A, passed 8-8-1995)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Mobile Home Park Plan
   
151.03   Water supply
   
151.04   Sewage and refuse disposal
   
151.05   Garbage receptacles
   
151.06   Fire protection
   
151.07   Fire inspection
   
151.08   Register of occupants
   
151.09   Violations
Licensing
   
151.20   License required
   
151.21   Application
   
151.22   Fee
   
151.23   Posting of license
   
151.24   Transfer or revocation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPING TRAILER. A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed
with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by another vehicle
and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, or travel use.
   FIFTH-WHEEL TRAILER. A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, of
such size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits, of
gross trailer area not to exceed 400 square feet in the set-up mode, and
designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle that contains a towing mechanism
that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle’s rear axle.
   MAINTAIN OR OPERATE. Applies to a period in excess of two weeks.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections and is eight
body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and which is
built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or
without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein.
   MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COURT. Land under single ownership designed for
the temporary or permanent parking of three or more vehicles used for human
habitation within a minimum lot area for each mobile home site which is less
than the requirements for a single-family home and/or where an individual
septic tank is not provided for each mobile home.
      (1)   MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COURT also includes a continuous parcel
of land under single ownership where the density of mobile homes is over three
per acre.
      (2)   MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COURT does not include land designated
or designed for the display or sale of mobile homes.
   MOTOR HOME. A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, or travel use built on or permanently attached to a
self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van which is an
integral part of the completed vehicle.
   PARK TRAILER. As defined in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
A119.5, Park Model Recreational Vehicle Standard.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The entities are
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, fifth-wheel trailer, and motor
home.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, of such
size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when towed by
a motorized vehicle, and of gross trailer area less than 320 square feet.
   TRUCK CAMPER. A portable unit constructed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, consisting of a roof, floor,
and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup
truck.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.02 MOBILE HOME PARK PLAN.
   The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   Location. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly
graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
   (B)   Mobile home spaces.
      (1)   Size. Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum
of 600 square feet for each space, which shall be at least 22 feet wide and
clearly defined.
      (2)   Clearance between homes. Mobile homes shall be so parked on each
space that there shall be at least 12 feet clearance between mobile homes at
their nearest points.
      (3)   Property lines. No mobile home shall be located closer than seven
feet from any property line bounding the mobile home park.
   (C)   Access to driveway. All mobile home spaces shall have access to a
driveway upon such mobile home park, and said driveway is to be of not less
than 20 feet in width, and said driveway shall have unobstructed access to a
public thoroughfare.
   (D)   Inspection. The sanitary and housekeeping conditions provided for and
maintained shall be at all times subject to inspection by the Department of
Health and Welfare, the Panhandle Health District, and City Health Officer, and
these conditions shall conform to and in all respects adhere to the sanitary
laws of both the state and city.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-5) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.03 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Required. An adequate supply of water approved by the Department of
Health and Welfare and the Panhandle Health District for drinking and domestic
purposes to meet the requirements of the park shall be supplied. The water
supply shall be obtained from faucets only.
   (B)   Common drinking cup. No common drinking cup shall be permitted and no
common vessel for obtaining water for use in the various mobile homes shall be
permitted.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-6) (Ord. 360, 4-13-1961) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04 SEWAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Sewer system. Waste from sinks, showers, bathtubs, toilets, and
laundries shall be discharged into a public sewer system, if said public sewer
system be available in the general area of the mobile home park, in compliance
with applicable laws of this city and state. All kitchen sinks, wash basins,
bath or shower tubs, or toilets in any mobile home harbored in any mobile home
park must empty into an airtight pipe or hose which discharges such wastewater
or sewage into the public sewer system, septic tank, or other appropriate
sewage disposal system, which is subject to the discretionary approval of the
Panhandle Health District and the City Council.
   (B)   Inspections; noncompliance. All sewage disposal facilities shall be
subject to periodical inspections by the City Council or Panhandle Health
District, and if said systems do not meet with their approval, it may order the
mobile home park operator to conform to their specifications, and in the
absence of compliance with these specifications, said City Council may revoke
the license issued to said mobile home park operator.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-7) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.05 GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   Tightly-covered garbage cans shall be provided in quantities adequate to
permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be kept in a
sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and
disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans
do not overflow.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-8) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.06 FIRE PROTECTION.
   No open fires shall be permitted at any place which would endanger life or
property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time. All fire laws of the
city shall apply to mobile home parks.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-9) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.07 FIRE INSPECTION.
   A member of the Fire District shall have the right to inspect said premises
from time to time for the purpose of better securing fire protection for the
inhabitants of said parks, and shall make recommendations to the City Council
for the improvement of said parks, and shall immediately report any situations
occurring in said parks constituting, in its discretion, fire hazards, whether
they be violations of this chapter or not.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-10) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.08 REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Register required. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a
register containing a record of all mobile home owners that are occupants
located within the park.
   (B)   Required information. The register shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name and address of each occupant in each mobile home;
      (2)   Make, model, and year of all automobiles and mobile homes;
      (3)   License plate number and owner of each mobile home and automobile
by which it is towed;
      (4)   The state issuing such license; and
      (5)   The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home and the
number or other identification of the space or spaces occupied.
   (C)   Inspection. The park shall keep the register available for inspection
at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other
officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in
the register.
   (D)   Maintenance of record. The register records shall not be destroyed
until after a period of three years following the date of registration.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-12) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.09 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-15) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSING
§ 151.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person who maintains or operates a mobile home park or trailer court
must first obtain a license from the City Council through the office of the
City Clerk/Treasurer, which license must be approved by the City Council and
which will be effective for the balance of the calendar year of its issuance.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-2) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.21 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Filing. Applications for a license shall be filed with, and issued by,
the City Council through the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Required information. The application shall be in writing and signed
by the applicant, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the mobile home park or
trailer court;
      (3)   Such further information as may be requested by the City Council to
enable it to determine if the proposed location will comply with legal and
statutory requirements, including a sketch or plot plan, and additional
permits, if any; and
      (4)   No change or alteration in the plot plan shall be made without
first making a written application for such change or alteration to the City
Council and receiving a written permit therefrom.
   (C)   Investigation. The City Council shall investigate said application and
the location therein specified, and if it is found by the City Council that
said location and application are in compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the application may be
approved.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-3) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.22 FEE.
   The annual fee for such licenses shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-4) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.23 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   The permit certificate shall be conspicuously posted on the individual
mobile home not located within a mobile home park, or in the office or on the
premises of, the mobile home park at all times.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-11) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
§ 151.24 TRANSFER OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   Mobile homes. All licenses issued unto the operators of mobile
homes shall be personal to the licensee and shall not be transferable.
      (2)   Mobile home parks. All licenses issued unto operators of mobile
home parks shall be personal to the licensee and not be transferable without
the written consent of the City Council first being obtained.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-13)
   (B)   (1)   Power to revoke. The City Council may revoke any permit to
maintain a mobile home or license to maintain and operate a mobile home park
when the person covered has been found guilty of violating any provisions of
this chapter or other state or federal law pertaining thereto.
      (2)   Reissuance. After such revocation, a permit or license may be
reissued if the circumstance leading to the revocation has been remedied and
the mobile home or mobile home park is maintained and operated in full
compliance with this chapter or any other ordinance or statute pertaining
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-14) (Ord. 360, passed 4-13-1961)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization, purpose, and objectives
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Lands to which the chapter applies
   
152.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
152.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.09   Interpretation
   
152.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.25   Development permit
   
152.26   Floodplain administration
   
152.27   Variances
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.40   General standards
   
152.41   Specific standards
   
152.42   AE Zones with base flood elevations but no floodways
   
152.43   Floodways
   
152.44   Zones without base flood elevations
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES.
   The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain
as follows in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare; reduce the annual cost of flood insurance; and minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize the expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the interpretation or application of any
provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the city’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding.
      (1)   AO Zones have a base flood depth that ranges from one foot to three
feet above the natural ground; a clearly-defined channel does not exist; the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and, velocity flow may be evident.
      (2)   AO is characterized as sheet flow; AH indicates ponding and is
shown with standard base flood elevations.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Zone
designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, AO, and AH, also known as the
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also referred to as the 100-YEAR FLOOD). Designated on flood
insurance rate maps by the letters A or V.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of surface water resulting from a
flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous
materials or hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. The official form (FEMA Form 81-31) used to track
development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter, and determine the proper insurance premium rate with FEMA Form
81-31 § B completed by the city.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the city, which has been adopted by
the city.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). Means the official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood
boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING. Means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from
any source; and
      (3)   Mudslides, as defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation to which structures and uses
within the SFHA are required to be elevated or floodproofed. The FPE for the
city is base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard.
   FLOODWAY (OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected-size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places within
the city with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
         (a)   By an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). A flood insurance claim payment in an
amount to be established by resolution of the City Council directly to a
property owner for the cost to comply with floodplain management regulations
after a direct physical loss caused by a flood. Eligibility for an ICC claim
can be through a single instance of substantial damage or as a result of
cumulative substantial damage, as defined herein. More information can be found
in FEMA ICC Manual No. 301.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR. Provided, such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at §
152.41 (that is, provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a city issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of this chapter adopted by the city.
   PROGRAM. The National Flood Insurance Program authorized by 42 U.S.C.
Chapter 50, § 4011, and any amendments thereto.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See definition of FLOODWAY.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before damage occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land area covered by the floodwaters
of the base flood as shown on FIRM. The SFHA includes Zones A, AO, and AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, as defined herein;
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date.
      (1)   ACTUAL START.
         (a)   Either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
         (b)   For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (2)   PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION. Does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above-ground, as well as a manufactured home, and
means as follows:
      (1)   A building with two or more outside, rigid walls and a fully-
secured roof that is affixed to a permanent site;
      (2)   A MANUFACTURED HOME, also known as a MOBILE HOME, is a structure
built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections,
and affixed to a permanent foundation; or
      (3)   A TRAVEL TRAILER without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to
a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the city’s floodplain
management and building ordinances, codes, rules, or regulations.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure.
      (1)   The term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed, and either of the
following:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      (2)   The term excludes:
         (a)   Any alteration of an historic structure, which is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, either individually or as a city, or a
state’s Inventory of Historic Places; provided, the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure; or
         (b)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local Health Code, Sanitary Code, or Safety Code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or
City Council, from the requirements of this chapter that permits construction
in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
      (1)   A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter
or other federal or state statutes, rules, or regulations until such time as
the documentation evidencing compliance can be provided to the city.
      (2)   Penalties for any such VIOLATION are set out in §
152.26(B) of this chapter.
   WATER DEPENDENT. A structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in
any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic
nature of its operations.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-2) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.06 LANDS TO WHICH THE CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-3) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 44 C.F.R. § 59.22(a)
§ 152.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for Shoshone County, Idaho and Incorporated Areas,” with an
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated September 26, 2008, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study and the FIRM are on file at City Hall, 703 Cedar Street,
Wallace, Idaho, 83873. The best available information for flood hazard area
identification as outlined in §
152.26(B)(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that
incorporates data utilized under §
152.26(B)(2).
(Prior Code, § 14-1-3) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(e)(1)(d)(2)
§ 152.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.09 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations provided to the city by FEMA. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city,
or any of its officers, employees, agents, representatives, planners,
attorneys, City Council members, the Mayor, or clerks thereof, for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.25 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Development permit required.
      (1)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
152.07.
      (2)   The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured
homes, as set forth in §
152.05, and for all development, including fill and other activities, also as
set forth in §
152.05.
   (B)   Application for development permit.
      (1)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the local Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; and existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
      (2)   Specifically, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures recorded on a current Elevation
Certificate (FF 81-31) available through FEMA;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
         (c)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
floodproofing criteria set forth in §
152.41(B); and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-4) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Development permit requirement, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(1)
§ 152.26 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Designation of the local Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer
is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the local Floodplain Administrator.
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Permit review:
         (a)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required; and
         (c)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of §
152.43 are met.
      (2)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in A Zones in
accordance with §
152.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other source in order to administer §§
152.41 and
152.43;
      (3)   Information shall be obtained and maintained:
         (a)   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood
Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in this section, obtain and record the
actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially-improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement. Recorded on a current
elevation certificate (FF 81-31) available through FEMA, with section B
completed by the city; and
         (b)   For all new or substantially-improved floodproofed,
nonresidential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through
the FIS, FIRM, or as required in division (B)(2) above:
            1.   Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure was floodproofed;
            2.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §
152.25(B)(3); and
            3.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourses:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and
         (b)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-4) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of Floodplain Administrator, see 44 C.F.R. § 59.22
   Elevation, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5)
   Information retention and maintenance, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(B)(5)(i), 44
C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5)(iii)
   Review of development permits, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(2)
   Use of base flood data, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(B)(4)
   Watercourse alteration, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(6)
§ 152.27 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear all applications for
a variance.
      (2)   All determinations for variances, appeals, and actions by affected
persons shall be in accordance with §§
156.170 through
156.178, and any amendments thereto.
      (3)   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals on denials of
applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
city in the interpretation, enforcement, or administration of this chapter.
      (5)   Those aggrieved by the final decision of the City Council may
appeal such decision to the District Court.
      (6)   In passing upon such appeals, the City Council shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (f)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Floodplain Management Program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets, and
bridges.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   (a)   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level.
         (b)   As the lot size increases, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local, state, and/or federal laws,
rules, or regulations.
      (5)   (a)   Variances, as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance
Program, are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a
physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain
to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances.
         (b)   Variances primarily address small lots in densely -populated
residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from flood elevations should be
quite rare.
      (6)   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight
or dry-floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low
damage potential, complies with all other city ordinances or codes, the
variance criteria specified herein, except division (B)(1) above, and otherwise
complies with §
152.40(A), (C), and (D).
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the permitted structure will be built with its lowest floor below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-4) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Further conditions for variances, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.6(A)(1) through (A)(7)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
   (B)   AH Zone drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using standard methods and practices within the construction
industry that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   (a)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities, shall be designed and/or
otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
         (b)   Locating such equipment below the base flood elevation may cause
annual flood insurance premiums to be increased.
   (D)   Utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
      (2)   Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the
floodway.
      (3)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (4)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (E)   Subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50
lots, or five acres, whichever is less.
   (F)   Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available
either through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or from another authoritative
source (§
152.02(B)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that
proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of
reasonableness is a local judgment, and includes the use of historical data,
high water marks, photographs of past flooding, and the like, where available.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Anchoring, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)
   Construction materials and methods, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(3)(ii) through
(iv)
   Flood hazard standards, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(b)
   Subdivision proposals, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(4)(b)(3)
   Utilities, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(5)(6)
§ 152.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   Specific standards apply to all areas of special flood hazards, including
the following required standards.
   (A)   Residential construction.
      (1)   (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to the flood protection elevation (FPE).
         (b)   Minimum FEMA standards require the lowest floor to be elevated
“to or above” the BFE; however, adding an additional foot of freeboard
increases safety and can reduce insurance premiums by as much as 30%.
         (c)   Additional freeboard is strongly encouraged by FEMA and the
city.
      (2)   All new construction or substantial improvement of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that
includes a fully-enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the
foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or
flood- resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwater.
         (a)   Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by
a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   Provide a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below
the opening; and
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices; provided, they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
         (b)   To comply with the “lowest floor” criteria of this chapter, the
unfinished or flood- resistant enclosure shall only be used for the parking of
vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
         (c)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         (d)   For crawlspace-foundation types, construction must follow the
guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Structures Located in
Special Flood Hazard Areas: National Flood Insurance Program Guidance,
specifically:
            1.   Below-grade crawlspaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet per second;
            2.   Interior grade of the crawlspace below the BFE must not be
more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
            3.   Height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the lowest
interior grade of the crawlspace to the bottom of the floor joist, must not
exceed four feet at any point; and
            4.   Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the
flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      (1)   Be floodproofed one foot or more above the base flood level so that
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications, and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
152.26(B)(3)(b); and
      (4)   (a)   Applicants who are floodproofing nonresidential buildings
should be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that
are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the
base flood level will be rated as one foot below).
         (b)   Floodproofing the building an additional foot will reduce
insurance premiums significantly.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   (a)   All manufactured homes in the floodplain to be placed or
substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the flood
protection elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately-anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   All manufactured homes in the floodplain need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area.
      (2)   In all areas of special flood hazard where the base flood elevation
has not been established, manufactured homes placed, substantially improved, or
having incurred substantial damage must be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two feet above
the highest adjacent grade and be securely anchored to an adequately-anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (3)   Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the
flood vent requirements in division (A)(2) above, except when the first floor,
including enclosed areas and crawlspace, is located above the base flood
elevation.
   (D)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking
system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and
security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; and/or
      (3)   Meet the requirements of division (C) above and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
   (E)   Critical facility.
      (1)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA, or
100-year floodplain).
         (a)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible
within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available.
         (b)   Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year
flood, whichever is higher.
      (2)   Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected
to the height utilized above.
      (3)   Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
      (4)   Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Flood hazard standards, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(1)
   Manufactured homes, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(6)(12)
   Nonresidential construction, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(3)(4)
   Recreational vehicles, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(14)
   Residential construction, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(2)(5)
§ 152.42 AE ZONES WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT NO FLOODWAYS.
   In areas with base flood elevations (but a regulatory floodway has not been
designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the city’s
FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point within the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(10)
§ 152.43 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.41(C) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that can carry debris and
increase erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3)
§ 152.44 ZONES WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   New construction, manufactured homes, and substantial improvements of
existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or crawlspace) elevated no less than two feet above the
highest adjacent grade at the building site.
   (B)   Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
§
152.41(A)(2).
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable federal or state regulations. Violations of the provisions
of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more than six
months, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-3) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 6-10-2015)
CHAPTER 153: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Codes
   
153.001   Building codes and standards adopted by reference
   
153.002   Uniform Plumbing Code
   
153.003   National Electrical Code
   
153.004   Uniform Code for Building Conservation
   
153.005   Northwest Energy Code
   
153.006   Americans with Disabilities Act
   
153.007   Mobile Home Rehabilitation Act
   
153.008   Permit Issuance
   
153.009   Fees
Building Permits; Inspections
   
153.020   Building Inspector
   
153.021   Building permit required
   
153.022   Permit fees
   
153.023   Inspections
   
153.024   Violations
House Numbering
   
153.035   Numbering required
   
153.036   City Engineer to direct
   
153.037   Whole number to 25 feet of ground
   
153.038   Odd and even numbers
   
153.039   Blocks numbered by hundreds
   
153.040   Violations
Basements
   
153.055   Ground floor pipe casing holes required
   
153.056   Storage prohibited
   
153.057   Notice to comply
   
153.058   Entrances to be protected
   
153.059   Fence or railing on stairways
   
153.060   Stairways to be protected
   
153.061   Gates to be kept closed
   
153.062   Violations
Watercourses
   
153.075   Building over creek prohibited
   
153.076   Placer Creek
   
153.077   South fork of Coeur d’Alene River
   
153.078   Canyon Creek
   
153.079   Nine Mile Creek
   
153.080   Violations
Miscellaneous Building Regulations
   
153.095   Awnings
   
153.096   Fire escapes
   
153.097   Lodging houses
Plumbing Regulations
   
153.110   Construction and use of buildings
   
153.111   Installations under City Engineer; authority
   
153.112   Connection required
   
153.113   Prohibited openings, connections, and deposits
   
153.114   Deposits near sewer prohibited
   
153.115   Licensure
   
153.116   Duties of plumbers
   
153.117   Inspections
   
153.118   Materials
   
153.119   Grades
   
153.120   Pipes
   
153.121   Traps
   
153.122   Joints
   
153.123   Fixtures trapped
   
153.124   Showers
   
153.125   Closets; vaults and cesspools
   
153.126   Violations
 
   
153.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODES
§ 153.001 BUILDING CODES AND STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Code adoption. The approved editions of the following nationally
recognized codes, as adopted by the state or the State Code Board, are adopted
as the official building codes of the city.
      (1)   International Building Code. The International Building Code, 2018
Edition, prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the
state or the State Building Code Board, together with any amendments or
revisions to the International Building Code made by the State Building Code
Board through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted.
         (a)   All rules promulgated by the State Code Board to provide
equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., accessibility guidelines and the Federal Fair
Housing Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., accessibility guidelines are
specifically included.
         (b)   The following specific minimum construction standards are
adopted.
            1.   The minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer
spacing is specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not
exceed four feet in height shall be four feet on center for vertical
reinforcement and two feet on center for horizontal reinforcement. Foundation
walls over four feet in height (unless closer spacing is specified by design or
engineering specifications) shall be 18 inches minimum on center for horizontal
and vertical reinforcement.
            2.   All continuous footings will require a minimum of two
horizontal reinforcing bars. Reinforcing bars shall be a minimum size of No. 4
and may be a minimum grade of 40.
            3.   The minimum roof design snow load shall be 60 pounds per
square foot (the exception being manufactured homes approved by the Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)).
            4.   The minimum depth for frost protection purposes from ground
surface to the bottom of a footing shall be 30 inches.
            5.   The ground snow load shall be 80 pounds per square foot.
      (2)   State Residential Code. The State Residential Code, 2020 Edition,
as adopted by the state or the State Building Code Board, consisting of the
International Residential Code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc.
and amended by the State Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, is adopted.
      (3)   State Energy Conservation Code. The State Energy Conservation Code,
2020 Edition, as adopted by the state or the State Building Code Board,
consisting of the International Energy Conservation Code prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc. and amended by the State Building Code Board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted.
      (4)   State Existing Building Code. The State Existing Building Code,
2018 Edition, as adopted by the state or the State Building Code Board,
consisting of the International Existing Building Code prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc. and amended by the State Building Code Board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted.
      (5)   State Manufactured Home Installation Standard. The State
Manufactured Home Installation Standard, as developed by the State Division of
Building Safety, is adopted.
      (6)   National Standard. American National Standard ICC/ANSI A117.1.
   (B)   Exemptions. Agricultural buildings, as defined by the International
Building Code, are exempt from the Building Code, but shall remain subject to
placement requirements and permits established by zoning regulations.
   (C)   Successive versions. The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall
be deemed superseded and successive versions of such codes, as they are adopted
by the State Building Code Board, are effective on the date any such codes are
made effective by the State Building Code Board.
   (D)   Copies on file. A copy of the latest edition of the foregoing codes
and standards shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer
for use and examination of and by the public.
   (E)   Fees. Fees for building permits and related Building Department
services shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-1) (Ord. 500, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2002-02, passed 12-10-
2002; Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-13-2008; Ord. 2008-02A, passed 1-12-2011; Ord.
2014-04, passed 12-10-2014; Ord. 2021-03, passed 4-14-2021)
§ 153.002 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by the city as
an ordinance of the city as fully as if it were set forth at length herein for
the purpose of providing certain minimum standards and requirements for the use
of and the design, construction, installation, improvement, extension, and
alteration of materials, piping, venting, fixtures, appliances, and
appurtenances in relation to “plumbing” and “plumbing systems,” as defined in
the Idaho Code, and to provide that all plumbing and plumbing systems shall be
designed, constructed, installed, improved, extended, and altered in
substantial accord with the Uniform Plumbing Code published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and as it shall
be amended from time to time and as such amendments or revisions shall be
adopted by the State Plumbing Board.
   (B)   Copies on file. Three copies of the Uniform Plumbing Code, latest
edition, together with all amendments thereto, duly certified by the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall be kept on file in his or her office for use and
examination of and by the public.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-2) (Ord. 418, passed 5-8-1973)
§ 153.003 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of the safeguarding
of persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the
use of electricity within the city, the National Electrical Code, prepared by
the National Fire Protection Association, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length
herein.
   (B)   Copies on file. Three copies of the National Electrical Code, latest
edition, duly certified by the City Clerk shall be kept on file in his or her
office for use and examination of and by the public.
   (C)   Violation. Any violation of the provisions contained within the
National Electrical Code shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. 412, passed 11-14-1972) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 UNIFORM CODE FOR BUILDING CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Adoption. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating and
controlling building and construction within the historical districts of the
city, the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, prepared by the International
Conference of Building Officials, latest edition thereof, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though
set forth at length herein.
   (B)   Copies on file. Three copies of the Uniform Code for Building
Conservation, latest edition thereof, and as the same may hereafter be amended,
duly certified by the City Clerk/Treasurer shall be kept on file in the office
of the City Clerk/Treasurer for use and examination of and by the public.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-5) (Ord. 507, passed 10-10-1989)
§ 153.005 NORTHWEST ENERGY CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city hereby adopts the latest edition of the Northwest
Energy Code, as published by the Bonneville Power Administration, the
Conversion Standard Equivalent Code to Chapter 53 of the Uniform Building Code,
as published by the Bonneville Power Administration, and Appendix Chapter 53 of
the Uniform Building Code, latest edition, as published by the International
Conference of Building Officials.
   (B)   Copies on file. Three copies of the Northwest Energy Code, latest
edition, and other codes as adopted in division (A) above, shall be duly
certified and filed for use by the public in the office of the City Clerk. An
additional copy of the adopted codes shall be maintained in the Building
Department.
   (C)   Administration of codes. The codes adopted above will be administered
in accordance with Chapters 1, 2, and 3 of the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code. It is the intent of the city that the cost of enforcement of the
provisions and monetary reimbursement for early adoption of this code shall be
provided by the Bonneville Power Administration.
   (D)   Violation.
      (1)   Each violation of this section or of any resolution, order, or
ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Each day such violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-6) (Ord. 513, passed 6-11-1991) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.006 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
   The Americans with Disabilities Act, part III, latest edition, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., is hereby adopted by the city as an ordinance of the
city as fully as if it were set forth at length herein for the purpose of the
city opting into Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 41, otherwise known as the State
Building Code Advisory Act.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-7)
§ 153.007 MOBILE HOME REHABILITATION ACT.
   The Mobile Home Rehabilitation Act, being Idaho Code Title 44, Chapter 25,
is hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance of the city, and as it may from
time to time be amended, as fully as if it were set forth at length herein as
an ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-8) (Ord. 98-05, passed 11-10-1998)
§ 153.008 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Duties of permit applicant shall include:
      (1)   Compliance with city’s Land Use Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances of the city.
      (2)   Has received final approval on a business/zoning development
permit, variance, conditional use permit, temporary hardship, final subdivision
plat, planned unit development, or zone change, if one is required;
      (3)   Has received necessary water, sewer, and health permits. Permit
approval shall be through East Shoshone Water District, South Fork Coeur
d’Alene River Sewer District, and Panhandle Health District;
      (4)   Has received an access, approach, or encroachment approval from the
city when applicable; and
      (5)   Has a floodplain determination from the floodplain map for the city
with approval for an elevation certificate within the Al designation and/or an
elevation certificate stamped by a state-licensed engineer, architect, or
surveyor when the parcel is located in a special flood hazard area.
   (B)   Work exempt from permit shall include one-story detached accessory
structures; provided, the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-9) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-13-2008)
§ 153.009 FEES.
   (A)   Fees for building permits and related Building Department services
shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Building valuation obtained from the Building Valuation Data published
by the International Conference of Building Officials’ (ICBO) Building
Standards magazine each year shall be used to determine valuation of
construction. Such valuation shall become effective on January 1 of the
calendar year following the ICBO publication.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-10) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-13-2008)
BUILDING PERMITS; INSPECTIONS
§ 153.020 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Chief of Fire District I shall be ex officio Fire Marshal and Building
Inspector and shall have the authority of a police officer, and it shall be his
or her duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and he or she shall
collect all fees hereunder and pay the same into the City Treasury, and shall
make a monthly report of all things done under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-1)
§ 153.021 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application; issuance. Every person, before erecting or remodeling any
building, by addition or otherwise, within the city shall submit a plan and
estimate of the cost of the proposed building operations and file the same with
the City Building Inspector or the Planning and Zoning Chair, and no work shall
be done thereon until the plan has been approved and a written permit to do the
work has been issued by the Chief of Fire District I.
   (B)   Kept on premises; inspection. Such permits shall be kept upon the
premises during progress of the work and be subject to inspection at all times.
   (C)   Revocation. A permit may be revoked at any time by the City Council
should sufficient cause exist, and all parties in interest shall be deemed to
have waived all claims for damages by reason of such revocation.
   (D)   Contractor registration. No building permit shall be issued to a
contractor for construction of any type without the contractor’s state
contractor registration number being presented by the contractor, except when
the permit applicant provides evidence to the satisfaction of the building
official that the applicant is exempt from the registration requirements
pursuant to Idaho Code Title 54, Chapter 52.
      (1)   The state contractor registration number shall be conspicuously
entered on the face of the permit so issued.
      (2)   No person engaged in construction activities who is exempt shall be
required to have a contractor registration number. A permit issued to an exempt
person shall conspicuously contain the phrase “no contractor registration
required” on the face of such permit.
      (3)   Exempt persons are set forth in Idaho Code § 54-5205, and include
those:
         (a)   Providing volunteer work;
         (b)   Construction activities fairly valued at less than $2,000; and
         (c)   Construction performed by a property owner.
      (4)   All issued building permits shall be posted at the construction
site in such a manner that the conspicuous statements are visible.
      (5)   The building official charged with the duty of issuing a permit
shall not be required to verify the contractor’s registration number or verify
the information provided to substantiate a claim for exemption. Accountability
shall be handled by the Bureau of Occupational Licenses and the State
Contractors Board.
      (6)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 54-5217, failure to register as required
by the State Contractor Registration Act, being Idaho Code Title 54, Chapter
52, is a misdemeanor, as further described in §
153.999.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 6-14-2006) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.022 PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for a building permit shall be as set by resolution of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-3) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 12-10-2002)
§ 153.023 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Duty to inspect. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Fire District I
to inspect, or cause to be inspected by Fire Department officers or members, as
often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts
and four times a year in the closely-built portions of the city, all buildings,
premises, and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings,
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any
ordinance of the city affecting the fire hazard.
   (B)   Order for removal or remedy; appeal. Whenever the Chief of Fire
District I or any officer or member thereof shall find any building or other
structure which for want of repairs, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition or for any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger other property, and whenever any officer or member
shall find, in any building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or
explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary
accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any other highly-inflammable
materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors, windows, and the like liable to interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he,
she, or they shall order the same to be removed or remedied and such order
shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or
buildings, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the Mayor, who shall, within
ten days, review such order and file his or her decision thereon, and unless
the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed
by such owner or occupant.
   (C)   Service of order. The service of any such order shall be made upon the
occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true
copy of the same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and
leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such
person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous
place on the door to the entrance of the said premises; whenever it may be
necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of the premises, such order may
be served either by delivering to and leaving with the said person a true copy
of the said order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the
officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner’s last known post
office address.
   (D)   Failure to comply. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such
order within ten days after said appeal shall have been determined, or, if no
appeal is taken then within ten days after the service of the said order, shall
be liable to a penalty as hereinafter stated.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.024 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 153.035 NUMBERING REQUIRED.
   All dwellings and business houses within the limits of city shall be
numbered as hereinafter directed.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-1)
§ 153.036 CITY ENGINEER TO DIRECT.
   The numbering hereinbefore indicated shall be done under the direction of
the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-2)
§ 153.037 WHOLE NUMBER TO 25 FEET OF GROUND.
   In numbering the houses, one whole number shall be allowed to every 25 feet
of ground wherever practicable, whether improved or vacant, and any house or
tenement with a lesser front than 25 feet shall receive a whole number.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-3)
§ 153.038 ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.
   (A)   East and west. On streets running east and west, odd numbers shall be
on the north side of the streets and even numbers on the south side of the
streets.
   (B)   North and south. On streets running north and south, odd numbers shall
be on the east side of the streets and even numbers shall be on the west side
of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-4)
§ 153.039 BLOCKS NUMBERED BY HUNDREDS.
   (A)   East and west.
      (1)   Each block shall be numbered by hundreds.
      (2)   All numbering on streets running east and west shall begin at First
Street with the number 100, the block between Second Street and Third Street
being numbered 200, and so on eastward in proper order.
      (3)   The portion of east and west streets lying west of First Street
shall receive numbers less than 100.
      (4)   Osborne Road, West Side Avenue, and Front Avenue shall be
considered as running east and west and be numbered accordingly.
      (5)   Canyon Avenue, Burke Road, and Cottage Grove Avenue shall be
considered as extensions of Bank Street and shall receive numbers which are
continuations, in proper order, of the numbers on Bank Street.
   (B)   North and south. All numbering on streets running north and south,
except on King Street and on Nine Mile Road, shall begin at Cypress Street and
Pine Street with the number 100, the block between River Street and Pine Street
being numbered 200, and so on southward in proper order. The portion of north
and south streets lying north of Cypress Avenue shall receive numbers less than
100. On King Street, the numbering shall begin at Bank Street with number one
and proceed southward in proper order; and on Nine Mile Road the numbering
shall begin at the South Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River with number one and
proceed northward in proper order.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-5)
§ 153.040 VIOLATIONS.
   Any owner, agent, or person having control of any dwelling or business house
of any and every kind and description, who shall violate, refuse, or neglect to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to penalty as provided in §
153.999 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
BASEMENTS
§ 153.055 GROUND FLOOR PIPE CASING HOLES REQUIRED.
   In order to enable the Fire Department to properly reach and extinguish
fires occurring in the basements of buildings in the city, which basements are
being used or will be used for the storage of goods or merchandise, without the
loss of valuable time in having to cut holes through wood and concrete floors
to such basements and for the purpose of gaining access thereto, every building
already erected and every building hereafter erected in the city where the
basement thereof is being used or is to be used for the storage of goods or
merchandise of any description shall be provided with ground floor pipe casing
holes constructed in and through the floors of the first story of such
building, extending down to and even with the basement ceiling or bottom of the
floor joist of such first-story floor so as to enable the Fire Department to
put a water-circulating nozzle through for the prompt extinguishment of any
fire occurring in any such basement. Such ground floor pipe casing holes shall
be constructed according to the plans therefor on file in the office of the
Chief of the Fire Department and shall be located and of such number as may be
determined upon by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1)
§ 153.056 STORAGE PROHIBITED.
   No goods or merchandise of any description shall be stored in any such
basement in such manner so as to interfere with the proper working of the
water-circulating nozzle used by the Fire Department which will pass through
any of such ground floor pipe casing holes; and no goods, merchandise, or other
obstructions shall be placed over the cover of such ground floor pipe casing
holes on the floor of the first story; and all such covers must at all times be
kept clear of all obstructions so as not to interfere with their prompt use by
the Fire Department in case of fire.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.057 NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire District I shall notify the owners of all
buildings now erected, where the basements are used for the storage of goods or
merchandise of any description, to place such ground floor pipe casings through
the floor of the first story within 60 days of the service of such notice.
   (B)   No plans of any building hereafter to be erected shall be accepted or
approved by the Chief of Fire District I or the City Engineer unless the plan
of the first floor thereof over a basement which is to be used for storing
goods or merchandise of any description shall show that the ground floor pipe
casing holes have been provided for, which will permit the Fire Department to
put a water-circulating nozzle through, and that the same are to be constructed
according to the plans therefor on file in the office of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-3)
§ 153.058 ENTRANCES TO BE PROTECTED.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or keep open
in an uncovered or unguarded condition any cellar or basement door, or stairway
leading into any cellar or basement from any street, alley, or sidewalk in the
city, or to leave or keep open in an uncovered or unguarded condition any pit,
grating, sidewalk opening, sidewalk elevator, coal hole, or any vault or other
subterranean passage opening from, into, or upon any street, alley, or sidewalk
in the city.
   (B)   Notice to comply. Upon the passage, approval, and publication of this
chapter, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to notify all persons
maintaining or using, on any sidewalk or alley in the city, any sidewalk
elevator, coal hole, chute, or stairway opening or leading into any basement or
cellar to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 15 days from the
date of such notice.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.059 FENCE OR RAILING ON STAIRWAYS.
   Each such stairway leading into any basement or cellar shall be enclosed
with a substantial fence of iron or metal pipe railing, in such a manner that
the lowest railing shall not be more than six inches above the sidewalk, a
second railing not more than 12 inches above the sidewalk, a third railing not
more than 20 inches above the sidewalk, and a fourth railing not more than 36
inches above the sidewalk; but, the total height of such fence or railing shall
not be less than 36 inches above the sidewalk, or, in lieu of a fence of iron
or metal pipe railing, it shall be lawful to securely enclose such basement
stairway, or other basement opening, with an iron fencing or grating of wire,
which shall not be less than three-sixteenths inch in thickness, and there
shall be kept and maintained at the entrance of such basement stairway or other
similar opening a grate, the specifications of which shall be similar to those
herein provided in case of outside railings or fencing.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-5)
§ 153.060 STAIRWAYS TO BE PROTECTED.
   Any person maintaining or using, on any street, alley, or sidewalk in the
city, any stairway leading down from any building, floor, or elevation above
any street, alley, or sidewalk must guard the rear of said stairway with a
substantial and effective iron railing.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-6)
§ 153.061 GATES TO BE KEPT CLOSED.
   Any person maintaining or using, on any street, alley, or sidewalk, in the
city, any sidewalk elevator, coal hole, or chute or other opening leading into
any basement or cellar, must, when the same is in use, properly guard and
enclose the same with suitable gate constructed in such a manner as to render
passage along such street, alley, or sidewalk safe and free from danger.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-7) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.062 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon
conviction therefor, be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-8) Penalty, see §
153.999
WATERCOURSES
§ 153.075 BUILDING OVER CREEK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build into, over, or upon any of the
streams or channels of the streams or any of the creeks or watercourses of the
city as the same now are, or as they may hereafter be established.
(Prior Code, § 9-5-1)
§ 153.076 PLACER CREEK.
   (A)   Channel established from south city boundary to point on High Street.
      (1)   Channel. The channel of the stream known as Placer Creek where it
flows through the city from a point on the south boundary line of the city to a
point on the monument line of High Street 153.10 feet westerly from the
monument marking the intersection of First Street and High Street of the city
is hereby located, designated, and established as follows, and the following
lines of survey and location are hereby adopted as the lines of survey and
location of the channel and course of such Placer Creek: Beginning at a point
on the south boundary line of the city 150 feet east of corner No. 2 of said
city boundary, running thence north 36 degrees 45 minutes east, 41 and no-
hundredths (0/100) feet to a point, thence north 46 degrees five minutes east,
64 and twenty-hundredths (0.2) feet to a point on the southerly line of Lot
Five, Block Two, South Wallace Townsite 20 distant easterly from the southwest
corner of said Lot Five; thence north 65 degrees, no minutes east, 125 feet to
a point; thence north 54 degrees, no minutes east 70 feet to the beginning of a
curve to the left; thence along the circumference of a curve whose radius is
110 feet and whose central angle is 66 degrees, no minutes, sixty-three and
thirty-six hundredths (63.36) feet to end of curve; thence north 12 degrees no
minutes west, one hundred eighty-five and ninety-four hundredths (185.94) feet
to a point on the north line of Lot One, Block Two, South Wallace Townsite, one
hundred forty-three and fifty-four hundredths (145.54) feet distant easterly
from the northwest corner of said Lot One; thence north seven degrees, no
minutes east, 280 feet to a point; thence north 18 degrees, five minutes east,
one hundred twenty-four and ninety-six (124.96) hundredths feet to a point;
thence north five degrees, no minutes east, 190 feet to a point on the monument
line of High Street one hundred fifty-three and ten-hundredths (153.10) feet
westerly from the monument marking the intersection of First Street and High
Street in the city.
      (2)   Width of channel. The width of such channel and watercourse of
Placer Creek shall be and the same is hereby established at 25 feet (e.g., it
shall be 12 and one-half feet on each side of the line hereinbefore described
in division (A)(1) above).
   (B)   Channel established through city.
      (1)   Channel. The channel of the stream known as Placer Creek through
the city is hereby located and established as follows, and the following lines
of survey and location are hereby adopted as the lines of survey and location
of the channel of Placer Creek: Beginning at a point in the center of the
channel of said Placer Creek, as it now runs, at a point where it crosses the
north side of River Street, thence south six degrees, ten minutes west 163 feet
along the center of said channel; thence south 34 degrees, 15 minutes west 315
feet; thence south 56 degrees, 10 minutes west 333 feet to a point opposite the
northwest corner of the Frances Holland Hospital; thence south 10 degrees, 15
minutes west 805 feet; thence south 27 degrees, 30 minutes west 255 feet;
thence south no degrees, 15 minutes east 246 feet; thence south 36 degrees, 15
minutes east 114 feet; thence south 28 degrees west 200 feet.
      (2)   Width of channel. The width of the channel of Placer Creek shall be
and the same is hereby established at 50 feet (e.g., it shall be 25 feet on
each side of the line hereinbefore described in division (B)(1) above).
(Prior Code, § 9-5-2)
§ 153.077 SOUTH FORK OF COEUR D’ALENE RIVER.
   (A)   Channel established through city. The channel of the stream known as
the South Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River through the city is hereby located
and established as follows, and the following lines of survey and location are
hereby adopted as the lines of survey and location of the channel of the South
Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River: Beginning at the most easterly point in the
channel of the South Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River, which falls within the
boundary line of the city, as is now established, thence through the center of
the channel thereof, as it now runs, south 32 degrees, 30 minutes west 257
feet; thence south 69 degrees, west 190 feet; thence north 69 degrees, 30
minutes west 383 feet; thence south 74 degrees, 45 minutes west 397 feet thence
south 46 degrees west 128 feet; thence south 38 degrees, five minutes west 231
feet; thence south 79 degrees, 15 minutes west 580 feet; thence north 81
degrees, 40 minutes west 232 feet; thence north 73 degrees, 48 minutes west,
366 feet; thence north 59 degrees west 156 feet; thence north 46 degrees, 25
minutes west 420 feet; thence north 47 degrees, 35 minutes west 530 feet to a
point where said river passes over the boundary line of the city.
   (B)   Width of channel. The width of the channel of the South Fork of the
Coeur d’Alene River shall be and the same is hereby established at 80 feet
(e.g., it shall be 40 feet on each side of the line hereinbefore described in
division (A) above).
(Prior Code, § 9-5-3)
§ 153.078 CANYON CREEK.
   (A)   Channel established through city. The channel of the stream known as
Canyon Creek through the city is hereby located and established as follows, and
the following lines of survey and location are hereby adopted as the lines of
survey and location of the channel of Canyon Creek: Beginning at a point in the
channel of the said Canyon Creek where it crosses the most northerly boundary
line of the city, as located up Canyon Creek Canyon; thence south 18 degrees,
45 minutes west 495 feet; thence south two degrees, five minutes west 106 feet;
thence south 33 degrees east 101.5 feet; thence south eight degrees east 131
feet; thence south 28 degrees east 280 feet; thence south eight degrees, 25
minutes west 122 feet; the south no degrees, 18 minutes west 207 feet to a
point where the center of said Canyon Creek channel meets the South Fork of the
Coeur d’Alene River channel.
   (B)   Width of channel. The width of the channel of Canyon Creek shall be
and the same is hereby established at 40 feet (e.g., it shall be 20 feet on
each side of the line hereinbefore described in division (A) above).
(Prior Code, § 9-5-4)
§ 153.079 NINE MILE CREEK.
   (A)   Channel established through city. The channel of the stream known as
Nine Mile Creek through the City is hereby located and established as follows,
and the following lines of survey and location are hereby adopted as the lines
of survey and location of the channel of Nine Mile Creek: Beginning at a point
in the center of Nine Mile Creek channel, as now located, where the same
intersects the most northerly boundary line of the city, as located and
established up Nine Mile Creek Canyon; thence south 43 degrees, 45 minutes west
200 feet; thence south four degrees west along the center of said channel 147
feet; thence south 32 degrees, 45 minutes west 146 feet; thence south one
degree, 15 minutes west 100 feet; thence south 57 degrees, 30 minutes west 127
feet; thence south 21 degrees, 45 minutes west 76 feet; thence south 50 degrees
west 270 feet to a point where the center of said Nine Mile Creek channel meets
the center of the channel of the South Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River.
   (B)   Width of channel. The width of the channel of Nine Mile Creek shall be
and the same is hereby established at 30 feet (e.g., it shall be 15 feet on
each side of the line hereinbefore described in division (A) above).
(Prior Code, § 9-5-5)
§ 153.080 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-5-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 153.095 AWNINGS.
   No person shall erect or maintain over or above the sidewalk space of any
street or avenue of the city any awning or shade of any kind for any purpose,
unless every part thereof shall be at least seven feet above the surface of the
sidewalk or sidewalk space. Any person violating the provisions of section
shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-1) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.096 FIRE ESCAPES.
   (A)   Required. Buildings of three stories or more in height now or
hereafter erected in the city shall be provided with sufficient well-
constructed, easily-accessible fire escapes or other suitable means of exit.
All fire escapes shall be kept clear of all obstructions whatsoever. They shall
be placed at the ends of halls or passages with a door or window on each floor
to each fire escape in the building. All halls and passages must extend to
outer walls of buildings hereafter built. The doors and windows leading to fire
escapes above the first story shall be provided with fastenings that can be
easily opened.
   (B)   Specifications.
      (1)   Material. All fire escapes shall be constructed entirely of iron.
      (2)   Side rails. The ladder shall have side rails of three-eighths inch
by one-half inch wrought iron, placed not less than 14 inches apart.
      (3)   Rounds. The rounds shall be five-eighths inch diameter, placed 14
inches apart and well secured to rails.
      (4)   Height. The ladder shall extend from a height of ten feet above the
sidewalk or ground to a distance of 2 feet above and over the fire wall.
      (5)   Hinged extension. There shall be a hinged extension to all ladders
where the first balcony is more than 12 feet from the ground and is so situated
that a fixed ladder would not interfere with doors or windows below; this
extension shall reach from within six feet of the ground to the first balcony.
   (C)   Balcony.
      (1)   Required. A balcony not less than two feet and six inches wide by a
length equal to the full width of the window or door and width of ladder space
shall be constructed on each floor at each ladder.
      (2)   Floor. The balconies shall have floors made strong enough to carry
a load of 100 pounds to the square foot, and as approved by the Chief of Fire
District I.
      (3)   Ladder openings. Ladder openings in the floor of balconies must not
be less than 20 inches by 20 inches.
      (4)   Floor rail. The floor rail of all balconies shall be of three-
eighths inch by two-inch wrought iron or its equivalent, and shall be supported
by strong braces of three-fourths inch by two-inch wrought iron at an angle of
45 degrees.
      (5)   Handrails. Handrails of balconies shall be made of solid square or
flat iron not less than one-half inch by one and one-half inch, securely
fastened together and to the walls. Space from handrail to floor to be filled
in with grille work or additional rails and uprights.
      (6)   Fastening to building. All balconies and ladders shall be securely
fastened to brick buildings by means of bolts or rods not less than five-
eighths inch diameter and not less than four inches long.
   (D)   Markings of fire escapes. It is hereby made the duty of every person
owning or having control of any public hall, office building, hotel, school
building, factory, or other structure where fire escapes are required to be
kept under the laws of the state to keep red lights burning in such manner so
as to indicate the place of such escape at all hours during the night, in such
manner that they may be easily indicated to the occupants of such buildings in
case of fire.
   (E)   Violation. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-2) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.097 LODGING HOUSES.
   (A)   Requirements. It shall be the duty of every person owning or having
control of any lodging house within the city where ten or more rooms are kept
for lodging purposes to keep exit signs burning in such manner so as to
indicate the places of exit from such lodging house at all hours during the
night, in such manner that such places of exit may be easily indicated to the
occupants of such lodging house.
   (B)   Notice to be posted. It shall be the duty of every person owning or
having control of any such lodging house as is mentioned in division (A) above,
to provide written or printed notices and keep them posted in each of the rooms
of such lodging house, which notices shall state the purpose for such exits and
where they are located throughout the building.
   (C)   Violations. Any person who shall fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-3) Penalty, see §
153.999
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
§ 153.110 CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF BUILDINGS.
   No person shall hereafter erect or remodel any building, by addition or
otherwise, within the limits of the city so that any part of such building may
be inadequate or defective in respect to plumbing, ventilation, sewerage, or
other usual or necessary precaution for the security of life or health; nor
shall any builder, owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or premises allow
anything to be done in or about such building or premises dangerous to life or
health.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.111 INSTALLATIONS UNDER CITY ENGINEER; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   All sanitary drains and plumbing arrangements hereafter constructed
within the limits of the city shall be done under the personal supervision of
the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-2)
   (B)   (1)   The City Engineer shall have authority to enter upon any
premises at reasonable hours and examine any drains or plumbing; and if any
substances are discharged therein liable to injure the drains or stop the flow
of sewerage, or if the plumbing or drains are defective, the City Engineer
shall notify the owner or occupant, or the plumber if the work is new and has
not been approved, and, if within reasonable time, not to exceed ten days, the
wrong is not remedied, the City Engineer may employ any other licensed plumber
to remedy the wrong caused by the one who did the original work, if the plumber
was at fault.
      (2)   Upon the completion of such work, the City Attorney shall commence
suit in the name of the city before any court having jurisdiction thereof to
recover the entire amount of expense of such plumbing and costs of suit of the
owner or occupant or of the plumber and his or her bondspersons, if the plumber
is at fault.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-3)
§ 153.112 CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Within ten days after notice from the City Engineer, the owner or
occupant of any building or premises within 200 feet from a sewer that is
occupied a portion of the day shall connect with the city sewers all water
closets, wash stands, slop stands, sinks, or other plumbing arrangements of
such premises; or, if proper drainage facilities do not exist, such owner or
occupant shall provide at least one water closet suitably arranged for use as a
urinal and slop stand; and, if such building is used as a laundry or boarding
house, suitable sinks and slop stands shall be provided in addition to and
separate from the closet.
   (B)   If, within the period of such notice, the owner or occupant does not
comply with all the requirements of this chapter and other regulations of the
City Council, the City Engineer may employ any licensed plumber to provide the
fixtures at the expense of the city, and, upon the completion of the work, the
City Attorney shall commence suit against the owner or occupant, in the name of
the city, before any court having jurisdiction thereof, to recover the entire
amount of expense of such plumbing and costs of suit.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-4) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.113 PROHIBITED OPENINGS, CONNECTIONS, AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   No plumber, drain layer, or other person shall open or uncover any
manhole, air inlet, flush tank, or private connection with the public sewer
without permission of the City Engineer.
   (B)   No plumber, drain layer, or other person shall leave openings, or
fixtures, without ample protection against the admission of dirt, rubbish, or
other injurious matter.
   (C)   No spring, creek, surface, or drainage water, cesspool, boiler,
radiator, refrigerator, or soda fountain shall connect directly with the city
sewer, but open fixtures properly vented and trapped shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-5) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.114 DEPOSITS NEAR SEWER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited upon the ground, or
in any hole or vault in the ground, within 200 feet of any sewer, any washwater
or waste water, liquid, or solid filth, except what is necessary to manure the
soil.
   (B)   All vaults or cesspools within 200 feet of any sewer must be filled
with clean gravel to within one foot of the surface, then one-half of a barrel
of lime shall be thrown in and again filled with clean gravel even with the
surface of the ground, and in case of subsequent settlement, more gravel must
be added.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-6) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.115 LICENSURE.
   Every plumber or drain layer, before laying any drain or doing any plumbing
work on any building within the limits of the city, except repairing (and
repairs are limited to mending leaks in the drain or vent pipes and forcing out
obstructions in the pipes) shall be required to be licensed in the state of
Idaho. Each person, before commencing work, shall provide to the City Clerk
proof of licensing, a certificate of insurance for bonding or otherwise, and
any other relevant documentation required for licensed plumbers as may from
time to time be required. It shall be considered a violation of this section
when the city deems the public health, safety, or welfare are endangered or
threatened, or should the city find that the entity is not licensed or
forbidden to do business in the state.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-7) (Ord. 2001-02, passed 2-13-2001) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.116 DUTIES OF PLUMBERS.
   (A)   Notify engineer. The plumber shall notify the City Engineer of the
time all work will be commenced requiring a permit; he or she shall also
arrange times with the engineer for inspection of sewer and cesspool
connections, and tests shall be performed by the plumber in the presence of the
engineer.
   (B)   Prosecution of work. When work has once commenced, it shall be
prosecuted with due diligence until completed; but it shall not be considered
completed until approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Traffic. Public travel must be impeded as little as possible.
   (D)   Barricades. Sufficient barricades against accidents shall be placed
around excavations at all times, and at night, lights shall be displayed in
addition. Additional provisions can be found in §
93.006.
   (E)   Excavations. No excavation in any street or alley shall remain open
for more than 48 hours, and when such excavation is refilled, it shall be done
in six-inch layers, and shall be thoroughly tamped or puddled as directed by
the City Engineer.
   (F)   Defects. Any defects in plumbing, settlement of the ground, or other
damage that may arise through fault of the plumber within 60 days from date of
inspection shall be repaired at the expense of the plumber, as provided in §
153.116.
   (G)   Violation. Any plumber or other person making or causing to be made
any trap, contraction of pipe, or other obstruction to the free flow of air
throughout any system of plumbing, except as provided in the regulations of the
City Council, shall, if a plumber, forfeit his or her license in addition to
the penalties imposed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-8) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.117 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Approval required. All work must be of good quality, free from
defects, and subject to the approval of the City Engineer, and no drains or
fixtures shall be used until so approved. Before the fixtures are placed, the
whole system of pipes shall be hermetically sealed and filled with water to the
top, and any imperfections disclosed shall be repaired before final approval.
   (B)   Certificate of approval. Upon the completion of any work or drainage
system done under the authority of this chapter, and that complies with all the
regulations of the City Council, the City Engineer shall issue a certificate of
approval to the plumber to whom the permit authorizing the work was issued;
provided, all lawful fees accruing or resulting from the work shall have been
paid.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-9)
§ 153.118 MATERIALS.
   (A)   All plumbing fixtures, traps, and catch basins shall be of
nonabsorbent materials, and of patterns subject to the regulation of the City
Council and approval of the City Engineer.
   (B)   The part of the drain or sewer pipe to a point four feet outside of
the building line of any building the drain may pass under or connect must be
six-inch vitrified salt-glazed clay pipe; provided, that the building line of
such building is on the street or alley line, and where the building line of
such building is not on the street or alley line, the vitrified salt-glazed
pipe passing inside such street or alley line may be diminished to four inches
and continue so until within four feet of the line of building. All other pipes
shall be of lead or cast iron properly coated with tar or asphaltum.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-10)
§ 153.119 GRADES.
   All drains shall be of such size and laid on such grades as the City
Engineer shall direct, but in no case shall any drain be laid on a lesser grade
than one-eighth inch per two feet. The expense of such engineering shall be
paid by the plumber or drain layer.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-11)
§ 153.120 PIPES.
   (A)   Placement. All pipes and fixtures shall be arranged so as to permit
any examination and repairing. They shall be amply protected from injury, and
no pipe shall be placed on the outside of any building except by permission of
the City Engineer.
   (B)   Change in direction. All changes in direction of soil or waste pipes
shall be made with not sharper than one-eighth bends and Y-branches of 45
degrees or less; no sanitary Ts shall be used, except on written permission of
the City Engineer.
   (C)   Depth of underground pipes. All underground pipes on the outside of
buildings shall be laid not less than 18 inches below the surface of the
adopted grade.
   (D)   Double hubs. No double hubs shall be used in soil or waste pipes.
   (E)   Soil and vent pipes. All soil and vent pipes of any building shall
terminate at least two feet above the roof, five feet above the highest
shutters, windows, or other openings, five feet from any flue, and ten feet
from any window or opening of any other building.
   (F)   Flashing. All soil and vent pipes terminating at the roof are to be
flashed with sheet lead, not less than four pounds per square foot.
   (G)   Size of soil pipe. No soil pipe shall be less than four inches
interior diameter and shall extend, with undiminished size, from the cesspool
or drain to a proper point above the building to be drained.
   (H)   Waste pipes.
      (1)   Placement. Waste pipes from all fixtures shall run as direct as
practicable to the soil pipes, and pipes may be branched together before
entering the soil pipe by making proper enlargement below the junction, equal
to the combined area of the pipes united; provided, the enlargement shall not
be greater than the area of the soil pipes.
      (2)   Interior diameter. Waste pipes shall be of the following interior
diameter for each of the following fixtures:
Fixture Type Waste Pipe Diameter
Fixture Type Waste Pipe Diameter
Bathtub      1.5 inches
Catch basin  4 inches
Closet       4 inches
Shower bath  2 inches
Sink         1.5 inches
Slop hopper  4 inches
Urinal       1.5 inches
Wash bowl    1.25 inches
Wash tray    1.25 inches
 
   (I)   Vent pipes.
      (1)   Branching.
         (a)   Vent pipes may be branched together by making a proper
enlargement above the junction equal to the combined area of the united pipes,
but no vent shall branch into the soil pipes unless by special permission of
the City Engineer.
         (b)   Vents shall not be connected or united lower than one foot above
the top of the highest fixtures so united.
      (2)   Prohibited use. No earthenware, sheet metal, or chimney flue shall
be used as a vent pipe.
      (3)   Diameter. The vent pipe from the trap of each fixture shall be of
the same size as the waste pipe, except the closet slop hopper and catch basin
vents, which shall not be less than two inches in diameter.
      (4)   Length. All vent pipes 30 feet in length shall be increased one-
half inch in diameter for each additional length not exceeding 30 feet.
   (J)   Grade; stop and waste cocks. All pipes serving water to any plumbing
fixture shall be laid on sufficient grade, and with necessary stop and waste
cocks, to drain dry when the water is shut off.
   (K)   Cast iron pipes and fittings.
      (1)   Extra heavy grade.
         (a)   All cast iron pipes and fittings used below the two top floors
of buildings more than two stories high shall be of the grade known to commerce
as “extra heavy,” and the pipe shall be of the following weight per linear
foot:
 
Pipe Type   Weight per Linear Foot
2-inch pipe 5.5 pounds per linear foot
3-inch pipe 9.5 pounds per linear foot
4-inch pipe 13 pounds per linear foot
5-inch pipe 17 pounds per linear foot
6-inch pipe 20 pounds per linear foot
 
         (b)   In buildings of two stories or less, the standard grade may be
used.
      (2)   Standard grade.
         (a)   Standard grade of lead pipe shall be the Lead Industries
Association’s standards, which are as follows:
Pipe Size Weight per Foot
-         Pounds Ounces
Pipe Size   Weight per Foot
-           Pounds Ounces
1 inch      2      0
1.25 inches 2      8
1.5 inches  3      8
2 inches    4      0
3 inches    4      12
4 inches    8      10
 
         (b)   Sheet lead shall weigh not less than four pounds per square
foot.
   (L)   Fastened to joists or walls. All pipes not resting on a solid bed of
earth shall be securely fastened to joists or walls with iron straps or
hangers.
   (M)   Strainers. All waste pipes, except those of water closets, shall be
provided with strong metallic strainers securely fastened in place.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-12) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.121 TRAPS.
   (A)   Specifications. All traps, except grease traps, shall be of the same
diameter as the pipes. They shall have at least a one and one-fourth inch seal,
and shall be crown vented to protect from syphonage; they shall also be
provided with a trap screw for cleaning.
   (B)   Grease traps.
      (1)   Outside building. Grease traps on the outside of a building shall
be properly vented and made of cement, earthenware, or brick, and shall not be
less than 12 inches in diameter.
      (2)   Inside building. Inside grease traps shall be made of lead or cast
iron, having an airtight screw for cleaning, at least four inches in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-13) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.122 JOINTS.
   (A)   Clay pipe. All clay pipe joints shall be made with oakum gaskets and
portland cement; one part clean, sharp sand to one part of portland cement, or
cement equally good, firmly hand-pressed into place.
   (B)   Iron pipe. All iron pipe joints shall be made with oakum gaskets and
soft lead thoroughly caulked. All lead pipe joints shall be wiped with solder
joints; no so-called solder unions will be allowed. Joints of iron and lead
pipe shall be made by inserting a brass sleeve of ferrule into the iron pipe
and caulking the joint with the oakum and lead, and the joint of the ferrule
with the lead pipe shall be a wiped joint. All joints must be left smooth on
the inside. The union of hopper, closet, bowl, and soil pipe shall be made with
a raymond ferrule, or an equally good ferrule.
   (C)   Separate trench required. Water and soil pipes shall not be laid in
the same trench.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-14) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.123 FIXTURES TRAPPED.
   All plumbing fixtures or openings for the reception of sewerage shall be
separately trapped as near the fixtures as possible, and no waste from any
fixture shall empty into the trap of another. The sewerage from laundries,
boarding house kitchens, bars, and counters shall pass through a suitable
grease trap.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-15) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.124 SHOWERS.
   The floors of all shower stalls shall be lined with sheet lead and be turned
up the side walls at least six inches, when laid on cement or concrete, to be
given a coating of asphaltum on both sides, including the upstands, if laid on
wood, place a layer of asphalt-saturated building paper under the pan and coat
the inside and upstands with asphaltum, securely solder the two-inch waste to
the lead pan, using a brass shower pan strainer of an approved pattern.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-16) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.125 CLOSETS; VAULTS AND CESSPOOLS.
   (A)   All water closets shall be sufficiently flushed after service with
clear water. Outside closets may be hopper closets, and they may be flushed by
direct service, but no hopper closet shall be placed or used on the inside of
any building that is occupied. Inside closets shall be syphon, washouts, or
other patterns meeting the approval of the City Engineer, and shall be flushed
indirectly from a separate tank.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-17)
   (B)   All closet vaults and cesspools shall be constructed with adequate
provisions for ventilation and cleaning out, and no vault or cesspool may be
connected with any building until so arranged as to prevent the admission of
sewer gas to the building.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-18) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.126 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who omits, refuses to comply with, or willfully violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the misdemeanor provisions
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 54-5217, failure to register as required by
the State Contractor Registration Act, as described in §
153.021, is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county’s jail for a term not to exceed six months. Either
or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and, in addition thereto,
any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 2006-01, passed 6-14-2006)
CHAPTER 154: SITE DEVELOPMENT
Section
Site Development Regulations
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Authority and control; permit or approval required
   
154.04   Application
   
154.05   Performance bond
   
154.06   Significant trees
   
154.07   Exemptions
   
154.08   Standards
   
154.09   Tree trimming
   
154.10   Unlawful abuse of trees
   
154.11   Appeal
   
154.12   Violations
Excavation Control
   
154.25   Purpose and scope
   
154.26   Construction, demolition, and renovation
   
154.27   Excavations; exemptions
   
154.28   Subdivisions and planned unit development
   
154.29   Funding; enforcement
 
   
154.99   Penalty
SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city without preventing the reasonable development of land;
   (B)   To encourage site development on public and private property,
including clearing, excavation, filling, and tree trimming and pruning in such
a manner so as to minimize hazards to life, health, and property;
   (C)   To preserve and enhance the city’s physical and aesthetic character by
preventing untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees, bushes,
hedges, shrubs, ground cover, or other landscaping material;
   (D)   To minimize surface water runoff and diversion which may contribute to
flooding or erosion;
   (E)   To reduce siltation in the city’s streams, storm sewer systems, and
public roadside improvements;
   (F)   To reduce the risk of slides and the creation of unstable city sites;
   (G)   To promote city- and site-planning practices that are consistent with
the city’s natural topography, soils, and vegetative features while at the same
time recognizing that certain factors, such as insects, disease, danger of
fallings, proximity to existing and proposed structures and improvements,
interference with utility services, protection of scenic views, and the
realization of a reasonable enjoyment of property may require the removal of
certain trees, bushes, shrubs, hedges, ground cover, or other landscaping
materials;
   (H)   To ensure prompt development, restoration, and replanting and
effective erosion control of property after land clearing and grading;
   (I)   To implement the goals and objectives of all city, county, state, and
federal law controlling soil conservation, environmental protection,
excavating, timber, logging, supply stabilization acts, and other environmental
acts which may be passed from time to time;
   (J)   To implement and further the city’s Comprehensive Plan; and
   (K)   To implement and further the city’s Plan within the city’s area of
impact.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-1) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY or CITY PROPERTIES. The city of Wallace, Shoshone County, Idaho, all of
the real property dedicated, deeded, or leased to the city or otherwise under
the physical control of the city, including, but not limited to, public rights-
of-way and city parks.
   CLEARING. Any activity which removes one-third or more of the vegetative
cover, foliage, and/or trees, including, but not limited to, root mat removal
and/or topsoil removal within any property line boundaries.
   CONTIGUOUS LAND. Parcels adjoining and touching other land and having the
same owner regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate
tax lot numbers or were purchased at different times, lie in different
sections, are different government lots, or are separated from each other by
public or private roads or rights-of-way.
   EXCAVATION. Any cutting, digging, scooping, or other methods of removing
earth or vegetative materials.
   FILLING. Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials.
   GRADING. Any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination
thereof, including the real property in its excavated or filled condition.
   GROUND COVER. Types of vegetation which are normally terrestrial, and shall
include, but not be limited to, trees less than four inches in diameter
measured at four and one-half feet above the ground level directly adjacent to
and at the highest existing point below that tree.
   MAJOR PROJECT. A project involving clearing or grading of more than 5,000
square feet of land, including, but not limited to, soil, topsoil, rocks,
sediment, vegetation, and the like, removal or clearing of more than three
trees, or the excavation or filling of more than ten cubic yards of material
per contiguous parcel(s) per year.
   MINOR PROJECT. A project involving clearing, grading, tree removal,
excavation, or fill that is less than 5,000 square feet of land, including, but
not limited to, soil, topsoil, rocks, sediment, vegetation, and the like,
removal or clearing of less than three trees, or the excavation or filling of
less than ten cubic yards of material per contiguous parcel per year.
   OWNER. The legal or record owner or owners of real property within the city
limits.
   PARCEL. Real property within the boundaries of an ad valorem tax lot
description as found in the county’s ad valorem tax records.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street between the roadway and a sidewalk.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
association, limited liability company, professional corporation, or any group
or combination acting as a unit.
   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree that is on city, county, or other public property
owned by the city, including, but not limited to, street rights-of way.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a public street improved, designed, or ordinarily
used by the general public for vehicle travel.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a public sidewalk improved, designed, or
ordinarily used by the general public for pedestrian travel.
   SIGNIFICANT TREE. Any tree that has a trunk diameter of 12 inches or more
measured at four feet six and inches above the ground level directly adjacent
to and at the highest existing grade below that tree.
   SLASH. The vegetation left on the ground after natural or human-caused
disturbances.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of a public right-of-way
dedicated or deeded to the city for use by the general public for purposes of
vehicular travel, whether or not maintained by the city and whether or not open
for vehicular traffic.
   TREE. Living, standing, woody plant having one erect perennial stem (trunk)
at least three inches in diameter at a point four feet and six inches above the
ground directly adjacent to and at the highest existing grade below that tree,
a definitively formed crown of foliage, and a mature height of at least 13
feet.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-2) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022)
§ 154.03 AUTHORITY AND CONTROL; PERMIT OR APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   City to control. The city shall have authority and control over all
trees, earth materials, or other landscaping materials, lying within the city
limits.
      (2)   Prohibited conduct. No person shall engage in major projects, as
defined herein, or any clearing or removal of any significant tree (public or
private) within the city limits or its area of impact without having complied
with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Land clearing and grading permit. Obtain a land clearing and grading
permit from the city by submitting an appropriate application to the City
Clerk. Said procedure for securing such permit shall be as follows:
      (1)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. Obtain, from the
City Clerk, an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which shall be
approved of by the Historic Preservation Commission or the city’s Planning and
Zoning Commission (hereafter referred to as the Planning and Zoning Commission)
after a hearing is held and a proposed plan for the project is approved;
      (2)   Certificate of compliance. Having obtained from the appropriate
local, state, or federal agency a certificate of compliance or a permit (e.g.,
fire hazard management agreement, notification of forest practice agreement
with the State Department of Lands, or other like certificate or permit from
such agencies as the Department of Water Quality, Environmental Protection
Agency, Bureau of Lands, Bureau of Land Management, National and/or State
Forest Service, or other appropriate agency); and
      (3)   Approval of permit. Following approval of the certificate of
appropriateness and the receipt by the property owner of all other necessary or
required certificates or permits, the owner shall cause each such certificate
or permit to be filed with the City Clerk, who may issue a permit.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-3) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Form; required information. An application for a land clearing permit
or certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted on a form provided by the
city. If the proposed action qualifies as a major project, then the following
information shall accompany the application:
      (1)   Property owner’s name and the applicant’s name, if different from
the owner;
      (2)   Legal description of the property, including parcel number(s);
      (3)   General plot plan that shall include the following information:
         (a)   General vicinity map;
         (b)   Narrative description of the entire proposed project;
         (c)   Locations and dimensions of buffer areas to be maintained or
established, and locations and descriptions of proposed erosion control devices
or structures which shall be in accordance with state best-management
practices;
         (d)   Identification and location of any significant trees;
         (e)   Note whether any portion of the project, including removal of
even one tree, is on city or other public property;
         (f)   Site disturbance plan, drawn to scale, including adjacent roads,
prominent features of the land, and location of proposed work;
         (g)   Slash abatement plan(s); and
         (h)   Slope percentage information for entire project area.
      (4)   Property boundaries indicating extent and location of proposed
clearing and grading activities, road, skid trails, and major physical features
of the property (e.g., streams, ravines, and the like). If the proposed project
involves site disturbance within five feet of the property line, a survey shall
be completed and provided with the application, or a verified agreement between
the adjacent property owner(s) and the applicant shall be submitted with the
application that includes a statement agreeing to the location of the property
line and consent to the proposed work;
      (5)   Disclosure of any previous or existing code violation(s) on the
parcel(s) and if/how they have been rectified; and
      (6)   As determined at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, other information as deemed appropriate to this subchapter may be
required in instances related to geologic hazard, shoreline protection, or
project scope.
   (B)   Permit fee. A permit fee for each acre or portion thereof shall be
established by resolution of the City Council. Permit fees apply only to major
projects. Fees shall be waived for all other permits required under §
154.01.
   (C)   Review by officials.
      (1)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of an application for a permit or
certificate of appropriateness and receipt of all other necessary and
appropriate local, state, and federal certificates or permits, shall submit the
application, certificates, and permits to the Planning and Zoning Commission,
which shall hold a hearing and render a decision by a majority vote of the
Planning and Zoning Commission whether to issue said permit or certificate of
appropriateness, which decision shall be made within 45 working days from the
date of submission of a completed application, unless an extension, is
authorized by the applicant or good cause shown why such an extension is
necessary.
      (2)   If such an extension is required, the applicant shall receive a
written notification from the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the 45
working days from submission as to the basis for said extension and the length
of the extension with a date specific upon which the decision is anticipated to
be rendered.
   (D)   Term or extension of permit.
      (1)   Any permit granted under this subchapter shall expire 12 months
from the date of issuance.
      (2)   Upon a showing of good cause, a permit may be extended by a
majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission for one additional 12-month
period.
   (E)   Amendment to plans. Once a permit or certificate of appropriateness is
issued, no change or amendment shall be made to the approved plans without the
written authorization by a majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (F)   Revocation, suspension, or termination of a permit or certificate of
appropriateness. The permit or certificate of appropriateness may be revoked,
suspended, or terminated by the city because of incorrect information supplied
in the owner’s application, any violation of the provisions of this subchapter,
or other violations of local, state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations.
   (G)   Notice posted. Within five business days of the submission of an
application to the City Clerk, the applicant shall prominently post a notice
including a copy of the application in a conspicuous location adjacent to
public right-of-way on the subject property. Notices shall not be nailed or
screwed onto trees.
   (H)   Appeal. An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and/or the City Council, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-4) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.05 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Surety bonds. On major projects, the Planning and Zoning Commission
may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to assure
that the work shall be completed in accordance with the permit. Bonds, if
required, shall be furnished by the property owner, or other person or agent in
control of the property. The amount of such bond shall not exceed the estimated
costs of the total restoration work planned. Such estimation must be approved
and signed off by the city engineer if no contractor estimate is available.
   (B)   Cash bond; instrument of credit. In lieu of a surety bond, the
applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the City Clerk in
an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-6) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.06 SIGNIFICANT TREES.
   No significant trees, as defined by §
154.02, shall be removed without first obtaining a land clearing permit or
certificate of appropriateness from the city. Development plans may be required
to be modified or changed by the city when necessary to preserve individual
trees or groups of trees and in order to remain consistent with the objectives
and goals of this subchapter. In the case of proposed removal of a public tree,
a certificate of appropriateness shall only be granted with the approval of the
Mayor or a majority of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-7) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Projects requiring majority approval by the Historic Preservation
Commission or Planning and Zoning Commission under
Chapter 156 of this code, and that are not inconsistent with this subchapter,
and/or by the majority approval of the City Council; provided, that nothing in
this section exempts land clearing and/or grading on such projects requiring
majority approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be in
accordance with such approval and the criteria and information required of the
applicable city, county, state, or federal laws, rules, and regulations;
   (B)   (1)   Land clearing and grading in emergency situations involving
immediate danger to life or property;
      (2)   Within 30 days after the danger has been resolved, if the actions
taken included removing a significant tree, removing any public tree, or
constituted a major project, an application for a certificate of appropriate
shall be submitted for approval by the Historic Preservation Commission/
Planning and Zoning Commission;
   (C)   The removal of dead trees or of diseased or damaged trees which
constitute a hazard to life or property, as evidenced by a written statement
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission by a qualified expert; and
   (D)   Cemetery graves.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-8) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022)
§ 154.08 STANDARDS.
   (A)   All land clearing and grading, including clearing and grading exempt
from the requirements for a permit in §
154.04, as well as clearing and grading authorized by the city pursuant to this
subchapter, shall conform to the following standards and provisions, unless
otherwise recommended in an approved soil engineering, engineering geology,
hydrology, or forest management plan where the alternate procedures will be
equal or superior in achieving the policies of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition, the following standards and provisions shall be the
governing criteria for the issuance or denial of land clearing and grading
permits or certificates of appropriateness under this chapter:
      (1)   General regulations, including:
         (a)   The clearing and/or grading will not create or contribute to
landslides, accelerated soil creepage, settlement and subsidence, or hazards
associated with strong ground motion and soil liquefaction;
         (b)   The proposal shall contain reasonable provisions for the
preservation of natural land and water features created by natural processes
(not human-made), vegetation, drainage, and other indigenous natural features
of the site;
         (c)   The clearing, grading, or excavating will not create or
contribute to flooding, erosion, or increased turbidity, siltation, or other
forms of pollution;
         (d)   No ground cover or trees which are within a maximum of 15 feet
of the annual high water mark of creeks, streams, lakes, and other shoreline
areas or within ten feet of the top of the bank of the same shall be removed,
nor shall any mechanical equipment operate in such areas; provided, the
conditions deemed by the city to constitute a public nuisance may be removed;
and provided, a property owner shall not be prohibited from making landscaping
improvements where such improvements are consistent with the aims of this
chapter, and where the owner can convincingly demonstrate such consistency to
the city;
         (e)   1.   The clearing and/or grading will be undertaken in such a
manner so as to preserve and enhance the city’s aesthetic and historic
character. Vegetative screens or buffer strips shall be maintained or
reestablished in a timely manner with approved plantings along public streets
and adjoining property boundaries, or with approved alternate clearing
techniques consistent with the aims of this subchapter as administered by the
city;
            2.   Development shall be initiated or a vegetative screen or
buffer established within six months or sooner of the date of initiation of
land clearing or grading activities;
         (f)   Clearing and grading operations shall be conducted so as to
expose the smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible
time, consistent with an anticipated build-out schedule;
         (g)   The clearing, grading, and excavating activities shall be
performed in accordance with all city, county, state, and federal laws, rules,
and regulations in all respects, including, but not limited to, those
pertaining to air and water pollution, noise control, and environmental
protection; and
         (h)   Slash shall be removed from a cleared site within 90 days from
the completion of the operation or sooner.
            1.   At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, an
extension of the 90- day period can be granted.
            2.   Any slash project not completed within this time frame,
including any period of extension, shall be in violation of this subchapter,
and each day such violation remains shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense and shall be prosecuted as such.
      (2)   The following provisions shall apply to cuts and fills, unless
otherwise waived by the city:
         (a)   Cut slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended
use. Cut slopes greater than five feet in height shall be no steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical (2:1), except where approved retaining walls are
engineered and installed and where trenches are refilled with material from the
excavation, revegetation with native trees and grasses, or other landscaping
materials;
         (b)   The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing
vegetation, unapproved fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials as
determined by the city. Where the slopes are a five-to-one ratio (5:1) or
steeper, by the excavation of relatively-level steps into the slope on which
the fill is to be placed;
         (c)   Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes that are
steeper than a two-to-one ratio (2:1) without an engineered retaining wall;
         (d)   The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use. Fill slopes exceeding five feet in depth shall be no steeper
than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), except where approved retaining
walls are engineered and installed;
         (e)   When the owner of any parcel shall raise, lower, or alter the
level or existing grade of a site by a fill or excavation, he or she shall, at
his or her own expense, protect all adjoining property from encroachment by
such fill, drainage runoff, or from danger of collapse due to such excavation
either by the erection of an engineered retaining wall or by sloping the sides
of such fill or excavation entirely within the confines of the site;
         (f)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require cut and fill
slopes be provided with subsurface drainage to retain slope stability, or
require geotechnical and/or hydrological analysis by a qualified expert; and
         (g)   The faces of slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control
erosion. Check dams, riprap, plantings, terraces, diversion ditches,
sedimentation ponds, straw bales, or other devices or methods shall be employed
to control erosion and provide safety. Devices or procedures for erosion
protection shall be initiated as soon as possible during grading operations and
shall be maintained in operable condition by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-9) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-
13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.09 TREE TRIMMING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of real property to
maintain the following:
      (1)   Trees on or within the city limits shall, at all times, be trimmed
and pruned so that there shall be a minimum of seven and one-half feet of clear
space between the surface of the sidewalk or parkway and the overhanging
branches and leaves;
      (2)   The overhanging branches and leaves shall at all times be trimmed
or pruned so that there is a minimum of 12 feet of clear space between the
surface of the roadway and the overhanging branches and leaves; and
      (3)   The branches and/or leaves of any tree, bush, hedge, shrubbery, or
other landscaping material which overhangs, juts out, or encroaches into or
upon any sidewalk, parkway, or roadway such that it creates a hazard to, or
impediment to the progress or vision of, any person traveling on any such
thoroughfare within the city limits, or which covers, endangers, or impairs the
view of any traffic control device or advisory sign, including any branch or
leaves within any restricted areas posted within the city limit.
   (B)   Failure to maintain such standards by the owner is hereby designated
and declared to be a public nuisance, and any remedy otherwise available to the
city for abating a public nuisance shall be available to the city under these
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-10) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed
4-13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.10 UNLAWFUL ABUSE OF TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally abuse, significantly
damage, or mutilate any tree on any parkway, sidewalk, roadway, street, alley,
or other public or private property opened to the public, or upon city
property, or to attach or place any rope or wire, other than one used to
support a damaged or broken tree, or to attach any electrical wire or other
thing to any tree within the city limits, or to damage any tree by chopping,
scraping, or by dumping near the tree any substance that can harm or damage any
such tree.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-11) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed
4-13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.11 APPEAL.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Planning
and Zoning Commission may, within 15 calendar days of such action, file a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall set
forth with specificity the grounds for such an appeal.
   (B)   Hearing by City Council. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the City
Council shall set a hearing date in accordance with §§
155.115 through
155.120.
   (C)   Purpose of hearing. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the City
Council to consider all information presented to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Evidence presented on appeal shall be confined to the record
involved in the action from which the appeal is taken. The City Council shall
hear oral argument made by parties based upon the record of the proceedings
before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Decision on appeal. Following the hearing, the City Council shall,
within 15 calendar days, affirm, modify, or reverse the Planning and Zoning
Commission’s decision.
   (E)   Final action of City Council. The City Council shall take final action
on an appeal by entering findings of fact from the record, any applicable
conclusions of law, and its final decision.
   (F)   Appeal from City Council decision. The action of the City Council
affirming, modifying, or reversing the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
decision or action shall be final, unless, within 30 days from the date of the
decision, the aggrieved party obtains a writ of certiorari from the District
Court of the First Judicial District of the state, in and for the county, in
the manner prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-12) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed
4-13-2022)
§ 154.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Misdemeanor violation. Violation of the provisions of this subchapter
or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute an
infraction and shall be punishable as provided in §
154.99.
   (B)   Separate offense.
      (1)   Any person who commits, participates in, assists, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and shall suffer the
penalties as set forth in division (A) above and §
154.99 for each day such participation, assistance, or maintenance continues.
      (2)   Each day shall be considered a separate, distinct offense.
   (C)   Public nuisance. In addition to the penalties set forth in divisions
(A) and (B) above, any violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
considered a public nuisance and may be enforced in accordance with
Chapter 92 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Issuance of city permits withheld; corrective action.
      (1)   Upon determination that a violation of the provisions of this
subchapter has occurred, the city shall withhold issuance of, or terminate, the
city permit or certificate of appropriateness for the affected property until
corrective action is taken by the responsible party.
      (2)   However, if mitigating circumstances exist and reasonable
commitments for corrective action are made, the city may issue a permit or
certificate of appropriateness. Such corrective action may include:
      (1)   Restoration of surface vegetation with plant material similar in
character and extent as existed prior to the unauthorized clearing;
      (2)   Implementation of drainage and erosion control measures;
      (3)   Replanting of mature trees (not seedlings or saplings) or other
vegetation or landscaping materials to replace those lost through unauthorized
clearing or excavation; and/or
      (4)   Other mitigation measure as required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission
(Prior Code, § 11-1-13) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2022-02, passed
4-13-2022) Penalty, see §
154.99
EXCAVATION CONTROL
§ 154.25 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to put in place procedures and methods to
ensure that remediated yards and other remediated areas of the city are
preserved and protected from recontamination or damage and to ensure the
citizens are not exposed to unacceptable health hazards as a consequence of
disturbances of unremediated lands. The methods to ensure the foregoing are
primarily accomplished through barriers and caps protection and by educational
programs. Soil management, management of barriers, and excavation control are
the primary focus of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-1) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-13-2008)
§ 154.26 CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND RENOVATION.
   (A)   The following work within the municipal boundaries of the city shall
require a city building permit and an Institutional Controls Program (ICP)
permit from Panhandle Health District No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as
“District”):
      (1)   Construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings,
which require excavation;
      (2)   Demolition of buildings, which require excavation;
      (3)   Renovation of buildings which would result in excavation; and
      (4)   Such other things that would be required by other rules of the
state involving the Institutional Controls Program (ICP).
   (B)   Applications for Institutional Controls Program permits from the
District shall be obtained from the Health District office, Kellogg, Idaho, and
shall be issued (or the need for a permit waived) by the District prior to the
issuance of the city building permit. Upon issuance of both permits, each shall
be filed with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Applications for an Institutional Controls Program permit shall be
made to the District within 30 days of submitting an application to the city
for a building permit. The city building permit and the Institutional Controls
Program permit, when required, must be approved and issued prior to the
applicant commencing work.
   (D)   In the event a city building permit is not required, an Institutional
Controls Program permit shall nonetheless be required for excavations, except
as exempted, for the purpose of providing for contaminated soil management.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-2) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-13-2008)
§ 154.27 EXCAVATIONS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   All excavations set forth in §
154.26, except as herein exempted, shall require an Institutional Controls
Program permit from the District. Applications for such permits shall be
available at the Health District office, Kellogg, Idaho. This requirement shall
not apply:
      (1)   To excavations of less than one cubic yard of earthen material;
      (2)   To excavations in a remediated area which does not penetrate the
visible delineation lines between remediated and unremediated soil (this
barrier is at approximately one foot in lawn areas and two feet in garden
areas) and which do not reduce the depth of the barrier; or
      (3)   To areas which have been totally remediated.
   (B)   If an Institutional Controls Program permit is required, such permit
must be approved and issued by the District prior to excavation.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-3) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-13-2008) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.28 SUBDIVISIONS AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All subdivisions and planned unit developments in the city which
require excavation shall require an Institutional Controls Program permit and
approval from the district of the developer’s plan for dealing with
contaminated soil.
   (B)   Such approval shall be obtained prior to final plat approval and prior
to commencing work.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-4) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-13-2008) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.29 FUNDING; ENFORCEMENT.
   All funding required for enforcement, monitoring, and compliance, including,
but not limited to, repository sites, visual barriers, clean soil, and staff
and educational materials, shall be the responsibility of the state and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-5) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-13-2008)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Each day the owner violates the provisions of §§
154.01 through
154.12 shall be considered an infraction, punishable by a fine of $300, and
such fine shall be assessed against the owner of the real property upon which
the activity of clearing, grading, excavation, or similar activity contemplated
herein is conducted prior to the issuance of a permit or certificate of
appropriateness.
         (a)   For each day the owner of real property violates the provisions
of §
154.04, a fine of up to $300 may be assessed against the owner of the real
property upon which the activity of clearing, grading, excavation, or similar
activity contemplated herein is conducted prior to the issuance of a permit or
certificate of appropriateness on major projects.
         (b)   In the case of a significant tree being removed, a minimum fine
of $100 shall be assessed and the commission may require mitigation. Mitigation
efforts may include, but are not limited to, offender replacing with a suitable
tree of at least two-inch caliper within 90 days.
         (c)   Unlawful abuse of tree violation. Any person in violation of §
154.08 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable up to $300 per violation.
      (2)   Increasing penalty. A second and any subsequent conviction for
violations of provisions of §§
154.01 through
154.12 shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for
any single offense, or confinement in the county jail for a period of not more
than six months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed, and,
in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court
may assess.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-4)
   (C)   (1)   Should any person fail to obtain such permits from the city or
the District or fail to comply with the provisions of §§
154.25 through
154.29, as required, the building permit(s), the Institutional Controls Program
permit(s), or subdivision permit(s) issued shall be void and the person in such
violation of these sections shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor for
each day of such violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 for any single offense, or confinement in the county jail for a
period of not more than six months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment
may be imposed, and, in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay
such costs as the court may assess.
      (2)   In addition, for a violation of §§
154.25 through
154.29, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding, including
temporary or injunctive relief, to prevent violations of §§
154.25 through
154.29.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-6) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2008-01, passed 2-
13-2008; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-13-2022)
CHAPTER 155: HISTORIC SITES
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Authority
   
155.003   Purpose
   
155.004   Notice
   
155.005   Duty to keep in good repair
   
155.006   Enforcement; violations generally
Historic Preservation Commission
   
155.020   Commission created
   
155.021   Membership, appointment
   
155.022   Term; reappointment
   
155.023   Membership requirements
   
155.024   Officers
   
155.025   Powers and duties
   
155.026   Meetings
   
155.027   Quorum
   
155.028   Vacancy
   
155.029   Removal
Historic District Designation Criteria
   
155.040   Qualifications for designation
   
155.041   Ineligible unless integral part of district
   
155.042   Significant as a whole
   
155.043   Interpretation
Historic District Designation Procedure
   
155.055   Investigation by Commission
   
155.056   Report of preliminary findings
   
155.057   Public hearing
   
155.058   Final report of Commission
   
155.059   City Council action
   
155.060   Issuance of permits
Certificate of Appropriateness
   
155.075   Certificate required
   
155.076   Interior arrangement of building
   
155.077   Change in use
   
155.078   Application
   
155.079   Hearing; notice
   
155.080   Intervenors
   
155.081   Findings of Commission
   
155.082   Approval; issuance
   
155.083   Disapproval
   
155.084   Ordinary maintenance and repair allowed
Hearings upon Application
   
155.095   Record
   
155.096   Rules of conduct
   
155.097   Findings of fact
   
155.098   Final decision
   
155.099   Modification of application
   
155.100   Continuation of hearing
Appeals to City Council
   
155.115   Notice of appeal
   
155.116   Preliminary hearing
   
155.117   Transcript
   
155.118   Notice of appellate hearing
   
155.119   Appellate hearing
   
155.120   Appeal
Design Guidelines and Standards
   
155.135   Guidelines
   
155.136   Area of application
   
155.137   Site orientation and directional expression
   
155.138   Scale, proportion, and rhythm
   
155.139   Form, detail, and treatment
   
155.140   Additional principles and recommendations
   
155.141   Predemolition design review
   
155.142   Criteria and procedures for evaluation of economic impact
   
155.143   Change in use of landmark property
   
155.144   Special restrictions
   
155.145   Exemption from Health and Building Codes
   
155.146   Transfer of development rights
   
155.147   Duty to keep in good repair
   
155.148   Appeals
   
155.149   Enforcement; violations
Geographic Designation
   
155.160   Findings
   
155.161   Designation; control
   
155.162   Legal description; map
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited to as the “Preservation of
Historic Sites Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 12-1-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.002 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code §§ 67-
4601 et seq., and as may
be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.003 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy the recognition,
preservation, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of structures, natural
features, sites, and areas within the city having historic, architectural,
archeological, cultural, or aesthetic significance is required in the interest
of the health, economic prosperity, cultural enrichment, and general welfare of
the people. The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by providing for the protection of
historic districts representing significant elements of its history;
   (B)   Enhance the visual character of the city by encouraging and regulating
the compatibility of architectural styles within historic districts reflecting
unique and established architectural traditions;
   (C)   Foster public appreciation of and civic pride in the beauty of the
city and the accomplishments of its past;
   (D)   Strengthen the economy of the city by protecting and enhancing the
city’s attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors;
   (E)   Stabilize and improve property values within the city; and
   (F)   Promote the private and public use of historic districts for the
education, prosperity, and general welfare of the people.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.004 NOTICE.
   (A)   When notice is required to be mailed under this chapter, notice shall
be deemed given as of the date of mailing.
   (B)   Further provisions for this notice procedure can be found in §
155.079.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.005 DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR.
   The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge, possession, or
control of a building or structure in a historic district shall keep in good
repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building, or
structure, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control as
specified in the designating ordinance or permit, and all interior portions
thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of
any exterior architectural feature.
(Prior Code, § 12-9-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.006 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Violation.
      (1)   Misdemeanor. It is a misdemeanor for any person, as property owner,
vendee, tenant, agent, employee, independent contractor, or otherwise, to
engage in any activity prohibited by §§
155.005,
155.147,
155.075, or
155.077.
      (2)   Separate offense. Each day of activity shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (3)   Principals in crime. All persons concerned in the commission of the
foregoing crime, whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense
or aid and abet in its commission, or, not being present, have advised and
encouraged its commission, are principals in any crime so committed.
(Prior Code, § 12-10-1)
   (B)   Civil action. In addition to the criminal penalties set forth in
division (A) above, whenever it appears to the City Council that any person has
engaged or is about to engage in any act or practice violating any provision of
this chapter, the City Council may institute a civil action in the District
Court to enforce compliance with this chapter upon a showing that a person has
engaged, or is about to engage, in any act or practice constituting a violation
of this chapter; a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or
such other relief as said District Court deems appropriate shall be granted.
The city shall not be required to furnish a bond in such a proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 12-10-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 155.020 COMMISSION CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Historic Preservation
Commission, hereinafter referred to as “Commission.”
(Prior Code, § 12-2-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
Cross-reference:
   Related provisions, see §§
156.020,
156.022, and
156.092
§ 155.021 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT.
   The Commission shall consist of not less than five, nor more than seven,
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of a
full majority of the full City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-2) (Ord. 505, passed 8-16-1989)
§ 155.022 TERM; REAPPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Initial appointments of the Commission shall be made as follows: Four
one-year terms; and three two-year terms.
   (B)   All subsequent appointments shall be made for two years.
   (C)   Any Commission member may be reappointed to serve additional terms.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-3) (Ord. 505, passed 8-16-1989)
§ 155.023 MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residency. All Commission members shall be residents of the city or
its impact area.
   (B)   Ineligibility. Commission members shall not include any employees of
the city, the Mayor, or members of the City Council.
   (C)   Qualifications. All members of the Commission shall have a
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic
preservation. The City Council shall endeavor to appoint at least two members
with professional training or experience in the disciplines of architecture,
history, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law,
or other historic preservation-related disciplines, to the extent that such
expertise is available in the community.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-4) (Ord. 492-A, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 155.024 OFFICERS.
   (A)   Election. The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from the
Commission’s members.
   (B)   Term. The Chair and Vice-Chair shall serve a term of one year from the
meeting at which they are elected and until their successors are duly elected.
   (C)   Voting; quorum. Neither the Chair nor Vice-Chair shall be disqualified
from voting or disqualified from being counted toward a quorum.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Commission,
authorize calls for any special meetings, appoint all committees, execute all
documents authorized by the Commission, and generally perform all duties
associated with that office.
      (2)   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair, in the event of absence or disability
of the Chair, or a vacancy in that office, shall assume and perform the duties
and functions of the Chair.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.025 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to the powers and duties described elsewhere in this chapter,
the Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Conduct, or cause to be conducted, a comprehensive survey of
properties of historic significance within the boundaries of the city.
Publicize and periodically update survey results;
   (B)   Maintain a local register of historic districts within the city;
   (C)   Review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing, and
redevelopment, municipal improvement, and other types of planning and programs
undertaken by any agency of the city, county, or state, as they relate to the
cultural or historic resources of the city;
   (D)   Recommend to the City Council the purchase of fee or less-than-fee
interests in property for purposes of historic preservation;
   (E)   Investigate and report to the City Council on the use of various
federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to
promote cultural resources and historic preservation in the city;
   (F)   Preserve, restore, maintain, and operate cultural or historic
properties under the ownership of the city or control of the Commission subject
to approval of expenditures by the City Council;
   (G)   Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, applications for
certificates of appropriateness, pursuant to this chapter;
   (H)   Review all applications for permits, environmental assessments,
environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements, and other
similar documents and instruments as set forth in this chapter, pertaining to
cultural resources, historic preservation, or related neighboring properties
within public view. The City Council shall forward all such documents to the
Commission for review and comment. The Commission shall forward its comments to
the City Council;
   (I)   Subject to prior approval of the City Council, hire staff, retain
consultants, and conduct studies, as the Commission deems desirable or
necessary;
   (J)   Subject to prior approval of the City Council, contract with the
county, state, or federal government, or any agency or subdivision of said
government, or with any other organization;
   (K)   Cooperate with local, county, state, and federal governments in the
pursuit and the objectives of historic preservation;
   (L)   Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including
voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and
decisions. All such material shall be public record;
   (M)   Render advice and guidance, upon the request of the property owner or
occupant, on the restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping, or
maintenance of any property located within a historic district, or other
property located within the city;
   (N)   Participate in, promote, and conduct public information, educational,
and interpretive programs pertaining to historic preservation and historic
districts; and
   (O)   Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.026 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. The Commission’s regular meeting shall be held on
the first Thursday of each month at the City Hall. Where no business is
scheduled or requested to be brought before the regular meeting, the Commission
Chair may cancel the meeting.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chair or at
the request of a majority of Commission members for the transaction of business
as stated in the call for the meeting. Special meetings may be held upon such
notice as is appropriate to the circumstances, or as otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-7) (Ord. 492, 7-14-1987; Ord. 92-3, 11-10-1992)
§ 155.027 QUORUM.
   (A)   The presence of a quorum shall be required for the transaction of
business at either regular or special meetings of the Commission. All decisions
or actions of the Commission shall be made by a majority vote of those members
present at any meeting where a quorum exists.
   (B)   The following numbers will constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business: If five Commission members, a quorum consists of three; if six
Commission members, a quorum consists of four; and, if seven Commission
members, a quorum consists of four.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-8) (Ord. 505, passed 8-16-1989)
§ 155.028 VACANCY.
   A vacancy shall occur upon the death, resignation, or removal by the City
Council of a member. In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of a majority of the full City Council, shall appoint a person to fill
the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-9) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.029 REMOVAL.
   (A)   A Commission member shall be removed by a majority of the full City
Council at such time when such member no longer possesses the qualifications of
office set forth in §
155.023.
   (B)   A member may be removed by a majority of the full City Council for
cause at any time.
   (C)   Removal for cause shall include, but not be limited to, a failure to
attend four regular or special meetings of the Commission during any
consecutive 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-10) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION CRITERIA
§ 155.040 QUALIFICATIONS FOR DESIGNATION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, any area within the city may be designated
as a historic district by the City Council, pursuant to
Chapter 52 of this code of ordinances, if the quality of significance in
American, Idaho, or city history, architecture, archeology, or culture is
present in the sites, buildings, structures, and objects that constitute such
district, and that they possess integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, a manner showing efficient competency, feeling, and association,
and:
   (A)   Are associated with events that have made a significant contribution
to the broad patterns of such history;
   (B)   Are associated with the lives of persons significant to such history;
   (C)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high
artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable area whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
   (D)   Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.041 INELIGIBLE UNLESS INTEGRAL PART OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   Ordinarily, cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures,
properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes,
structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed
historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and
properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not
be considered eligible for inclusion within a historic district.
   (B)   However, such properties will qualify for inclusion within a historic
district if they are integral parts of such districts that otherwise do meet
such criteria or if they fall within the following categories:
      (1)   A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance;
      (2)   A building or structure removed from its original location but
which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the
surviving structure most importantly associated with historic person or event;
      (3)   A birthplace or grave of historic figure of outstanding importance,
if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his
or her productive life;
      (4)   A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves of
persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features,
or from association with historic events;
      (5)   A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master
plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has
survived;
      (6)   A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical
significance; or
      (7)   A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is
of exceptional importance.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.042 SIGNIFICANT AS A WHOLE.
   A historic district shall be significant as a whole even though it may be
composed of components-sites, buildings, structures, and objects that lack
individual distinction or historic integrity, as long as the district conveys
overall a sense of the time and place of the period of which the elements of
the district gained historic significance.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.043 INTERPRETATION.
   The City Council and Commission shall interpret the application of the above
criteria with due regard for the guidelines set forth in by the National Park
Service, available at https://www.nps.gov/articles/sec-stds-evaluation-
guidelines.htm.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEDURE
§ 155.055 INVESTIGATION BY COMMISSION.
   The Commission, at its own initiative, or upon the request of the City
Council, shall make an investigation of the historical, architectural,
archeological, and cultural significance of the buildings, structures,
features, sites, or surroundings included in any proposed historic district,
using the criteria set forth in this Title 15.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.056 REPORT OF PRELIMINARY FINDINGS.
   (A)   If the members of the Commission do not constitute a majority of the
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall report its
preliminary findings to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
consideration and recommendations, allowing the Planning and Zoning Commission
60 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing described in §
155.057.
   (B)   If the members of the Commission constitute at least a majority of the
membership of the Planning and Zoning Commission, then this section shall be of
no force or effect.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.057 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Subsequent to its preliminary decision upon creating or not creating a
historic district, the Commission shall hold a public hearing. Except as
provided in Section §
155.056, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
given by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owners of all property to be
included in such historic district, at least 14 days prior to the date of said
public hearing, using the name and addresses of such owners as shown either in
the records of the city or on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and shall
further be advertised once in a daily newspaper of general circulation at least
five days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.058 FINAL REPORT OF COMMISSION.
   At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than 20 days
from the date of the hearing, the Commission shall submit a final report to the
City Council with its recommendations, and if a recommendation of the creation
of a historic district, a draft of a proposed ordinance creating such a
historic district.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.059 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   The City Council shall approve the proposed ordinance in whole or in part,
or shall disapprove it in its entirety.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.060 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   No building, alteration, demolition, or removal permits for any
improvement, building, or structure located within a historic district proposed
by the Commission shall be issued, subsequent to the Commission’s notice of
public hearing, until such time as the City Council has disapproved the
proposed ordinance or has not included such property within the historic
district.
   (B)   In the event that such property is included within a historic district
created by ordinance by the City Council, such property and such applications
shall be subject to the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
§ 155.075 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required after designation of historic district. After the designation
of a historic district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure
(including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, and pavements, or other
appurtenant features), nor aboveground utility structure, nor any type of
outdoor advertising sign, shall be erected, altered, restored, moved, or
demolished within such district until after an application for a certificate of
appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by
the Commission.
   (B)   Required prior to issuance of other permits. The city shall require
such a certificate to be issued by the Commission prior to the issuance of a
building permit or other permit granted for purposes of construction or
altering structures. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether
or not a building permit is required.
   (C)   Definition.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall include
the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the
exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind of
texture of the building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs, or other appurtenant fixtures and natural features such
as trees and shrubbery.
      (2)   (a)   In the case of outdoor advertising signs, EXTERIOR FEATURES
shall be construed to mean the style, materials, size, and location of all such
signs.
         (b)   All applications shall be accompanied with color, material, and
graphics samples along with scaled drawings or sketches of the proposed sign or
signs, their mountings, locations, and any other visual aids such as
photographs or drawings that may support the application.
   (D)   Each zone separate. Each application will be considered separately as
to zone and historic appropriateness within that zone.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-1) (Ord. 92-3, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 155.076 INTERIOR ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDING.
   The interior arrangement of a building shall not be subject to the
provisions of this chapter unless the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, or demolition of such interior features in any way effects either
the structural integrity of the building or the exterior portion of any
building, or is apparent or observable from the exterior of any such building,
in which such event a certificate of appropriateness is required.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.077 CHANGE IN USE.
   No change in the use of any structure of property within a designated
historic district shall be permitted until after an application for a
certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the
Commission. The city shall require such a certificate to be issued by the
Commission prior to the approval of any change of zoning classification within
the historic district.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.078 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Form. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
made by filing an application for such certificate with the City Clerk/
Treasurer on forms provided by the Commission.
   (B)   Required information. An application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall include the following:
      (1)   A clear statement of the proposed work, to include such things as
colors, materials, landscaping, and signs;
      (2)   Plans, elevations, and specifications in sufficient detail to
accurately describe the size, height, and completed appearance of the proposed
work;
      (3)   A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures on the
proposed site and the proposed work;
      (4)   In cases where the application is for a demolition, the need,
justification, and necessity for demolition and the proposed plans for the
site;
      (5)   A signed verification by the applicant that the statements
contained in the application are true and correct; and
      (6)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Commission as set
forth in the Commission’s application forms.
   (C)   Time of filing. An application for a certificate of appropriateness
must be received by the City Clerk/Treasurer seven calendar days prior to the
first Wednesday of each month to be considered at the next regular monthly
Commission meeting.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987; Ord. 508, passed 11-14-
1989)
§ 155.079 HEARING; NOTICE.
   Within 45 days after the filing of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of
the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant in writing. If the Commission believes any property is likely to be
materially affected by the application, it shall take reasonable steps to
provide the same notice to those affected owners, giving both such owners and
the applicant an opportunity to be heard on the application at the time of the
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.080 INTERVENORS.
   Any resident of the city or property owner of property located within the
city may intervene as an interested party at the hearing upon an application
for a certificate of appropriateness. The applicant and all intervenors shall
be given an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.081 FINDINGS OF COMMISSION.
   At the public hearing, the Commission shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law as to whether or not the proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration, moving, or demolition is appropriate. The
Commission, in making its determination, shall act in accordance and in
conformity with the design guidelines and standards set forth in
Chapter 155, and specifically the criteria and procedures for evaluation of
economic impact set forth in §
155.142 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-7) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.082 APPROVAL; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   No intervenors. If no party has intervened at the hearing and
testified against the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness, and if
the Commission determines that a certificate of appropriateness should be
issued, then the Commission shall forthwith approve the application and issue
the certificate of appropriateness.
   (B)   Intervenors. If a party has timely intervened and has testified at the
hearing against the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness, and if the
Commission determines that the certificate of appropriateness should be issued,
the Commission shall approve the application, but shall not issue the
certificate of appropriateness until the fourteenth day subsequent to the date
of the hearing, unless during such time, the intervenor has filed a notice of
appeal with the City Council. The filing of a notice of appeal within said time
shall divest the Commission of the power, authority, and jurisdiction to issue
the certificate of appropriateness.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-8) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.083 DISAPPROVAL.
   (A)   If the Commission determines that a certificate of appropriateness
should not be issued, it shall place upon its records the reasons for such
determination and shall forthwith notify the applicant of such determination,
forwarding to the applicant an attested copy of its reasons, and all of its
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and its recommendations, if any.
   (B)   An applicant aggrieved by such a determination of the Commission may
appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Council
within 14 days from the date that the applicant has been furnished the
Commission’s findings of fact and conclusions of law.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-9) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.084 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR ALLOWED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior feature in a historic district which does
not involve a change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to
prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or
demolition of any such feature which the Building Official, Mayor, and
Commission Chair shall certify, each in writing, that such work is required by
the public safety because of an imminent and immediate unsafe and dangerous
condition.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-10) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
HEARINGS UPON APPLICATION
§ 155.095 RECORD.
   All hearings upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall
be electronically recorded. The record of a hearing before the Commission shall
include:
   (A)   The application for a certificate of appropriateness;
   (B)   Evidence received or considered;
   (C)   A statement of matters officially noted;
   (D)   Questions and offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon;
   (E)   Any proposed findings and exceptions; and
   (F)   Any decisions, findings of fact, and conclusions of law.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.096 RULES OF CONDUCT.
   The hearings conducted by the Commission shall be conducted according to
Robert’s Rules of Order, and the following provisions.
   (A)   Objection. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be
noted in the record.
   (B)   Written evidence. When a hearing will be expedited and the interests
of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence
may be received in written form.
   (C)   Documentary evidence. Documentary evidence may be received in the form
of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request,
parties shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original.
   (D)   Notice of facts. Notice may be taken of generally recognized technical
or scientific facts within the Commission’s specialized knowledge, if any.
      (1)   The applicant shall be notified either before or during the hearing
of the material noticed, and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed.
      (2)   The Commission’s experience, technical competence, and specialized
knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
   (E)   Evidentiary rules. The Chair shall make all evidentiary rulings, or
may refer all evidentiary rulings to be made by the Commission’s attorney.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.097 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on matters
officially noticed.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.098 FINAL DECISION.
   (A)   A final decision shall be made at the hearing and stated in the
records. Thereafter, the final decision shall be transcribed.
   (B)   A final decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions of
law, separately stated.
   (C)   Findings of fact shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit
statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings.
   (D)   If an applicant or intervenor has submitted proposed findings of fact,
the decision shall include a ruling upon each proposed finding.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.099 MODIFICATION OF APPLICATION.
   The Commission may, at the hearing, enter into an agreement with an
applicant that, in the event that an applicant were to modify the application
at the hearing, the Commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness
to the modified application.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.100 CONTINUATION OF HEARING.
   (A)   The hearing upon an application may, with the consent of the
applicant, be continued from time to time for a period of time not to exceed 14
days from the date of the original hearing date.
   (B)   A continuation of a hearing shall not require additional notice,
provided that notice of the time, place, and date of the continuation is given
at the hearing being continued.
(Prior Code, § 12-6-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL
§ 155.115 NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   A notice of appeal to the City Council shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The date and heading of the decision from which the appeal is taken;
   (B)   A statement whether the appeal is taken upon matters of law, or upon
matters of fact, or both;
   (C)   A statement of the issues that the appellant asserts on appeal; and
   (D)   The name, address, and signature of the appellant.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.116 PRELIMINARY HEARING.
   Within 21 days from the filing of the notice of appeal, the City Council
shall, with ten days’ written notice to all parties, hold a preliminary hearing
to determine:
   (A)   Whether the appeal involved questions of law alone, and, if so,
whether or not the appeal may be determined without ordering a transcript of
the hearing before the Commission;
   (B)   Whether the appeal should be determined by listening to the recording
tape;
   (C)   Whether a transcript of the hearing before the Commission should be
ordered; or
   (D)   Whether the appeal is pursued frivolously without foundation, in which
event, the City Council shall summarily dismiss the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.117 TRANSCRIPT.
   (A)   No transcript required. In the event that the City Council determines
that the appeal can be heard as a question of law alone, without the necessity
of a transcript, the City Council shall enter an order to that effect stating
the issue of law to be determined on appeal and setting a day certain for the
hearing upon the appeal.
   (B)   Listening to recording. In the event that the City Council determines
that the appeal should be heard by listening to the tapes of the proceedings
before the Commission, it shall enter an order to that effect and direct a time
within which the parties and all members of the City Council shall review or
listen to the recording tapes and set a date certain for the hearing of the
appeal. No City Council member may participate at the appeal hearing unless
said City Council member certifies that he or she has listened to the recording
tape.
   (C)   Written transcript.
      (1)   In the event that the City Council determines that a transcript is
required for the processing of the appeal, the City Council shall enter an
order to that effect and direct the appellant to pay to the City Clerk/
Treasurer the estimated transcriber fees in the following manner:
         (a)   The appellant shall pay a per-page rate, to be established by
resolution of the City Council, for the original copy of the transcript. The
appellant shall pay the estimated cost of the transcript within five days of
the City Council order, and shall pay the balance of the cost within five days
of completion of the transcript; and
         (b)   A transcript may be prepared by any competent typist, but the
transcript must be examined and certified by the person who took the
transcription.
      (2)   Upon completion, the transcript shall be delivered to the City
Council. The City Council shall mail or deliver a notice of the filing of the
transcript to all parties, advising the parties that they may purchase a copy
of the transcript at a per-page rate to be established by resolution of the
City Council.
      (3)   The parties shall have 12 days from the date of the said notice to
file any objections to the transcript. Upon failure of the parties to file any
objections to the transcript, the transcript shall be deemed settled. Any
objection made to the transcript shall be made at the appellate hearing.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.118 NOTICE OF APPELLATE HEARING.
   (A)   The City Council shall set an appellate hearing upon the appeal within
21 days of the date of the preliminary hearing if no transcript is ordered, and
if a transcript is ordered, no earlier than 21 days, nor later than 45 days,
from the date of the preparation of the transcript.
   (B)   At least seven days’ written notice shall be given to all parties of
the date of the appellate hearing.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.119 APPELLATE HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing. The appeal shall be reviewed by the City Council at an
appellate hearing and shall be confined to the record. The City Council shall
hear oral arguments made by the parties based upon the record of the
proceedings before the Commission. The City Council shall not substitute its
judgment for that of the Commission as to the weight of the evidence on
questions of fact. The City Council may affirm the decision of the Commission
or remand the application to the Commission for further proceedings. The City
Council may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the
appellant have been prejudiced because the Commission’s findings, conclusions,
or decisions are:
      (1)   In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
      (2)   In excess of the authority of the Commission;
      (3)   Made upon unlawful procedure;
      (4)   Affected by other error of law;
      (5)   Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and
substantial evidence on the whole record; or
      (6)   Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
   (B)   Recording. All hearings before the City Council shall be
electronically recorded. The City Council shall make all rulings and decisions
upon the record. All rulings and orders made at the preliminary hearing and all
rulings and decisions made upon the appellate hearing shall be forthwith
transcribed with copies sent to all parties.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.120 APPEAL.
   An appeal of the decision of the City Council shall be taken to the District
Court of the First Judicial District of the State, in and for the county, in
the manner prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 12-7-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS
§ 155.135 GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Basis.
      (1)   The City Council has determined that several aspects of
architectural design have a significant impact on the character and value of
the city’s historic districts and that preserving and enhancing this character
requires the existence of a certain harmony and compatibility in these aspects,
from one building to the next and throughout the district.
      (2)   These design guidelines are based on existing design
characteristics commonly observed in the city and will serve as a baseline
description against which plans for new construction and reconstruction can be
judged for harmony, compatibility, and appropriateness.
   (B)   Intent. The intent of these guidelines is not to require particular
architectural features or dictate architectural style; rather, it is to
identify a range of design options which will encourage development compatible
with the existing character of the city and which will discourage the
introduction of incompatible features.
      (1)   Contemporary designs and materials, used in a manner compatible
with the sense of the past that is being preserved, are not only permitted, but
encouraged.
      (2)   Economic feasibility and durability of proposed improvements, along
with aesthetic harmony, are primary concerns.
   (C)   Interpretation. A strict interpretation of these guidelines may be
waived by the Historic Preservation Commission if the applicant develops a
design solution which meets the spirit and intent of these design guidelines in
a better manner. In the same sense, the guidelines presented here are not fixed
and immutable through time, but are subject to continuing study and revision by
the Historic Preservation Commission as the desirability for such modification
becomes apparent.
   (D)   Historic period. Although the criteria for historic designation set
forth in §§
155.040 through
155.043 covers a range of architectural styles and historic periods, the city’s
predominant architectural character is primarily derived from the numerous
buildings and homes that were erected during the period of 1890 through 1920.
It was also during this time that the city rose to prominence and acquired its
greatest historical significance. In the guidelines that follow, this period
from 1890 to 1920 is referred to as the HISTORIC PERIOD and shall represent a
general benchmark to which new and reconstruction building designs should
compatibly relate.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Exceptions may occur in cases where reconstruction work is proposed
for buildings of a distinct style but which are different from that which was
typical of the “historic period.”
      (2)   In these cases, the appropriate design choice shall be to respect
the distinct style significant, in its own right and seek to retain the
building’s particular architectural character, especially in terms of its
unique form, scale, proportions, rhythm, modeling, and massing.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-1) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.136 AREA OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission will be reviewing three different
kinds of construction activity that require certificates of appropriateness,
and each kind will require a slightly different application of these
guidelines:
      (1)   New construction. For the construction of new buildings and parts
of buildings in historic districts, the focus of the guidelines is on the
compatibility of new construction with the existing predominant historic
character of the city without dictating style or taste.
      (2)   Reconstruction, remodeling, repair. For reconstruction, remodeling,
and repair of existing buildings in historic districts, the guidelines seek to
guide and encourage restoration in line with the original character of the
structure.
      (3)   Relocation. For relocation of buildings to sites within a historic
district, the guidelines seek to ensure that buildings moved to sites within
the district are compatible with the predominant historical character of
surrounding buildings and are suitably situated on the lot.
   (B)   Unless otherwise stated in the text, the guidelines shall apply
equally to construction activity in both the designated commercial historic
district and the designated residential historic district(s).
(Prior Code, § 12-8-2) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.137 SITE ORIENTATION AND DIRECTIONAL EXPRESSION.
   An important factor affecting the character of a historic district concerns
the relationship between a historic building and its orientation toward
adjacent structures and the street. An orderly rhythm in site orientation and
directional expression can also lend harmony to a historic district and evoke a
stronger sense of its historical character.
   (A)   Setbacks.
      (1)   In addition to the setback regulations prescribed in Chapter 156 of
this code of ordinances, the street-facing facade of new and reconstructed
buildings in the Commercial Landmark District should be erected in line with
the street-front setback of existing buildings from the historic period on the
same block.
      (2)   The street-facing facade of new and reconstructed buildings in the
Commercial Historic District should be erected in line with the street-front
setback of existing buildings from the historic period.
   (B)   Directional expression.
      (1)   To preserve the continuity prevailing along most block faces in the
city, the principal facade of new or reconstructed buildings should be oriented
parallel to the street it faces.
      (2)   The principal facade should be oriented parallel to the street it
faces.
   (C)   Front yard additions. To preserve the orderly rhythm of front yard
spacing and the architectural integrity of street-facing facades, front yard
additions to existing buildings in the Residential Historic District should be
generally discouraged when such construction will alter or obscure the street-
facing facade of a building that has been designated as contributing to the
character of the historic district, or if the construction of the addition will
result in a street-facing setback of less than 80% of the average setback of
existing buildings from the historic period on the same block.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-3) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.138 SCALE, PROPORTION, AND RHYTHM.
   The relative portion of a building compared to neighboring buildings, or of
a building to a pedestrian observer, or of a building to its surroundings in
general, is the building’s scale. Scale does more to determine the visual
impact of a structure than does any other single aspect of building design.
Preserving a harmony and compatibility in scale among the buildings in the
city’s historic districts focuses attention on several key dimensions,
including building height, floor elevations, size, and massing.
   (A)   Building height.
      (1)   New and reconstructed buildings should not be erected to a height
greater than 10% of the average height of existing buildings from the historic
period on the same and adjacent blocks. In no case should any building in the
Commercial District be erected to a height greater than the County Courthouse.
      (2)   Buildings should not be erected to a height greater than 10% of the
average height of existing buildings from the historic period on the same and
adjacent blocks.
   (B)   Floor elevations.
      (1)   On new and reconstructed buildings in the Commercial District, the
first floor elevation above the street curb, the entrance door sill elevation,
and the floor-to-floor elevations within the buildings should reflect the
average of comparable elevations of existing buildings from the historic period
on the same and adjacent blocks.
      (2)   In the event the applicant successfully demonstrates, pursuant to
Title 11 of this code of ordinances, the economic necessity of altering the
original elevation of an interior floor or ceiling, such reconstruction shall
be done in a manner that retains the original historic appearance, design,
detail, and modeling of the building’s street-facing facade(s).
   (C)   Size and scale.
      (1)   (a)   The size and scale of new or reconstructed buildings should
be about equal to the average of similar types of existing buildings from the
historic period in the district.
         (b)   Special care should be given to following the building-height-
to-building-width ratio of front building facades on adjacent buildings from
the historic period.
      (2)   The size and scale should be about equal to the average of similar
types of existing buildings from the historic period.
      (3)   In the event it is necessary to construct or reconstruct a building
in such a manner that its size and scale will be inconsistent with that of
adjacent buildings from the historic period, the front facade of such new or
reconstructed buildings should be broken into smaller masses or bays of a size
and scale that is consistent with that of adjacent buildings from the historic
period.
      (4)   Out-of-scale buildings should be broken into smaller masses or bays
of a size and scale that is consistent with adjacent buildings from the
historic period.
   (D)   Massing.
      (1)   New and reconstructed buildings in any historic district should
avoid designs that result in a single, monolithic appearance that is not
relieved by variations in massing. When possible, new and reconstructed
buildings should be broken into varied masses and forms such as are
characteristic of or compatible with typical existing buildings from the
historic period.
      (2)   Building designs should avoid a monolithic appearance.
   (E)   Rhythm.
      (1)   Architectural rhythm is the ordered recurrent alteration of
building masses and spaces across a single facade or along an entire block.
      (2)   Special care should be given to preserving and continuing the
rhythm of solids to voids on street-facing facades and the rhythm of spacing of
buildings along streets.
      (3)   The rhythm of solids to voids on street-facing facades and the
spacing of buildings along streets should be preserved and continued.
   (F)   Walls of continuity.
      (1)   Physical elements, such as brick walls, wrought iron fences,
evergreen landscape masses, building facades, or combinations of these also
contribute to the character and feel of the architecture of a historic period.
      (2)   The design of any new or reconstructed building should seek to
preserve or maintain such character-defining walls of continuity whenever
possible.
      (3)   Walls of continuity should be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-4) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.139 FORM, DETAIL, AND TREATMENT.
   (A)   Historic character. In addition to site orientation, directional
expression, scale, proportion, and rhythm, the character of the city’s historic
building stock is also defined by the particular modeling of their vertical
facades and roofs. The historic character of the city’s existing buildings is
best expressed when the separate elements that make up the modeling of their
facades and roofs are retained in either their original or essential form.
      (1)   Similarity, the unique character of the city’s historic districts,
is best conveyed when the design of a new building incorporates forms, details,
and treatments that either evoke a sense of the architectural style of the
historic district or avoid distracting from an observer’s sense of the
predominant historic character of the district.
      (2)   Among the most important modeling elements that help define the
historic character of the city’s buildings are cornices, storefronts, window
patterns, roof shapes, siding and roof materials, colors, and textures.
   (B)   Cornices.
      (1)   Many of the buildings erected in the city’s Commercial Landmark
District during the early historic period were designed with a horizontal
cornice on its principal street-facing facade.
      (2)   The cornice, which protrudes from the plane of the facade, marks
and defines the vertical extent of the building and ties it in with adjacent
buildings in the Commercial Historic District.
      (3)   Some cornices in the Commercial Historic District were also
embellished with rich architectural details which today serve as examples of
the form of aesthetic expression that was typical of the city’s turn of the
century architectural design.
      (4)   Cornices should be retained.
      (5)   Horizontal cornice lines should be continued.
      (6)   To help assure continuity from one building to the next in the
Commercial Landmark District and to preserve examples of the city’s early
twentieth-century architectural expression, existing cornices and cornice lines
should be retained. The heights and depths of these cornices on new
construction should be consistent with the average cornice dimensions of
adjacent buildings from the historic period.
   (C)   Storefronts.
      (1)   The traditional storefront is probably the single most important
architectural form that expresses the uniqueness and historical character of
the city’s Commercial Historic District. The city’s existing storefronts convey
a strong sense of the early historic period when commercial architecture and
street design were oriented more to the convenience of the pedestrian than that
of the passing motorist.
      (2)   Although architectural detailing in the traditional storefront
evolved over time and from region to region, its basic form or modeling
remained essentially the same. In the city, it consisted of a consciously-
proportioned configuration of less than a dozen interconnected design elements,
including (from street level upwards): a low-paneled bulkhead surmounted by an
expanse of display windows with transom windows above and a storefront cornice
or signboard delineating the vertical extent of the first story. Either side of
the storefront was typically finished with vertical piers of pilasters, often
of masonry construction, that usually extended to the roof cornice and served
to frame the sides of the building. The upper stories of the city’s storefronts
typically consisted of regularly-spaced windows, often topped by window hoods,
lintels, or voussoirs, and cast against masonry wall. The top of the
traditional storefront building was usually finished with a parapet wall and a
protruding decorative cornice.
      (3)   The basic design elements of the storefront should be retained or
reclaimed.
      (4)   Construction work on Commercial Historic District storefronts
should retain these basic storefront design elements where they exist, and seek
to reclaim them when they have been altered or lost. Attention should also be
given to retaining or restoring the original rhythm and proportions of these
design elements on all building facades and exterior walls.
      (5)   New construction work in the Commercial Historic District should
consider designs that are either compatible with the traditional storefront or
allude to its typical form, rhythm, and proportions. In no case, however,
should new construction design seek to replicate or imitate specific motifs or
details of the traditional storefront design.
      (6)   Preapproved siding styles are available from the City Clerk at City
Hall. When using one or a multiple of these preapproved items, an application
for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the pre-approved choices will
not be subject to a public hearing on the application; rather, a certificate of
appropriateness may be immediately issued by the City Clerk or the Chair of the
Commission to the applicant.
   (D)   Window patterns.
      (1)   The predominant window configuration on street-facing facades in
the city exhibits a regularity in proportion and size of window openings and in
the rhythm and order with which they are arranged.
      (2)   Preapproved window styles are available from the City Clerk at City
Hall. When using any one or a multiple of these preapproved items, an
application for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the preapproved
choices will not be subject to a public hearing on the application; rather, a
certificate of appropriateness may be immediately issued by the City Clerk or
the Chair of the Commission to the applicant.
      (3)   Proposed designs for window arrangements in new construction should
be compatible with and avoid distracting from the predominant window pattern of
adjacent buildings from the historic period. In cases of remodeling or
reconstruction in all historic districts, a building’s historic window pattern
should be retained or reclaimed. Where that is not possible, the predominant
window pattern of existing buildings from the historic period should be
followed as a design guide.
      (4)   Window patterns should be retained and reclaimed.
   (E)   Window replacement.
      (1)   In cases where the replacement of a window is required, the
replacement should match the original window, fill the entire opening, and
duplicate the original window pattern. If possible, the original sash and frame
material should be matched.
      (2)   Window replacements should match the original window, fill the
entire opening, and duplicate the original window pattern.
      (3)   In circumstances where metallic windows must be used, the metallic
sashes and frame should be of a dark anodized or baked enamel finish so as to
minimize the obtrusiveness of the bright metallic color.
   (F)   Storm windows.
      (1)   When storm windows are required, they should be designed and
installed in such a manner that they appear to be an integral part of the
building. If mounted on the exterior of the building, they should resemble the
inner window as closely as possible in shape and appearance and should be
painted to match the color of the inner window sash. On street-facing facades,
it may be desirable to consider installing storm windows on the inside where
they will not be seen from the street.
      (2)   Storm windows should resemble the inner window as closely as
possible in shape and appearance.
   (G)   Blocking windows and doors.
      (1)   The practice of blocking-up or blocking-down window and door
openings substantially alters the historic appearance of a building and the
historic rhythm of forms and openings of adjacent buildings along the block.
      (2)   Blocking should always be avoided in reconstruction work on
existing structures.
      (3)   If, pursuant to this chapter, it is found absolutely necessary to
alter an interior ceiling beyond an original alley or street-facing window head
or sill, such alteration shall be done in a manner that retains the full
exterior height of the window, preserves its original proportions and rhythm on
all of the building’s street-facing facades, and retains or replicates the
historic siding material and modeling forms on all surfaces affected by the
altering of the ceiling.
   (H)   Roofs.
      (1)   The principal roof form in the city’s Commercial Historic District
is the flat roof with parapet wall. Many of the city’s parapets are also
finished with pediments, corbelling, protruding cornices, and/or molded
friezes. The predominance of this roof form contributes an important element of
order to the Commercial Landmark District, especially when the city is viewed
from higher elevations. The parapeted flat roof also serves to integrate the
city’s diverse facades into a coherent whole and provides a strong sense of the
historic period in which the city rose to prominence.
      (2)   Parapet roofs and their decorative embellishments should be
retained.
      (3)   Preapproved roofing choices are available from the City Clerk at
City Hall. When using any one or multiple of these preapproved items, an
application for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the preapproved
items or an application for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the
preapproved choices will not be subject to a public hearing on the application;
rather, a certificate of appropriateness may be immediately issued by the City
Clerk or the Chair of the Commission to the applicant.
      (4)   Reconstruction work on all buildings in the Commercial Landmark
District should always seek to retain existing parapeted roofs and their
respective decorative embellishments. Roof designs for new construction in the
Commercial Landmark District should seek compatibility with adjacent buildings
from the historic period through the use of roof forms and horizontal cornice
lines that allude to the predominant parapeted roof pattern of the Commercial
District.
   (I)   Materials and textures.
      (1)   Variety in the use of materials and textures is important for the
interest and intimacy it conveys and the historic character it is capable of
evoking.
      (2)   (a)   The choice of materials and textures for reconstruction
designs should be limited to those that were available and typically used at
the time the building in question gained historical significance. In cases
where a historic building’s roof or siding material has deteriorated beyond
repair, or for any other necessary reason requires replacement, the choice of a
new replacement material should match the original material as closely as
possible in terms of composition, size, shape, color, and texture.
         (b)   Material choices for new and reconstruction designs in all
historic districts should avoid, whenever possible, the use of contemporary
synthetic, metallic, and similar building materials that imitate the appearance
of historic building materials such as iron, wood, or stone.
      (3)   Designs for new construction should incorporate only those
materials and textures that either allude to or are compatible with the
predominant materials and textures from the historic period.
   (J)   Colors.
      (1)   In the city, historic color schemes varied by availability of
pigments, stylistic preferences of the period, the type of surface to which
paint was applied, and the dictates of climate.
      (2)   Whenever possible, paint choices in all historic districts should
be limited to those colors, if any, that are known to have been used on the
structure in the historic period. In the absence of such information, color
choices should be limited to those that were available and appropriate for the
building’s style and historic period, and their compatibility with adjacent
structures in the historic district.
      (3)   Preapproved color choices are available from the City Clerk at City
Hall. When using any one or a multiple of these preapproved colors, an
application for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the preapproved
color choices will not be subject to a public hearing on the application;
rather, a certificate of appropriateness may be immediately issued by the City
Clerk or the Chair of the Commission to the applicant.
      (4)   Care should be given to avoiding the application of paint to
surfaces that were not painted in the historic period, and, conversely, paint
should not be entirely removed from historic surfaces that required the
protection of paint or equivalent sealants to inhibit deterioration from the
weather.
      (5)   As a general rule, the removal of paint from historic exterior
woodwork, masonry, and metal should be avoided unless absolutely essential.
Once conditions warranting removal have been identified, however, paint should
be removed to the next sound layer using the gentlest method possible.
   (K)   Architectural details.
      (1)   Architectural details and ornamentation represent unique historic
elements of the city’s architecture and are important components of the city’s
historic character. Their uniqueness, distinctiveness, and ubiquity helps set
the city’s historic character apart from all other historic communities in the
region.
      (2)   Significant architectural details should not be lost in the
rehabilitation or “modernization” of existing buildings in the city’s historic
districts. Reconstruction efforts should respect and enhance the original
architectural integrity of a historic structure and should attempt to retain
such characteristic architectural detail as:
         (a)   Modillioned cornices and pedimented parapet walls;
         (b)   Keystones, voussoirs, and window hoods;
         (c)   Masonry lintels, sills, and relieving arches;
         (d)   Transom windows, fanlights, and sidelights around doors;
         (e)   Multi-colored patterned brick;
         (f)   Wood window frames and mullions; and
         (g)   Friezes, entablatures, and string courses.
   (L)   Fences. Pre-approved fence styles are available from the City Clerk at
City Hall. When using one or a multiple of these preapproved items, an
application for a certificate of appropriateness indicating the pre-approved
choices will not be subject to a public hearing on the application; rather, a
certificate of appropriateness may be immediately issued by the City Clerk or
the Chair of the Commission to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-5) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987; Ord. 2007-01, passed 5-9-
2007; Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-8-2013)
§ 155.140 ADDITIONAL PRINCIPLES AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
   In addition to the specific reconstruction guidelines promulgated in this
chapter, design proposals for reconstruction work in landmark districts should
also consider the principles and recommendations set forth in the Secretary of
the Interior’s most recent edition of the Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-6) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.141 PREDEMOLITION DESIGN REVIEW.
   When an application for a certificate of appropriateness for a building in a
historic district is submitted for review, and when that application involves
the demolition of all or a portion of the building or structures within the
boundaries of the historic district, the Commission shall review the post-
demolition plans for the property in terms of the design guidelines and
standards enumerated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-7) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.142 CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES FOR EVALUATION OF ECONOMIC IMPACT.
   (A)   Commission consideration. Upon application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall, when requested by the property owner,
consider evidence of the economic impact on the owner of denial or partial
denial of a certificate of appropriateness. In no case may a certificate be
denied, in whole or in part, where the Commission establishes that the denial
or partial denial will, when available incentives are utilized, deprive the
owner of a reasonable economic use of the designated property within a landmark
district. A certificate of appropriateness shall be granted, subject to
conditions stipulated by the Commission, if a structural evaluation by the
owner and confirmed by the Commission demonstrates that the significant feature
or features at issue are beyond reasonable repair and a hazardous condition
exists.
   (B)   Factors considered for denial or partial denial.
      (1)   In determining whether denial or partial denial of a certificate of
appropriateness will permit the owner of a reasonable economic use of
designated property in a historic district, the Commission shall consider the
following factors:
         (a)   The market value of the designated property in its existing
condition, taking into consideration the ability to maintain, operate, or
rehabilitate the designated property with the alterations or changes sought by
the owner, and without the alterations or changes sought by the owner.
Available incentives shall be included in both calculations of market value;
         (b)   The owner’s yearly net return on the designated property to the
extent available during the five years prior to the hearing;
         (c)   Estimates of the owner’s future net yearly return on the
designated property with and without the alterations or changes sought by the
owner and with available incentives;
         (d)   The net return and the rate of return necessary to attract
capital for investment in such designated property and in the land on which the
designated property is situated without the alterations or changes sought by
the owner and available incentives, if such information is available or, if
such information is not available; in a comparable building, structure, area,
or site and in the land on which such comparable building, structure, area, or
site is situated; and
         (e)   The net return and rate of return realized on comparable
buildings, structures, areas, or sites not subject to this chapter.
      (2)   Upon written request from the Commission, the owner or person in
charge shall provide the Commission with such information as is necessary and
sufficient to make the determinations required hereunder.
   (C)   Appointment of expert. Upon reasonable notice to the owner, the
Commission may appoint an expert or experts to provide advice and/or testimony
concerning the value of the property, the availability of incentives and the
economic impacts of approval, denial, or partial denial of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-8) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.143 CHANGE IN USE OF LANDMARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   Notice of proposed action. An individual landmark property designated
pursuant to this chapter and not included within the bounds of a landmark
district may be demolished, materially altered, remodeled, relocated, or put to
a different use only after 180 days’ written notice of the owner’s proposed
action has been given to the Commission.
   (B)   Acquisition by Commission. During this period, the Commission may
negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a
means of preserving the designated landmark. During this period, or at any time
prior thereto following notice of designation to the owner, and where such
action is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the continued preservation of
the designated landmark, the Commission may enter into negotiations with the
owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, or exchange of the designated
landmark or any interest therein.
   (C)   Reduction of waiting period. The Commission may reduce the waiting
period required by this section in any case where the owner would suffer
extreme hardship unless a reduction in the required period were allowed.
   (D)   Waiver of waiting period. The Commission shall have the discretionary
authority to waive all or any portion of the required waiting period, provided
that the alteration, remodeling, relocation, or change of use is undertaken
subject to conditions agreed to by the Commission ensuring the continued
maintenance of the historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural
integrity and character of the property.
   (E)   Forfeiture of designation status. Any historic property that is
demolished, materially altered, remodeled, relocated, or put to different use
pursuant to the provisions of this section may, at the discretion of the
Commission, forfeit its right to designation status and all the rights,
incentives, and entitlement conditioned by that designation status.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-9) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.144 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.
   In addition to any power or authority of the city to regulate by planning or
zoning laws and regulations or by any other laws and regulations, the City
Council shall be empowered, pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-4612, to provide by
ordinances special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement,
and preservation of a landmark, landmark site, or landmark district properties.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-10) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.145 EXEMPTION FROM HEALTH AND BUILDING CODES.
   The City Council, in order to promote the preservation and restoration of a
landmark, landmark site, or landmark district properties within its
jurisdiction, may exempt a landmark, landmark site, or landmark district from
the application of such standards contained in the County Health or City
Building Codes, or both, as the City Council, upon recommendation of the
Commission, shall determine would otherwise prevent or seriously hinder the
preservation or restoration of said landmark, landmark site, or landmark
district.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-11) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.146 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS.
   The Commission may establish procedures authorizing owners of a designated
landmark, landmark site, or landmark district properties to transfer
development rights in such amounts and subject to such conditions as the City
Council shall determine. For the purposes of this section, DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
are the rights granted under this section respecting the permissible bulk and
size of improvements erected thereon.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-12) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.147 DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR.
   The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a landmark or an
improvement, building, or structure in a landmark district shall keep in good
repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building, or
structure, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control as
specified in the designating ordinance or permit, and all interior portions
thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of
any exterior architectural feature.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-13) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.148 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appealable actions. The following actions by the Commission may be
appealed by an interested party:
      (1)   No public hearing. The Commission’s decision not to hold a public
hearing on an application for designation of a landmark property;
      (2)   Site designation. A determination made after a public hearing to
designate or not to designate a landmark, landmark site, landmark district; and
      (3)   Certificate of appropriateness. The Commission’s decision to grant
or not to grant a certificate of appropriateness.
   (B)   Petition for reconsideration.
      (1)   Time limitation; grounds. Any interested person aggrieved by a
preliminary determination of the Commission finding that a cultural resource is
ineligible for designation may, within 35 calendar days of the date of notice
of the determination, petition the Commission for reconsideration of that
determination on the grounds that the determination was based on errors or
omissions of fact or that new information bearing on the determination and not
discoverable by the petitioner at the time of the determination is available.
The petition for reconsideration shall be filed with the Commission and shall
be accompanied by a statement of the grounds for the petition and supporting
documents.
      (2)   Commission action. Within 60 calendar days of receiving the
petition for reconsideration, the Commission shall make review of the record,
affirm, modify, or reverse its prior determination, and may render a revised
determination. The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a hearing on the
petition for reconsideration.
      (3)   Writ of certiorari. The action of the Commission denying
reconsideration and affirming its determination that a cultural resource is
ineligible for designation shall be final, unless, within 20 calendar days from
the date of the action, an interested person of record obtains a writ of
certiorari from the District Court of the county for the purpose of review of
the action taken.
   (C)   Notice of appeal.
      (1)   Appeal. Any interested person of record aggrieved by a decision of
the Commission designating or rejecting a nomination for designation as
landmark property or issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness may,
within 35 calendar days of mailing of notice of such designation or rejection
of nomination or of such issuance or denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, appeal such decision in writing to the City Council.
      (2)   Written notice. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with
the Commission and the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement
setting forth the grounds for the appeal, supporting documents, and argument.
      (3)   Remand back to Commission; modify or reverse decision. If, after
examination of the written appeal and the record, the City Council determines
that:
         (a) An error in fact may exist in the record, it shall remand the
proceeding to the Commission for reconsideration; or
         (b)   If the City Council determines that the decision of the
Commission is based on an error in judgment or conclusion, it may modify or
reverse the decision of the Commission.
      (4)   Request additional information. The City Council’s consideration
shall be based upon the record only; however, the City Council may, at its
discretion, publicly request additional information of the appellant, the
Commission, or other knowledgeable persons.
      (5)   Final action of City Council. The City Council shall take final
action on any appeal from a decision of the Commission by adoption of an
ordinance, and, when so doing, it shall make of the Commission by adoption of
an ordinance, and, when so doing, it shall make and enter findings of fact from
the record and reasons therefrom which support its action.
         (a)   Said findings and reasons shall set forth and demonstrate the
manner in which the action carries out and helps to implement the goals,
objectives, and criteria set forth in the ordinance.
         (b)   The City Council may adopt all or portions of the Commission’s
findings and reasons.
      (6)   Writ of certiorari. The action of the City Council approving or
rejecting a decision or recommendation of the Commission shall be final,
unless, within 20 days from the date of the action, an interested person of
record obtains a writ of certiorari from the District Court of the county for
the purpose of review of the action taken.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-14) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987)
§ 155.149 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Methods of enforcement.
      (1)   In addition to the regulations of this chapter, other chapters of
this Title and other provisions of law which govern the approval or disapproval
of applications for permits or licenses covered by this chapter, the Commission
or its designee shall have the authority to implement the enforcement thereof
by any of the following means:
         (a)   Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this
chapter upon the owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the improvement,
building, structure, or land;
         (b)   Calling upon the City Attorney to institute any necessary legal
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the City Attorney is
hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; or
         (c)   Calling upon the Chief of Police and authorized agents to assist
in the enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the City Attorney may
maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the
correction or removal of any violation of this chapter, or for an injunction in
appropriate cases.
   (B)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 12-8-15) (Ord. 492, passed 7-14-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
GEOGRAPHIC DESIGNATION
§ 155.160 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city’s Historic Preservation Commission has duly convened and made
investigative conclusions regarding the quality of significance in American,
Idaho, or city history, architecture, archaeology, or culture that is present
in the sites, buildings, structures, and objects that constitute the proposed
historic district, and that they possess integrity of location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
      (1)   Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of such history; or
      (2)   They embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction or represent the work of a master, or possess high
artistic value, or that they represent a significant and distinguishable area
whose components may lack individual distinction.
   (B)   It was further determined by the city’s Historic Preservation
Commission that should any particular buildings, structures, features, sites,
or surroundings be deemed to lack individual distinction or historic integrity,
that the proposed historic district as a whole conveys an overall sense of the
time and place of the period of which the elements of the district gained
historic significance, and therefore, the historic district is significant as a
whole. Said investigative findings of the city’s Historic Preservation
Commission shall be hereby adopted.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 10-28-2020)
§ 155.161 DESIGNATION; CONTROL.
   (A)   Designation. That, pursuant to the provisions of §§
155.059 and
156.094 of this code of ordinances, the City Council approves the formal
designation of the following historic district as the Historic District:
“That geographical area, including the boundaries and resource status
(contributory, compatible, noncontributory) established in the 1979 Wallace
Historic District under the National Register of Historic Places nomination,
inclusive of the 1983 and 2000 boundary increases and resource status
designations, and further inclusive of any future boundary increases or
resource status designations as may be made to the Wallace Historic District
under the National Register of Historic Places.”
   (B)   Controls. A certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the
Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to §§
155.075 through
155.084 and
156.095 before the owners may make alterations or changes to the exterior of
any property within the defined Historic District above.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 10-28-2020)
§ 155.162 LEGAL DESCRIPTION; MAP.
   (A)   Legal description. A formal legal description of the area encompassed
by the Historic District, using parcel references based on parcel data from the
county then in existence at the time of adoption of this section, will be kept
at City Hall and made available to citizens upon request. All parcel references
are based on the county parcel data received from the county in March of 2020
(Datum EPSG:8826 - NAD83/Idaho Transverse Mercator - Projected). The Historic
District boundary legal description is as follows:
      (1)   Beginning at the northwest corner of Parcel No. O1650001012A;
      (2)   Continue northeast along the northwest edge of Parcels No.
O1650001012A, O1650001007A, and O1650001002A to the north corner of Parcel No.
O1650001002A;
      (3)   Continue southeast, then northeast, then southeast along the north
edge of Parcel No. O1650001001A to the southwest corner of Parcel No.
O3225001009G;
      (4)   Continue northeast along the northwest edge of Parcel No.
O3225001009G to the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001009H;
      (5)   Continue northeast, then northwest, then north along the west edge
of Parcel No. B0750001009H;
      (6)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001008D;
      (7)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001008A;
      (8)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001007A;
      (9)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001006;
      (10)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001005D;
      (11)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001005A;
      (12)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001004A;
      (13)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001003A;
      (14)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750001002A;
      (15)   Continue north along the west edge and then east along the north
edge of Parcel No. B0750001001A;
      (16)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000025A;
      (17)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000026A;
      (18)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000028A;
      (19)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000032A;
      (20)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000035A;
      (21)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000037A;
      (22)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000039A;
      (23)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000040A;
      (24)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000042A;
      (25)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000045A;
      (26)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0700000047A;
      (27)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B070000000CA;
      (28)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B070000000CB;
      (29)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0300003008A;
      (30)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0300003006A;
      (31)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0300003004A;
      (32)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0300003002A;
      (33)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0300003001A;
      (34)   Continue northeast along the west edge and then east along the
north edge of Parcel No. B0300003000A;
      (35)   Continue east along the north edge of Parcel No. B03000020070;
      (36)   Continue east along the north edge of Parcel No. B0300002005A;
      (37)   Continue east along the north edge of Parcel No. B0300002003A;
      (38)   Continue east along the north edge of Parcel No. B0300002001A;
      (39)   Continue east along the north edge of the Placer Creek right-of-
way to the southwest corner of Parcel No. B00000341500;
      (40)   Continue north along the west edge and then east along the north
edge of Parcel No. B00000341500;
      (41)   Continue northeast along the west edge of the Placer Creek right-
of-way to the west edge of the First Street right-of-way;
      (42)   Continue north along the west edge and then east along the north
edge of the First Street right-of-way;
      (43)   Continue east along the north edge and then north along the west
edge of Parcel No. B0050002001A;
      (44)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0050002005A;
      (45)   Continue north along the west edge of the Pine Street right-of-
way;
      (46)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0050001001A;
      (47)   Continue north along the west edge of parcel of the alley right-
of-way;
      (48)   Continue north along the west edge and then east along the north
edge of Parcel No. B0050001001A;
      (49)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0050001018A;
      (50)   Continue west, then northwest, then northwest along the south edge
of the River Street right-of-way;
      (51)   Continue east directly from the south edge of the River Street
right-of-way to the northwest corner of Parcel No. B0550003001A;
      (52)   Continue northeast along the north edge of Parcel No.
B0S50003001A;
      (53)   Continue directly northeast from the northeast corner of Parcel
No. B0550003001A, across Parcel No. B0550004000A, to the northeast edge of the
Front Street right-of-way and the southwest edge of the South Fork Coeur
d’Alene River channel;
      (54)   Continue southeast along the southwest edge of the South Fork
Coeur d’Alene River channel to the northeast corner of Parcel No. B0050017010A;
      (55)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050017020A;
      (56)   Continue from the northeast corner of Parcel No. B0050017020A
across the Sixth Street right-of-way to the northwest corner of Parcel No.
B0050023000A;
      (57)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050023000A;
      (58)   Continue from the southeast corner of Parcel No. B0050023000A
across the alley right-of- way to the northeast corner of Parcel No.
B00500230220;
      (59)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B00500230220;
      (60)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050026001B;
      (61)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050026001A;
      (62)   Continue southeast from the southeast corner of Parcel No.
B0050026001A across the Cedar Street right-of-way to the northeast corner of
Parcel No. B0050027002A;
      (63)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050027002A;
      (64)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050027000E;
      (65)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B0050027009A;
      (66)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B025000A001A;
      (67)   Continue southeast from the northeast corner of Parcel No.
B025000A001A across the Eighth Street right-of-way to the northwest corner of
the portion of Parcel No. B025000A001A that is east of the Eighth Street right-
of-way;
      (68)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B025000A001A;
      (69)   Continue northeast from the northeast corner of the portion of
Parcel No. B025000A001A east of the Eighth Street right-of-way directly to the
southeast corner of Parcel No. B02000070000;
      (70)   Continue west along the south edge and northwest along the west
edge of Parcel No. B02000070000;
      (71)   Continue northeast along the west edge and east along the north
edge of Parcel No. B02000090000;
      (72)   Continue northwest along the west edge of Parcel No. B0200013001B;
      (73)   Continue northwest along the west edge of Parcel No. B0200013001A;
      (74)   Continue northwest along the west edge of Parcel No. B02000200000;
      (75)   Continue northwest along the west edge of Parcel No. B02000190000;
      (76)   Continue northeast along the west edge and then east along the
north edge and the south along the east edge of Parcel No. B02000180000;
      (77)   Continue southeast along the east edge of Parcel No. B02000190000;
      (78)   Continue southeast along the east edge of Parcel No. B02000200000;
      (79)   Continue southeast along the east edge of Parcel No. B0200013001A;
      (80)   Continue east along the north edge and then northeast along the
west edge of Parcel No. B0200005002A;
      (81)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0200005001C;
      (82)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0200005001B;
      (83)   Continue northeast along the west edge of Parcel No. B0200005001A;
      (84)   Continue northeast along the west edge and then east along the
north edge of Parcel No. B0200005001D;
      (85)   Continue from the northeast corner of Parcel No. B0200005001D
northeast across the Canyon Avenue right-of-way directly to the southwest
corner of Parcel No. B0200004001A;
      (86)   Continue northeast along the west edge, then east along the north
edge, then south along the east edge of Parcel No. B0200004001A;
      (87)   Continue south along the east edge of Parcel No. B0200004002A;
      (88)   Continue south along the east edge of Parcel No. B02000040030;
      (89)   Continue south along the east edge of Parcel No. B0200004005A;
      (90)   Continue south along the east edge of Parcel No. B02000040060;
      (91)   Continue south along the east edge of Parcel No. B0200004007A;
      (92)   Continue southeast from the southeast corner of Parcel No.
B0200004007A directly across the Burke Road right-of-way to the northwest
corner of Parcel No. B02000030000;
      (93)   Continue east along the north edge and then southeast along the
east edge of Parcel No. B02000030000;
      (94)   Continue from the southeast corner of Parcel No. B02000030000
directly across the alley right-of-way to the northeast corner of Parcel No.
B0600002009A;
      (95)   Continue southeast along the east edge and southwest along the
east edge of Parcel No. B0600002009A;
      (96)   Continue southwest along the east edge and southwest along the
south edge of Parcel No. B0600002007A;
      (97)   Continue southwest along the south edge of Parcel No.
B0600002007A;
      (98)   Continue southwest along the south edge of Parcel No.
B0600002001A;
      (99)   Continue southwest along the south edge of Parcel No.
B0600002001B;
      (100)   Continue from the southwest corner of Parcel No. B0600002001B
directly across the Benthams Road right-of-way to the north northwest corner of
Parcel No. B06000010020;
      (101)   Continue southwest along the northwest edge of Parcel No.
B06000010020;
      (102)   Continue from the south northwest corner of Parcel No.
B06000010020 directly to the northeast corner of Parcel No. B06000010010;
      (103)   Continue southwest along the west edge of Parcel No.
B06000010010;
      (104)   Continue directly from the southwest corner of Parcel No.
B06000010010 to the north corner of Parcel No. B025000400AA;
      (105)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge of Parcel No.
B025000400AA;
      (106)   Continue southeast along the northeast edge and northeast along
the north edge of Parcel No. B0250004001A;
      (107)   Continue northeast along the north edge and then south along the
west edge and then east along the north edge of Parcel No. B0250004013A;
      (108)   Continue east along the north edge of Parcel No. B0250004015A;
      (109)   Continue from the northeast corner of Parcel No. B0250004015A
directly across the right- of-way of Residence Street to the northwest corner
of Parcel No. B03500170010;
      (110)   Continue northeast along the north edge and then southeast along
the east edge of Parcel No. B03500170010;
      (111)   Continue southeast along the east edge of Parcel No.
B0350017002A;
      (112)   Continue from the southeast corner of Parcel No. B0350017002A
directly across the Pearl Street right-of-way to the northeast corner of Parcel
No. B0350016001A;
      (113)   Continue southeast along the east edge of Parcel No.
B0350016001A;
      (114)   Continue from the southeast corner of Parcel No. B0350016001A
directly to the centerline of the Silver Street right-of-way residing midway
between the south edge of Parcel No. B0350016001A and the north edge of Parcel
No. B03500130000;
      (115)   Continue southwest along the centerline of the Silver Street
right-of-way to the midpoint of the intersection of the Silver Street and C
Street rights-of-way;
      (116)   Continue south along the centerline of the C Street right-of-way
to the midpoint of the intersection of the C Street and Harrison Street rights-
of-way;
      (117)   Continue southwest along the centerline of the Harrison Street
right-of-way to the midpoint of the Harrison Street and A Street rights-of-way;
      (118)   Continue northwest along the centerline of the A Street right-of-
way to the midpoint of the A Street and Oak Street rights-of-way;
      (119)   Continue west along the centerline of the Oak Street right-of-way
to the west end of the right-of-way;
      (120)   Continue north along the west end of the Oak Street right-of-way
directly to the southwest corner of Parcel No. B0500006008A;
      (121)   Continue north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0500006008A;
      (122)   Continue west along the south edge and then north along the west
edge of the Olive Street right-of-way to the southeast corner of Parcel No.
B0100018007A;
      (123)   Continue west along the south edge then north along the west edge
of Parcel No. B0100018007A;
      (124)   Continue west along the south edge of Parcel No. B0100018004A;
      (125)   Continue south along the east edge then west along the south edge
then north along the west edge of Parcel No. B0100018004A;
      (126)   Continue west from the northwest corner of Parcel No.
B0100018004A along the centerline of the Maple Street right-of-way to the
midpoint of the intersection of the Maple Street and Second Street rights-of-
way;
      (127)   Continue north along the centerline of the Second Street right-
of-way to the midpoint of the intersection of the Second Street and Pearl
Street rights-of-way;
      (128)   Continue west along the centerline of the Pearl Street right-of-
way to the midpoint of the intersection of the Pearl Street and First Street
rights-of-way;
      (129)   Continue south along the centerline of the First Street right-of-
way to the south end of the right-of-way;
      (130)   Continue west along the south end of the First Street right-of-
way to the southeast corner of Parcel No. B0800003007A;
      (131)   Continue west along the south edge of Parcel No. B0800003007A;
      (132)   Continue from the southwest corner of Parcel No. B0800003007A
west across the Placer Creek right-of-way to the east edge of Parcel No.
B0800005016A;
      (133)   Continue southwest along the east edge of Parcel No.
B0800005016A;
      (134)   Continue from the southeast corner of Parcel No. B0800005016A
southwest across Parcel No. B0750002001A to the northwest corner of Parcel No.
B0750002002B;
      (135)   Continue south along the west edge of Parcel No. B0750002002B;
      (136)   Continue southeast from the southwest corner of Parcel No.
B0750002002B (latitude 47.4689999319; longitude -115.9325440087; EPSG:4326 -
WGS 84 - Geographic Datum) directly to the point (latitude 47.4683114019;
longitude -115.9323359066; EPSG:4326 - WGS 84 - Geographic Datum) at the base
of the slope;
      (137)   Continue southwest from the above-described point at the base of
the slope directly to the east corner of Parcel No. B0750002006A;
      (138)   Continue from the east corner of Parcel No. B0750002006A
southwest directly to the northeast corner of Parcel No. 48N04E344700;
      (139)   Continue along the northwest edge of Parcel No. 48N04E344700 to
the northeast corner of Parcel No. 48N04E341570;
      (140)   Continue southwest along the east edge of Parcel No.
48N04E341570;
      (141)   Continue southwest along the east edge and northwest along the
south edge of Parcel No. 48N04E341590;
      (142)   Continue southwest along the east edge of Parcel No.
O165000C0000;
      (143)   Continue southwest along the east edge, then east along the north
edge, then southwest along the south edge of Parcel No. O165000D000A;
      (144)   Continue southwest along the south edge of Parcel No.
O165000E000A;
      (145)   Continue southwest along the south edge, then northwest along the
west edge, then southwest along the south edge, then northwest along the west
edge of Parcel No. O165000E000B to the east edge of the King Street right-of-
way;
      (146)   Continue southwest along the south edge of the King Street right-
of-way to the point at the southeast corner of the right-of-way (latitude
47.4666657381; longitude -115.9354596119; EPSG: 4326 - WGS 84- Geographic
Datum);
      (147)   Continue northwest from the above-described southeast corner
point to the southeast corner of Parcel No. 01650001012A; and
      (148)   Continue northwest along the south edge of Parcel No.
O1650001012A to end at the northwest corner of Parcel No. O1650001012A.
   (B)   Official map. A map which outlines those buildings, structures,
features, sites, and surroundings within the District, as well as the
designation of those properties as contributing, non-contributing, and
compatible, should be kept at City Hall and made available to citizens upon
request. The following maps located on the pages pursuant to this section are
part of said section, and work to illustrate portions of the Historic District
and their property status.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c62ae7bf251653eaee3ce2959c8f11512172fee1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1259.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c62ae7bf251653eaee3ce2959c8f11512172fee1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1261.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c62ae7bf251653eaee3ce2959c8f11512172fee1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1263.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c62ae7bf251653eaee3ce2959c8f11512172fee1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1265.png]
 
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 10-28-2020)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Definitions
   
156.003   Authority
   
156.004   Interpretation; application
   
156.005   Combining of permits
   
156.006   Ex post facto application
   
156.007   Variances, conditional and nonconforming uses; amendments
Administration
   
156.020   Administrator and Commission created
   
156.021   Administrator
   
156.022   Commission
   
156.023   Conflict of interest
District Maps and Interpretations
   
156.035   Establishment and purpose of zoning districts
   
156.036   Zoning districts defined
   
156.037   Zoning map adoption
   
156.038   Interpretation of district boundaries
District Regulations
   
156.050   Minimum regulations
   
156.051   Official schedule of district regulations adopted
   
156.052   Natural Resource District (NR)
   
156.053   Holding District (H)
   
156.054   Single-Family Residential District (R-0)
   
156.055   Residential District (R-1)
   
156.056   Multi-Family Residential District (R-2)
   
156.057   Neighborhood Business District (C-1)
   
156.058   Service Business District (C-2)
   
156.059   General Commercial District (GC)
   
156.060   Light Manufacturing District (M-1)
   
156.061   Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2)
Performance Standards
   
156.075   General
   
156.076   Supplemental yard and height regulations
   
156.077   Supplemental general provisions
   
156.078   Commercial and industrial uses
   
156.079   Unique land uses
Cultural Resource Management
   
156.090   Purpose
   
156.091   Area of application
   
156.092   Powers and duties of Commission
   
156.093   Cultural resource designation criteria
   
156.094   Cultural resource designation procedures
   
156.095   Permits
   
156.096   Appeals
   
156.097   Ordinary maintenance and repair
   
156.098   Duty to keep in good repair
   
156.099   Showing of hardship
   
156.100   Enforcement; violations
Conditional Use Permits
   
156.115   General
   
156.116   Application
   
156.117   General standards
   
156.118   Public sites and open spaces
   
156.119   Supplementary conditions and safeguards
   
156.120   Procedure for hearing, notice
   
156.121   Action by Commission
   
156.122   Notification to applicant
   
156.123   Appeal to Council
Nonconforming Uses
   
156.135   Intent
   
156.136   Incompatibility of nonconforming uses
   
156.137   Avoidance of undue hardship
   
156.138   Nonconforming lots of record
   
156.139   Nonconforming uses of structures or structure and land combinations
   
156.140   Repairs and maintenance
   
156.141   Uses under special use provisions not nonconforming uses
Signs
   
156.155   Intent
   
156.156   Public signs excluded
   
156.157   General requirements
   
156.158   Permitted signs
   
156.159   Violations
Appeal, Variance, and Action by Affected Persons
   
156.170   General
   
156.171   Administrative appeals
   
156.172   Stay of proceedings
   
156.173   Variance
   
156.174   Application and standards for variances
   
156.175   Supplementary conditions and safeguards
   
156.176   Public hearing
   
156.177   Action by Commission
   
156.178   Actions by affected persons
Enforcement
   
156.190   Zoning approval required; building permits
   
156.191   Application
   
156.192   Zoning approval
   
156.193   Expiration of zoning approval
   
156.194   Record of zoning approval
   
156.195   Failure to obtain zoning approval
   
156.196   Construction and use
   
156.197   Complaints regarding violations
   
156.198   Schedule of fees, charges, and expenses
   
156.199   Violations
Amendments
   
156.210   General
   
156.211   Initiation of zoning amendments
   
156.212   Application
   
156.213   Transmittal to Commission
   
156.214   Commission to hold public hearing
   
156.215   Recommendation by Commission
   
156.216   Action by Council
   
156.217   Resubmission of application
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance” of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation. For the purpose of the chapter, certain terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
      (1)   The word PERSON includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
      (2)   The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number
includes the plural; and the plural number includes the singular.
      (3)   The word SHALL is a mandatory requirement; the word MAY is a
permissive requirement; and the word SHOULD is a preferred requirement.
      (4)   The words USED or OCCUPIED include the words INTENDED, DESIGNED, or
ARRANGED to be used or occupied.
      (5)   The word LOT includes the words PLOT, PARCEL, and TRACT.
(Prior Code, § 13-3-1)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. Use or structure on the same lot with another
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
structure.
      ADMINISTRATOR.   An official having knowledge in principles and practices
of zoning, who is appointed by the City Council to administer this chapter.
      ALTERATION.   Any exterior change or modification, through public or
private action, of any cultural resource or of any property located within a
historic district, including, but not limited to, exterior changes to or
modification of structure, architectural details, or visual characteristics,
such as paint color and surface texture, grading, surface paving, new
structures, cutting or removal of trees and other natural features, disturbance
of archeological sites or areas, and the placement or removal of any exterior
objects, such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls,
fences, steps, plantings, and landscape accessories affecting the exterior
visual qualities of the property.
      AMENDMENT. See
Chapter 152.
      AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER, AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES. The
sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers,
or farm implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty
repair of the same to be displayed and sold on the premises.
      AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR OR GARAGE. The repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of
motor vehicles or parts thereof, including service, painting, and steam-
cleaning of vehicles.
      BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a BASEMENT, unless such floor level qualifies as a first story,
as defined in this section.
      BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
      BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building detached from, but located
on, the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured for the average elevation
of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the
top of building walls for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
      CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human or
animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums, and mortuaries, if operated in connection with and within the
boundaries of such CEMETERY for which perpetual care and maintenance is
provided.
      CLINIC. A building used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick,
ailing, infirm, or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and
surgical attention, but which building does not provide board, room, or regular
hospital care and services.
      CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by an
organized association of persons for social, literary, political, educational,
or recreational purposes primarily for the exclusive organization, group, or
association, a principal activity of which is to render a service usually and
ordinarily carried on in a business.
      COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES. Any profit-making activity which is
generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion picture theaters,
carnivals, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and similar entertainment activities.
      COMMISSION.   The Planning and Zoning Historic Preservation Commission
appointed by the city, as described in §§
155.020 through
155.029,
156.022, and
156.092.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the City
Council, including such things as the general location and extent of present
proposed physical facilities, including housing, industrial commercial uses,
major transportation, parks, schools, and other community facilities.
      CONDITIONAL USE. See
Chapter 153.
      COUNCIL. City Council of the city.
      CULTURAL RESOURCE. Improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features,
sites, places, areas, or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational,
cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the citizens of the
city.
      DENSITY. A unit of measurement. The number of gross dwelling units per
acre of land.
         (a)   GROSS DENSITY. The gross number of dwelling units per acre of
total land to be developed, including public rights-of-way.
         (b)   NET DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land when
the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses,
excluding public rights-of-way.
      DISTRICT.   Synonymous with ZONE.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling
units, including townhouses and condominiums with varying arrangements of
entrances and parting walls. MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING may include public housing
and company owned and/or sponsored housing development.
      DWELLING, ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY).   A
dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant, where meals
and/or lodging are provided for compensation for three or more unrelated
persons where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in the individual
rooms.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.   A dwelling consisting of a single-dwelling
unit only, separated from other building units by open space.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling consisting of two dwelling units which
may be either attached side by side, or one above the other.
      DWELLING UNIT.   Space within a dwelling comprising living, dining,
sleeping room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for
cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its
household employees.
      EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a
specified purpose, of any designated part of their property.
      EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The architectural elements embodying
style, design, general arrangement, and components of all of the outer surfaces
of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture
of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights,
signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.
      FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single-dwelling unit, providing
that all members are related by blood, adoption, or marriage.
      HEALTH AUTHORITY. The local District Health Department or the State
Department of Health and Welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
      HISTORIC, CULTURAL RESOURCE, OR LANDMARK SITE. A parcel or part thereof
on which a cultural resource is situated, and any abutting parcel or part
thereof constituting part of the premises on which the cultural resource is
situated, and which has been designated a designated site pursuant to federal
or state designation or this chapter.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. Any area containing improvements which have a special
character, historical interest, or aesthetic value or which represents
architectural periods or styles typical to the history of the city, and which
improvements constitute a distinct section of the city that has been designated
a HISTORIC DISTRICT pursuant to federal or state designation or this chapter.
      HISTORIC LANDMARK OR CULTURAL RESOURCE STRUCTURE. Any improvement that
has special historical, cultural, aesthetic, or architectural character,
interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or history of the
city, state, or nation and that has been designated pursuant to federal or
state designation or this chapter.
      HOLDING ZONE. A zone designated to serve as a reservoir pending future
designation of land use.
      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation conducted entirely within a dwelling unit,
subject to the required performance standards in §
156.079.
      HOTEL OR MOTEL AND APARTMENT HOTEL. A building in which lodging or
boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation.
As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a “dwelling, rooming
house” (including boarding houses, lodging houses, and dormitories), which is
separately defined in this section.
      IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence,
gate, wall, work of art, or other object constituting a physical betterment of
real property, or any part of such betterment.
      INSTITUTION. Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of
mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling, or other correctional services.
      JUNK. Any material, such as metal, glass, paper, or other waste, that has
ceased to serve the initial purpose for which it was designed. The sale of
portions of the initial object to be used again in some form.
      JUNK BUILDINGS, JUNK SHOPS, JUNKYARDS. Any land, property, structure,
building, or combination of the same on which junk is stored or processed.
      KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more domesticated animals
more than four months of age are housed, roomed, bred, boarded, trained, or
sold, and which may offer provisions for minor medical treatment.
      LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET.
         (a)   Space logically and conveniently located for both pickups and
deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to
such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
         (b)   Required OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE is not to be included as off-
street parking space in the computation of required off-street parking space.
All OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES shall be located totally outside of any street or
alley right-of-way.
      LOT. For the purposes of this title, a lot is a parcel of land of
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and
area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required.
Such LOT shall have frontage on an improved public street or on an approved
private street and may consist of:
         (a)   Single lot of record;
         (b)   A portion of a lot of record; and
         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, or portion of lots of
record.
      LOT COVERAGE. The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on
a lot to the horizontally-projected area of the lot, expressed to the
percentage.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to a street shall be
considered FRONTAGE, and yard shall be provided as indicated under the
definition of yards in this section.
      LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF. The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
      LOT TYPES. Terminology used in this chapter with reference to corner
lots, interior lots, and through lots is as follows.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot with only one frontage on a street.
         (c)   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which frontage is at right
angles to the general pattern in the area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be
a corner lot.
         (d)   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. THROUGH LOTS abutting two streets may be referred to as DOUBLE
FRONTAGE LOTS.
      MANUFACTURING, EXTRACTIVE. Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing,
storing, separating, cleaning, and marketing of any mineral natural resource.
      MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. Manufacturing, processing, including wood
processing, assembling, storing, testing, and similar industrial uses which are
generally major operations and extensive in character; require large sites,
open storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, and ready
access to regional transportation; and normally generate some nuisances such as
smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution, but
not beyond a district boundary.
      MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are
usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet, and free of
objectionable or hazardous elements, such as smoke, noise, odor, or dust;
operating and storing within enclosed structures; and generating little
industrial traffic and no nuisances.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, and is
eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and
which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein.
      MOBILE HOME COURT OR TRAILER COURT.
         (a)   Land under single ownership designed for the temporary or
permanent parking of three or more vehicles used for human habitation within a
minimum lot area for each mobile home site which is less than the requirements
for a single-family home and/or where an individual septic tank is not provided
for each mobile home.
         (b)   MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COURT also includes a continuous
parcel or land under single ownership where the density of mobile homes is over
three per acre.
         (c)   MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COURT does not include land
designated or designed for the display or sale of mobile homes.
      NATURAL RESOURCE ZONE. A zone designed to permit multiple uses in the
rural areas of the county.
      NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure, or use of land existing at the
time of enactment hereof, and which does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
      NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS. Land, buildings, structures, or a combination
thereof for the storage, cultivation, and transplanting of live trees, shrubs,
or plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for
gardening or landscaping.
      NURSERY FOR CHILDREN. A place, home, or facility providing care for more
than five children of preschool age.
      NURSING HOME, HOME OF THE AGED. A home or facility for the care or
treatment of more than five pensioners or elderly people.
      OBJECT. A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, symbolic, or
scientific value, usually by design or nature movable.
      OPEN SPACE. An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the
same lot with a building.
         (a)   The area may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts, or any other
recreational facilities that the Commission deems permissive.
         (b)   Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation, and the like
shall not be included.
      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Consists of areas adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly-
related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but should be
located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
      PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND. A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the city in the amount of the estimated construction costs
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
      PERSONAL SERVICES. Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily
offers services to the general public, such as shoe repair, watch repair,
barber shops, beauty parlors, and similar activities.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area of land in which a variety of
residential, commercial, and industrial uses developed under single ownership
or control are accommodated in a preplanned environment with more flexible
standards, such as lot sizes and setbacks, and those restrictions that would
normally apply under these regulations.
      PRESERVATION. The identification, study, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, or enhancement of cultural resources.
      PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES. The use of offices and related spaces for such
professional services as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers,
architects, engineers, and similar professions.
      PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY. The erection, construction, alteration,
operation, or maintenance of buildings, power plants or substations, water
treatment plants or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants and
other similar public service structures by a public utility or by a railroad,
whether publicly or privately owned, or by municipal or other governmental
agencies, and including the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport,
communication, and public water and sewage services.
      PUBLIC USES. Public parks, schools, and administrative and cultural
buildings and structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely
to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
      RESEARCH ACTIVITIES. Research, development and testing related to such
fields as chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation, and
engineering.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way.
In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips,
sidewalks, and lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special
features (required by the topography or treatment), such as grade separation,
landscape areas, viaducts, and bridges.
      ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for the display of
any product.
      SEATS. For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking
spaces for certain uses, the number of SEATS is the number of seating units
installed or indicated for each 24 linear inches of benches, pews, or space for
loose chairs.
      SEMI-PUBLIC USE. Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals, and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic, or nonprofit nature.
      SERVICE STATION.
         (a)   Building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires, and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail,
and where, in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made:
            1.   Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries, and distributor
parts;
            2.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
            3.   Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan
belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like;
            4.   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
            5.   Washing, polishing, and sale of washing and polishing
materials;
            6.   Greasing and lubrication;
            7.   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;
            8.   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
            9.   Adjusting and repairing of brakes;
            10.   Minor motor adjustment, not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor;
            11.   Sales of cold drinks, packaged food, tobacco, and similar
conveniences for service station customers, as accessory and incidental to
principal operations;
            12.   Providing road maps and other informational material to
customers; provisions for restroom facilities; and
            13.   Warranty maintenance and safety inspections.
         (b)   Uses permissible at a FILLING STATION do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair garage
nor a body shop.
      SETBACK LINE. A line established by this chapter, generally parallel with
and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no
building or structure may be located aboveground, except as may be provided in
this code.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway which
is approved for use of pedestrian traffic.
      SIGN. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons
not on the premises on which the sign is located.
         (a)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas, or
other artificial light, including reflecting or phosphorus light.
         (b)   SIGN, LIGHTING DEVICE. Any light, string of lights, or group of
lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
         (c)   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign unrelated to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the
premises where said sign is located.
         (d)   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. Any sign related to a business or profession
conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where
such sign is located.
         (e)   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which projects from the exterior of
the building.
      SPECIAL USE. A special use permitted within a district, other than a
principally permitted use, requiring conditional use permit and approval of the
Commission. Conditional uses permitted in each district are listed in the
Official Schedule of District Regulations in §§
156.050 through
156.061.
      STORY.
         (a)   The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above.
         (b)   Except that the topmost STORY shall be that portion of a
building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the
ceiling or roof above.
         (c)   If the finished floor level directly above a basement or unused
under-floor space is more than six feet above grade for more than 50% of the
total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point, such basement
or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a STORY.
      STORY, FIRST. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story,
except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a FIRST STORY, provided such floor level is not more than four
feet below grade, for more than 50% of the total perimeter, or more than eight
feet below grade at any point.
      STREET. A right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent property, a dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term
STREET also includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, and other such terms.
         (a)   ALLEY. Minor street providing secondary access to the back or
side of a property otherwise abutting a street.
         (b)   ARTERIAL. A street designated on the Comprehensive Plan for the
purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
         (c)   COLLECTOR. A street designated on the Comprehensive Plan for the
purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector streets and/
or arterial streets.
         (d)   MINOR. A street which has the primary purpose of providing
access to abutting properties.
         (e)   PRIVATE. A street that is not accepted for public use or
maintenance; provides for vehicular and pedestrian access.
      STRUCTURE.
         (a)   Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location on
the ground.
         (b)   Among other things, STRUCTURE includes buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences, and billboards.
      SUPPLY YARDS. A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods.
      TRAILER OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A structure transportable in one or more
sections less than eight body feet in width or less than 32 body feet in
length, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein.
      USE. The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
      VARIANCE.
         (a)   A VARIANCE is a modification of the requirements of this chapter
as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard,
setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other provisions affecting the
size or shape of a structure or the size of lots.
         (b)   A VARIANCE shall not be considered a right or special privilege,
but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship
because of characteristics of the site and upon the further showing that the
variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
      VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC.
         (a)   A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis, and treatment of
sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals and those who are in need of medical
or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations on the premises
for their treatment, observation, and/or recuperation.
         (b)   It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary
activity.
      VICINITY MAP. A drawing which sets forth, by dimensions or other means,
the relationship of the proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
      WALKWAY. A public way, four feet or more in width, for pedestrian use
only, whether or not along the side of a road.
      WOOD PROCESSING.
         (a)   The sawing of logs, post and pole processing, hardwood and cedar
products, and such operations associated with the industry.
         (b)   Not to include pulp mills, chipping plants, and creosote plants.
      WRECKING YARD. The dismantling or wrecking of two or more used motor
vehicles, mobile homes, a trailers or the storage, sale, or dumping of
dismantled, partially-dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
      YARD. An open space on a lot which is required by this chapter to be
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this title.
         (a)   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending between side lot lines across the
front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal
building.
         (b)   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A yard extending from the principal
building to the side lot on both sides of the principal building between the
lines establishing the front and rear yards.
         (c)   YARD, REAR. A yard extending between side lot lines across the
rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
         (d)   YARD, STREET SIDE. A yard extending from the principal building
to the secondary street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the
front and rear yards.
      ZONE. Providing for definitions of district relations.
      ZONING APPROVAL. Approval by the Administrator or that person designated
assistant that the use is in compliance with the Zoning Map and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-3-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.003 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code Title
67, Chapter 65, and State Constitution Article 12, § 2, as amended or
subsequently codified.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.004 INTERPRETATION; APPLICATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for promotion of the public
health, safety, and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter conflict with requirements of any other lawfully-adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing
the higher standards shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.005 COMBINING OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Commission is hereby required to coordinate with other departments
and agencies concerning all permits which may be required in this chapter and
previous or subsequently-adopted city ordinances.
   (B)   A one-step permit application and processing procedure shall be
developed with the respective departments and agencies for the purpose of
reducing errors, misunderstanding, confusion, and unnecessary delay for those
involved.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.006 EX POST FACTO APPLICATION.
   This chapter is not to be applied in an ex post facto manner, and any use in
any zone which is nonconforming at the time of the passage hereof to the area
that is now zoned will be allowed to continue, and any lot which does not meet
the minimum lot requirements of any zone at the time of the passage hereof will
be allowed to be used for all purposes for which the area is now zoned if it
meets the other requirements of the zone.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.007 VARIANCES, CONDITIONAL AND NONCONFORMING USES; AMENDMENTS.
   The Commission notes that the terms variances, conditional uses,
nonconforming uses, and amendments are terms which have separate and distinct
legal meanings, and it is the intention of the Commission that their legal
meaning be applied whenever and wherever the aforesaid terms are used in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.020 ADMINISTRATOR AND COMMISSION CREATED.
   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, an
Administrator and Commission are hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 13-2-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.021 ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Designation. The Chair of the Planning and Zoning Historic
Preservation Commission shall act as Administrator to administer this chapter.
   (B)   Assistants. The Administrator may be provided with the assistance of
such other persons as the City Council may direct.
   (C)   Duties. For the purpose of this chapter, the Administrator shall have
the following duties:
      (1)   Advise interested parties of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest;
      (3)   Aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
      (4)   Issue zoning approval;
      (5)   Investigate all violations of this chapter and notify, in writing,
the person responsible for such violations, ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation; and
      (6)   Assist the Commission and City Council in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code, § 13-2-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.022 COMMISSION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the Commission shall have the following
duties:
   (A)   Initiate proposed amendments to this chapter and conduct a review of
this chapter every two years;
   (B)   Review all proposed amendments to this chapter and make
recommendations to the City Council;
   (C)   Review all planned unit developments and make recommendations to the
City Council;
   (D)   Grant special use permits as specified in the Official Schedule of
District Regulations, as described in §§
156.050 through
156.061, and under the conditions as herein specified, such additional
safeguards as will uphold the intent of this chapter;
   (E)   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination made by the
Administrator;
   (F)   Authorize such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done; and
   (G)   Periodically review fees charged and make recommendations to the City
Council for adjustments.
(Prior Code, § 13-2-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
Cross-reference:
   Additional duties, see §§
155.020 through
155.029 and
156.092
§ 156.023 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   The City Council, in creating a Commission, shall provide that the
area and interests within its jurisdiction are broadly represented on the
Commission.
   (B)   A member or employee of the City Council shall not participate in any
proceeding or action when the member, employee, or his or her employer,
business partner, business associate, or any person related to him or her by
affinity or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic interest in
the procedure or action.
   (C)   Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be disclosed
at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or considered. A
knowing violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 13-2-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
DISTRICT MAPS AND INTERPRETATIONS
§ 156.035 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following zoning districts are hereby established. For the
interpretation of this subchapter, the zoning districts have been formulated to
realize the general purposes as set forth in this subchapter. In addition, the
specific purpose of each zoning district shall be as stated.
(Prior Code, § 13-4-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.036 ZONING DISTRICTS DEFINED.
   (A)   Natural Resource District (NR). The purpose of the Natural Resource
District is to preserve and maintain the rural character of the land. This
District is also established to allow uses as designated by the Comprehensive
Plan in areas where commercial, industrial, and residential uses can exist side
by side, and where the establishment of a separate district or single-use
district would not be desirable.
   (B)   Holding District (H). The purpose of a Holding District is to maintain
the current vacant character of the site until such time as logical development
shall occur.
   (C)   Single-Family Residential District (R-0). The purpose of the R-
0 District is to promote the establishment of medium-low density, single-family
dwellings, excluding mobile homes, not to exceed ten dwelling units per net
acre. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required.
   (D)   Residential District (R-1). The purpose of the R-1 District is to
promote the establishment of medium-low density, single-family dwellings not to
exceed ten dwelling units per net acre. Centralized water and sewer facilities
are required.
   (E)   Multi-Family Residential District (R-2). The purpose of the R-
2 District is to promote the establishment of medium density, two-family and
multiple-family dwellings not to exceed 12 dwelling units per net acre. This
District is also designed to promote the logical transition of larger older
homes in well-established neighborhoods to multi-family dwellings.
   (F)   Neighborhood Business District (C-1). The purpose of the C-1 District
is to permit the establishment of convenience business uses which tend to meet
the daily needs of the residents of an immediate neighborhood. Such District
shall be strategically located with access to a collector thoroughfare.
Marginal strip development shall be prohibited.
   (G)   Service Business District (C-2). The purpose of the C-2 District is to
permit the establishment of areas for highway and service business uses only.
This District is specifically designed in clusters to service the motoring
public. This District is generally associated with interchange areas along the
major limited access highways.
   (H)   General Commercial (GC). The GC District is intended to create,
preserve, or enhance areas with a wide range of retail sales and service
establishments serving both long-term and short-term needs in compact locations
typically appropriate to commercial clusters developed in urban-density areas.
This District also includes some development which does not strictly fit the
description of this chapter, but also does not merit a zoning district.
   (I)   Light Manufacturing District (M-1). The purpose of the M-1 District is
to encourage the development of manufacturing and wholesale business
establishments which are clean, quiet, and free of hazardous or objectionable
elements, such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare, and shall operate
entirely within enclosed structures and generate little industrial traffic.
Research activities are encouraged. This District is further designed to act as
a transitional use between heavy manufacturing uses and other less intense
business and residential uses.
   (J)   Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2). The purpose of the M-2 District is
to encourage the development of major manufacturing, processing, warehousing,
and major research and testing operations. These activities require extensive
community facilities and reasonable access to arterial thoroughfares.
(Prior Code, § 13-4-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.037 ZONING MAP ADOPTION.
   The districts established in §
156.036 as shown on the Official Zoning Map, together with all explanatory
matter thereon, are hereby adopted as part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-5-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.038 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply.
   (A)   Centerline. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the centerline of street lines, highway right-of-way lines, streams,
lakes, or other bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such
boundary.
   (B)   Lot lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be
said boundaries.
   (C)   Parallel to centerlines. Where district boundaries are so indicated
that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, or the
centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimensions
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map.
   (D)   Railroad line. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad
line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main
tracts of said railroad line.
(Prior Code, § 13-5-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 156.050 MINIMUM REGULATIONS.
   The regulations for each district set forth by this subchapter shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereafter provided.
   (A)   No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in conformity with all
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      (1)   To provide for greater height or bulk;
      (2)   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      (3)   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      (4)   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or
other open spaces than herein required, or in any manner be contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein;
yards or lots created after effective date hereof shall meet at least the
minimum requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.051 OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   District regulations shall be as set forth in §§
156.052 through
156.061 and in the performance standards in §§
156.075 through
156.079.
   (B)   The Official Schedule of District Regulations is divided into four
land use groups: rural or natural resource, residential, commercial, and
industrial.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.052 NATURAL RESOURCE DISTRICT (NR).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose, as earlier stated, of the Natural Resource
District is to preserve and maintain the rural character of the land. This
District is also established to allow uses as designated for by the city’s
Comprehensive Plan in areas where commercial, industrial, and residential uses
can exist side by side, and where the establishment of a separate district for
single use would not be desirable.
   (B)   Change of use.
      (1)   Review by Planning Commission. Any change of use that will occur in
the Natural Resource District will be subject to review by the Planning
Commission for approval or disapproval within 60 days.
      (2)   Considerations. When a change of use is requested in the Natural
Resource District, the following considerations will be taken into account.
         (a)   The use proposed is compatible with the site characteristics
such as slope, flood hazards, and the like.
         (b)   The uses proposed will not substantially alter the character of
the rural area.
         (c)   The proposal complies with the goals and policies of the Land
Use Plan.
         (d)   The proposal meets all the subdivision and zoning site and
performance standards as set out in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
      (3)   Residential uses. The following criteria will be considered
concerning a request for a residential use in the Natural Resource District:
         (a)   The characteristics of the change of use requested and its
compatibility to the site (e.g., potential flooding, faultline slippage, or
access to roads, services, and the like);
         (b)   The proposal complies with the goals and policies of the city’s
Comprehensive Plan; and
         (c)   The proposal meets all the subdivision and zoning site and
performance standards as set out in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
      (4)   Commercial. The following criteria will be considered concerning a
request for commercial uses in the Natural Resource District.
         (a)   The commercial use is compatible with existing uses.
         (b)   The proposal complies with the goals and policies established in
the Land Use Plan.
         (c)   The proposal meets all the subdivision and zoning site and
performance standards as set out in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
         (d)   The proposal is designed in such a way so as to minimize the
impact on adjacent land uses.
      (5)   Industrial. The following criteria will be considered concerning a
request for industrial uses in the Natural Resource District.
         (a)   The proposal complies with the goals and policies established in
the Land Use Plan.
         (b)   The proposal meets all the subdivision and zoning site and
performance standards as set out in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
      (6)   Parks and open space. The following criteria will be considered
concerning a request for recreation areas in the Natural Resource District:
         (a)   The site is suitable for the type of recreational activity
proposed;
         (b)   Natural limitations are taken into consideration both as a
deterrent and as an enhancement to the proposal, and that these are adequately
addressed;
         (c)   The proposal complies with the goals and policies of the city’s
Comprehensive Plan; and
         (d)   The proposal meets all the subdivision and zoning site and
performance standards as set out in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.053 HOLDING DISTRICT (H).
   Based on the findings and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Ordinance 2022-01 removed the Holding District and thereby
redistributed those areas previously in the Holding District.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980; Ord. 2022-01, passed 5-
11-2022)
§ 156.054 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-0).
   (A)   Purpose; density. The purpose of the R-0 District is to promote the
establishment of medium-low density, single-family dwellings, excluding mobile
homes, not to exceed ten dwelling units per net acre.
   (B)   Required facilities. Centralized water and sewer facilities are
required.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following permitted uses are allowed in the R-
0 Zone:
      (1)   Home occupations; and
      (2)   Single-family dwellings (excluding mobile homes).
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses:
      (1)   Churches;
      (2)   Day nurseries;
      (3)   Foster care homes;
      (4)   Hospitals, nursing homes, or homes of the aged;
      (5)   Medical or dental clinics;
      (6)   Multiple-units, not to exceed four; and
      (7)   Public uses.
   (E)   Yards. Yards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Front yard minimum front setback shall be 25 feet; and
      (2)   Side yard minimum side setback shall be five feet.
   (F)   Maximum height. No buildings in Zone R-0 shall be more than four
stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.055 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Purpose; density. The purpose of the R-1 District is to promote the
establishment of medium-low density, single-family dwellings, not to exceed ten
dwelling units per net acre.
   (B)   Required facilities. Centralized water and sewer facilities are
required.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following permitted uses are allowed in the R-
1 Zone:
      (1)   Home occupations; and
      (2)   Single-family dwellings (excluding mobile homes).
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses:
      (1)   Day nursery;
      (2)   Dormitories;
      (3)   Foster care homes;
      (4)   Fraternity houses;
      (5)   Hospitals, nursing homes, or homes of the aged;
      (6)   Medical or dental clinics;
      (7)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (8)   Planned unit developments;
      (9)   Public uses;
      (10)   Semi-public uses; and
      (11)   Sororities.
   (E)   Yards. Yards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Front yard minimum front setback shall be 25 feet; and
      (2)   Side yard minimum side setback shall be five feet.
   (F)   Maximum height. No buildings in Zone R-1 shall be more than four
stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.056 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose; density. The purpose of an R-2 District is to promote the
establishment of medium density, two-family and multiple-family dwellings not
to exceed 12 dwelling units per net acre.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in an R-2 District:
      (1)   Home occupations;
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (3)   Rooming or boarding houses;
      (4)   Single-family dwellings; and
      (5)   Two-family dwellings.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses are conditional uses:
      (1)   Cemeteries;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Elementary or high schools;
      (4)   Foster care homes;
      (5)   Fraternities, sorority houses, or dormitories;
      (6)   Homes for children (daycare centers);
      (7)   Hospitals;
      (8)   Hotels;
      (9)   Mobile home parks;
      (10)   Mobile homes;
      (11)   Nurseries for flowers and plants;
      (12)   Nursing homes for the aged;
      (13)   Planned unit developments;
      (14)   Public uses; and
      (15)   Semi-public uses.
   (D)   Yards. Yards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Front yard minimum front setback shall be 25 feet; and
      (2)   Side yard minimum side setback shall be three feet.
   (E)   Mobile home park. Mobile home parks are acceptable as a conditional
use, provided they shall meet or exceed the following design standards.
      (1)   Lot areas and density as hereby established shall be considered the
minimum requirements within a mobile home park.
         (a)   Minimum area requirement for a mobile home park shall be three
acres.
         (b)   A minimum of 10% of the land area within the mobile home park
shall be provided for definable play areas and open spaces within the mobile
home park. Such areas of open space and/or play areas shall not be areas
included within any setbacks, parking areas, or roads, nor shall they include
any areas of less than 20 feet in length or width.
         (c)   The minimum lot area per unit shall be 3,750 square feet,
including underground utility easements, private drives, and parking spaces,
but excluding street rights-of-way.
      (2)   Lot coverage and setback requirements shall be:
         (a)   Maximum lot coverage for the mobile home park development shall
be 50%. Computations shall be based on all structures within said park;
         (b)   Minimum distance between mobile homes shall be not less than ten
feet, the point of measurement being a straight line between the closest points
of the units being measured;
         (c)   When a mobile home park abuts a single-family residential use
area, there shall be a buffer area of 30 feet. There will be a 25-foot street
setback from the public right-of-way line to any mobile home structure.
Landscaping shall be according to a landscape plan, to be submitted at the time
of application. Such plan shall show the type of planting material, size, and
planting schedule;
         (d)   All mobile home parks shall have access to an arterial or
collector street, and street access shall be discouraged into or upon local
single-family residential area streets; and
         (e)   Average park density shall not exceed eight mobile home units
per gross acre.
      (3)   General internal park development requirements shall be:
         (a)   There shall be a minimum front yard setback from the mobile home
unit to the street line of 25 feet, except where otherwise stipulated in this
division (E)(3); and
         (b)   Mobile home stands shall:
            1.   Be at such elevation, distance, and angle relative to the
street and driveway that placement and removal of the mobile home with a car,
tow truck, or other customary moving equipment is practical;
            2.   Have a longitudinal grade of less than 4% and transverse crown
or grade to provide adequate surface drainage; and
            3.   Be compacted and surfaced with material which will prevent the
growth of vegetation while supporting the maximum anticipated loads during all
seasons.
      (4)   Parking requirements shall be as follows.
         (a)   Off-street parking areas shall be surfaced in accordance with
the street surface standards below.
         (b)   All required off-street parking space shall be located not
further than 200 feet from the unit or units for which they are designated.
         (c)   A minimum of one and one-fourth spaces of parking must be
provided for each mobile home unit space provided within the park. The one-unit
space for occupant use must be within the distance from the unit established
above. The remaining space equivalent to one-fourth space must be in group
compounds at an appropriate location within the park.
         (d)   Streets shall adhere to the following standards.
            1.   Streets shall be of sufficient width so as to permit ease of
access to the mobile home parking stands and the placement and removal of
mobile homes without causing damage to or otherwise jeopardizing the safety of
any occupants or mobile homes in the park.
            2.   Streets shall have a minimum width so as to permit two moving
lanes of traffic, and the minimum lane width shall be ten feet.
            3.   Public access to a mobile home park shall be so designated as
to permit a minimum number of ingress and egress points to control traffic
movement, and to keep undesirable traffic out of the park.
            4.   Streets shall be graded to ensure surface drainage to the
storm sewer system.
            5.   Streets and parking areas shall be surfaced for all travel
with crushed stone gravel or other suitable material.
      (5)   Storage of large items such as boats, boat trailers, and the like
shall not be accomplished at the site of the mobile home unit, but, rather,
shall be provided in separate screened areas of the park.
      (6)   Maintenance standards shall be as follows.
         (a)   The operator of any mobile home park, or a duly-authorized
attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home
park, its facilities, and its equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary
condition.
         (b)   The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with said
operator, for the violation of provisions of these regulations to which said
operator is subject.
      (7)   No building in Zone R-2 shall be more than four stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.057 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the C-1 District is to permit the
establishment of convenience business uses which tend to meet the daily needs
for the residents of the immediate neighborhood.
   (B)   Location. Such District shall be strategically located with access to
a collector thoroughfare.
   (C)   Marginal strip development. Marginal strip development shall be
prohibited.
   (D)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Neighborhood
Business District:
      (1)   Beauty or barber shops;
      (2)   Drug stores; and
      (3)   Food stores.
   (E)   Conditional uses. Service stations are conditional uses permitted in
this District.
   (F)   Yards. In the Neighborhood Business District, the yards shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard minimum shall be ten feet;
      (2)   Rear yard minimum shall be five feet;
      (3)   There shall be no requirements for interior sides; and
      (4)   Street side shall be ten feet.
   (G)   Building height. No building shall be more than four stories in
height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.058 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a C-2 District is to permit the establishment
of areas for highway and service business uses only; and is specifically
designed in clusters to service the motoring public. This District is generally
associated with interchange areas along the major limited-access highways.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the C-2 Zone:
      (1)   Gift shops;
      (2)   Motels or hotels;
      (3)   Restaurants;
      (4)   Self-service laundries;
      (5)   Service stations; and
      (6)   Travel trailers or campground parks.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses permitted within
the C-2 Zone:
      (1)   Bars or taverns;
      (2)   Car or trailer sales and services;
      (3)   Car washes;
      (4)   Livery stables;
      (5)   Public uses; and
      (6)   Semi-public uses.
   (D)   Yards. In the C-2 Zone, a side or rear yard abutting a residential
zone shall be screened and have a minimum of 15 feet from the rear of the
structure to the back lot line.
   (E)   Maximum height. Buildings shall not exceed four stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.059 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC).
   (A)   Purpose. The GC District is intended to create, preserve, or enhance
areas with a wide range of retail uses and service establishments serving both
long-term and short-term needs in compact locations typically appropriate to
commercial clusters developed in urban-density areas. This District also
includes some development which does not strictly fit the description of this
chapter, but also does not merit a zoning district.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in a GC District:
      (1)   Automotive sales and services;
      (2)   Bakeries;
      (3)   Banks or other financial institutions;
      (4)   Beauty shops, barber shops, or other personal businesses;
      (5)   Boat or house trailer sales and services;
      (6)   Bowling allies or other commercial amusement establishments;
      (7)   Building materials supply outlets;
      (8)   Business or professional offices;
      (9)   Day nurseries;
      (10)   Foster care homes;
      (11)   Frozen food locker services;
      (12)   Self-service laundries;
      (13)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
      (14)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (15)   Motels or hotels;
      (16)   Print plants;
      (17)   Restaurants;
      (18)   Retail stores;
      (19)   Home occupations;
      (20)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (21)   Rooming or boarding houses;
      (22)   Single-family dwellings; and
      (23)   Two-family dwellings.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses are conditional uses in the GC
Zone:
      (1)   Bars or taverns;
      (2)   Car washes;
      (3)   Drive-in theaters;
      (4)   Farm equipment or heavy equipment and services;
      (5)   Long-term parking;
      (6)   Mortuaries;
      (7)   Public uses;
      (8)   Semi-public uses;
      (9)   Service stations;
      (10)   Veterinary clinics or kennels; and
      (11)   Wholesale bakeries.
   (D)   Maximum height. Buildings shall not be more than four stories in
height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980; Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-
10-2021)
§ 156.060 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT (M-1).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the M-1 District is to encourage development
of manufacturing and wholesale business establishments which are clean, quiet,
and free of hazardous or objectionable elements, such as noise, odor, dust,
smoke, or glare, and shall operate entirely within an enclosed structure and
generate little industrial traffic. Research activities are encouraged. This
District is further designed to act as a transitional use between any
manufacturing uses and other less intense business and residential uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Zone:
      (1)   Auto sales, services, storage, and rentals;
      (2)   Billboard manufacturing;
      (3)   Building supply outlets;
      (4)   Cabinet shops;
      (5)   Car washes;
      (6)   Cleaning and laundry agencies;
      (7)   Contractor storage yards;
      (8)   Dairy products processing;
      (9)   Food processing plants;
      (10)   Furniture refinishing;
      (11)   Grain storage;
      (12)   Commercial laundry plants;
      (13)   Retail lumber yards;
      (14)   Machine shops;
      (15)   Nurseries for flowers and plants;
      (16)   Parking lots and garage facilities;
      (17)   Public utility yards;
      (18)   Railroad yards or shops;
      (19)   Sanitary landfills;
      (20)   Shops for building contractors;
      (21)   Sign shops;
      (22)   Terminal trucking and yard trucking;
      (23)   Tire shops, including recapping;
      (24)   Trailer, mobile home, and farm equipment sales yards;
      (25)   Warehousing and wholesaling;
      (26)   Home occupations;
      (27)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (28)   Rooming or boarding houses;
      (29)   Single-family dwellings; and
      (30)   Two-family dwellings.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses are conditional uses permitted in
the M-1 District:
      (1)   Those uses permitted in C-1 and C-2 Districts;
      (2)   Billboard manufacturers;
      (3)   Chemical storage and manufacturing;
      (4)   Drive-in theaters;
      (5)   Feedlots and stockyards;
      (6)   Food stores and delicatessens;
      (7)   Fuel yards;
      (8)   Hospitals;
      (9)   Ice manufacturing and cold storage plants;
      (10)   Junkyards;
      (11)   Machine shops;
      (12)   Meat packing plants;
      (13)   Monument works and stone;
      (14)   Planned unit developments;
      (15)   Prescription pharmacies;
      (16)   Printing and blueprinting;
      (17)   Rendering plants;
      (18)   Roadside stands;
      (19)   Service stations;
      (20)   Truck and tractor repair;
      (21)   Wood processing plants, except pulp mills, chipping plants, and
creosote plants; and
      (22)   Wrecking yards.
   (D)   Yards. There are no yard requirements in the M-1 District.
   (E)   Maximum height. Buildings shall not exceed four stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-9) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980; Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-
10-2021)
§ 156.061 HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT (M-2).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the M-2 District is to encourage development
of major manufacturing, processing, warehousing, and major research and testing
operations.
   (B)   Requirements. These activities require extensive community facilities
and reasonable access to arterial thoroughfares.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Those uses permitted in the M-2 District are as
follows:
      (1)   Asphalt plants;
      (2)   Auto sales, service, storage, and rentals;
      (3)   Beverage bottling plants;
      (4)   Concrete batch plants or clay products manufacturing;
      (5)   Contractor’s storage yards;
      (6)   Dairy products and processing;
      (7)   Food processing plants;
      (8)   Fuel yards;
      (9)   Grain storage;
      (10)   Ice manufacturing and cold storage plants;
      (11)   Junkyards;
      (12)   Lumberyard retail;
      (13)   Machine shops;
      (14)   Meat packing plants;
      (15)   Monument works and stone;
      (16)   Parking lots and garage facilities;
      (17)   Petroleum storage;
      (18)   Planing mills;
      (19)   Public utility yards;
      (20)   Railroad yards or shops;
      (21)   Shops for building contractors;
      (22)   Sign shops;
      (23)   Terminal trucking yards;
      (24)   Tire shops;
      (25)   Trailer, mobile home, and farm equipment sales yards;
      (26)   Truck and tractor repairs;
      (27)   Warehousing and wholesaling;
      (28)   Wood processing plants; and
      (29)   Wrecking yards.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses permitted in the
M-2 Zone:
      (1)   Chemical storage and manufacturing; and
      (2)   Railroads.
   (E)   Yards. There are no yard requirements in the M-2 Zone.
   (F)   Maximum height. Buildings in Zone M-2 shall not be more than four
stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 13-6-2-10) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 156.075 GENERAL.
   The purpose of performance standards is to set specific conditions for
various uses, classification of uses, or areas where problems are frequently
encountered.
(Prior Code, § 13-7-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.076 SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner so as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet
above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by
the right-of-way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said
street right-of-way lines 25 feet from the point of intersection.
   (B)   Yard requirements for multi-family dwellings. Multi-family dwellings
shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side,
and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front,
one rear, and two side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate
district.
   (C)   Side and rear yard requirements for nonresidential uses abutting
Residential Districts. Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located
nor conducted closer than 40 feet to any lot line of a Residential District,
except that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to 50% of the
requirement if acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the Commission
is provided.
      (1)   Such screening shall be masonry or solid fence between four feet
and eight feet in height maintained in safe condition and free of all
advertising or other signs on the residential side of the lot.
      (2)   Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of
a strip of land not less than 20 feet in width planted with an evergreen hedge,
or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet in height at the
time of planting.
   (D)   Architectural projections. Open structures such as canopies,
balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios, and similar architectural
projections shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and
shall not project into the required minimum front, side, or rear yards.
   (E)   Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained in
the official schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries,
cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances
usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy, except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard
to the safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.
(Prior Code, § 13-7-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.077 SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the
following provisions shall be adhered to:
   (A)   Conversion of dwellings to more units. A residence may not be
converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
      (1)   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by this
title for new structures in that district;
      (2)   The lot area per dwelling unit equals the lot area requirements for
new structures as prescribed by the most current edition of the Uniform
Building Code;
      (3)   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district as prescribed by the
most current edition of the Uniform Building Code; and
      (4)   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances.
   (B)   Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings, construction trailers,
equipment, and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress,
but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the
completion date of the project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the
Administrator.
   (C)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Any automobile body which is
not properly and currently licensed and is not in operating condition or has
not been used for a period of six months or more, whether left on public or
private property, and which is offensive to the sight of the community,
neighborhood, or to persons passing by on a public thoroughfare, shall be
considered as an attractive nuisance, and removed at the request of the City
Council, the Commission, or city law enforcement official. If not removed, the
city may remove same at the owner’s expense.
   (D)   Required trash areas. All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four feet in height
or within an enclosed building or trash and/or garbage collection dumpster.
Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of
trash and/or garbage shall be required, as determined by the Administrator, and
shall be provided.
   (E)   Architectural conformity.
      (1)   It is recognized that the existing structures found in Zones R-
0 and GC have historical value and that it is in the best interest to preserve
and maintain this historical setting. Therefore, all construction in Zones R-
0 and GC will be of a nature that will blend with and not detract from the
period architecture in these zones. Metal buildings of any nature in these
zones are to be discouraged and prohibited unless designed in such a manner, so
as to blend with existing structures.
(Prior Code, § 13-7-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.078 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES.
   No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises,
except that any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and maintained
if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable
conditions to acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements.
   (A)   Fire hazards. Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable
or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire-
prevention equipment. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger
involved, as specified in the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the state.
   (B)   Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activity shall emit
harmful radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point, other than that of the
creator of such disturbance.
   (C)   Noise. Objectionable noise, as determined by the Administrator, which
is due to volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled.
Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are
exempt from this requirement.
   (D)   Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without the use of vibration- detection instruments on any adjoining lot or
property.
   (E)   Air pollution. Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and
regulations established by the health authority.
   (F)   Glare. No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property outside a manufacturing district or from any street.
   (G)   Erosion. No erosion by human, wind, or water shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   (H)   Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
   (I)   Enforcement provisions. The Administrator, prior to giving zoning
approval, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and
in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits
and tolerances.
   (J)   Measurement procedures. Methods and procedures for the determination
of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards
Institute, New York; the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington,
D.C.; the United States Bureau of Mines, and the health authority.
(Prior Code, § 13-7-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.079 UNIQUE LAND USES.
   Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this chapter.
   (A)   Accessory buildings.
      (1)   Prohibited in front yard. Accessory buildings will not be located
in any required front yard area.
      (2)   Setback from property line. Setbacks will not be located closer
than five feet from any side or rear property line.
   (B)   Agriculture (buffer area). Agricultural and buffer areas will be
maintained to minimize soil erosion, sedimentation, contamination, and nutrient
enrichment of ground and surface water.
   (C)   Animal clinics, animal hospitals, veterinary offices, and kennels.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   Animal clinics, animal hospitals, veterinary offices, and
kennels will be located at least 300 feet from any residence, including motels
and hotels, except for an owner’s residence.
         (b)   The Administrator may modify these requirements if the animals
are completely housed in soundproof structures that completely screen them from
view of the abutting residential property.
      (2)   Compliance with regulations. Animal clinics, animal hospitals,
veterinary offices, and kennels will comply with all state and local
regulations, relative to such an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping
practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a
minimum the factors of noise and odor.
   (D)   Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases and explosive materials
aboveground and for resale.
      (1)   Location. Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases and explosive
materials aboveground and for resale will be located at least 300 feet from a
residential zone, a residence, motel, or hotel, except for the owner’s
residence.
      (2)   Fire official approval. Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases
and explosive materials aboveground and for resale will be erected subject to
the approval of the appropriate fire official.
      (3)   Off-street parking and loading. Bulk storage of flammable liquids
and gases and explosive materials aboveground and for resale will have suitable
loading and unloading spaces and off-street parking facilities, subject to the
approval of the appropriate fire official.
   (E)   Chemicals, pesticide, and fertilizer storage and manufacturing.
Chemical, pesticide, and fertilizer storage and manufacturing will have
adequate fire protection, storage area, handling, and disposal, as approved by
the appropriate fire official.
   (F)   Contractor’s yards (e.g., road, housing, anything with heavy
equipment).
      (1)   Location. Contractor’s yards will be located a minimum distance of
300 feet from any residence, except for an owner’s residence.
      (2)   Screening. Contractor’s yards will have a screening fence around
areas utilized for storage of equipment.
      (3)   Use limitations. Contractor’s yards will be limited to storage,
maintenance, and processing incidental to contracting work. There shall be no
general industrial or commercial uses.
   (G)   Drive-in restaurants.
      (1)   Enclosed on property line. Drive-in restaurants will be enclosed on
the property line with landscaping and fencing, except for ingress and egress,
to prevent trash from moving onto other properties.
      (2)   Sight-obscuring fence. Drive-in restaurants will have a six-foot
high sight-obscuring fence along the property lines that adjoin a residence.
      (3)   Trash. Drive-in restaurants will provide for adequate trash
receptacles.
      (4)   Lighting. Drive-in restaurants will avoid the direction of night
lighting toward any residence.
   (H)   Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, or other earth-moving activity.
      (1)   Exposure of bare ground. During filling, grading, lagooning,
dredging, or other earth- moving activity, the smallest amount of bare ground
shall be exposed for the shortest time feasible.
      (2)   Temporary ground cover. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, or
other earth-moving activity will provide temporary ground cover, such as mulch.
      (3)   Methods to trap sediment. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, or
other earth-moving activity will use diversions, silting basins, terraces, and
other methods to trap sediment.
      (4)   Lagooning. Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, or other earth-
moving activity will provide lagooning in such a manner so as to avoid
conditions which will create fish traps.
      (5)   Restriction prohibited. A floodway, channel, or natural drainageway
shall not be restricted during filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, or other
earth-moving activity.
      (6)   Prevent erosion or soil failure. Filling, grading, lagooning,
dredging, or other earth-moving activity will construct and stabilize sides and
the bottom of cuts, fills, channels, and artificial watercourses to prevent
erosion or soil failure.
      (7)   Below-grade excavation. Below-grade excavation shall not occur
except for drainageways within 50 feet of any lot line or public right-of-way.
      (8)   Restoration. Topsoil or loam will be restored to its existing
natural condition.
   (I)   Home occupation.
      (1)   Employees. No more than one person other than members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
      (2)   Use of dwelling. The use of the dwelling unit for the home
occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residence
purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25% of floor area of the dwelling
unit shall be used to conduct the home occupation.
      (3)   Outside appearance; sign. There shall be no change in the outside
appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the
conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding four square
feet in area, nonilluminated, and made of nonreflective materials and mounted
flat against the wall of the principal building.
      (4)   Traffic; off-street parking. No significant traffic shall be
generated by such home occupation, and any need for parking generated by the
conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off-street parking requirements
as specified in this chapter, and shall not be located in a required front
yard.
      (5)   Prohibited equipment, processes.
         (a)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interferences detectable to normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is
conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if
conducted in other than a single-family residence.
         (b)   In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises.
   (J)   Mobile home parks.
      (1)   Essential character of area. Mobile home parks will be designed,
constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in
appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and
such use will not change the essential character of the same area.
      (2)   Future neighboring uses. Mobile home parks will not be hazardous or
detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses.
      (3)   Essential public facilities and services. Mobile home parks will be
served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways,
streets, police and fire protection, drainage, refuse disposal, and schools, or
the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed park
shall be able to provide adequately any such services.
      (4)   Consistent with intent and purpose. Mobile home parks will be
consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and the city’s
Comprehensive Plan.
      (5)   Vehicular approaches. Mobile home parks will have vehicular
approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an
interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads.
      (6)   Natural, scenic, or historic features. Mobile home parks will not
result in the destruction, loss, or damage of natural, scenic, or historic
features of major importance.
      (7)   Health standards. Mobile home parks will meet the minimum health
standards as set forth by the State Department of Health and Welfare.
   (K)   Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial materials.
      (1)   Screening. Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial materials
will be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or
residentially zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an alley
or street.
      (2)   Location. Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial materials
will not be located in any front yard setback area.
   (L)   Riding stables and schools.
      (1)   Location. Riding stables and schools will locate all stables or
loafing sheds not nearer than ten feet from any residence, except for an
owner’s residence. All facilities shall be set back a distance of 30 feet from
any property line.
      (2)   Design. Riding stables and schools will be designed and located
with full consideration being given to their proximity to adjacent uses, their
effect upon adjacent uses, and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties as to the storage of horse trailers and the factors of noise and
odor.
      (3)   Housekeeping practices. Riding stables and schools will require
that the owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation to
maintain adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a nuisance.
   (M)   Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges.
      (1)   Backstop. Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges will be designed with a
backstop.
      (2)   Line of fire. Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges will be designed to
avoid a line of fire that is directed toward any residence or business within
one mile.
      (3)   Landscaping. Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges will incorporate
landscaping that is compatible with the surrounding landscaping.
      (4)   Supervision; security measures. Outdoor rifle and pistol ranges
will provide supervision and security measures during periods of use.
(Prior Code, § 13-7-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Additional provisions for mobile home parks, see §
156.056(E)
CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
§ 156.090 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the
recognition, preservation, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of structures,
natural features, sites, and areas within the city having historic,
architectural, archeological, cultural, or aesthetic significance is required
in the interest of the health, economic prosperity, cultural enrichment, and
general welfare of the people.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by providing for the protection
of historic structures representing significant elements of its history;
      (2)   Enhance the visual character of the city by encouraging and
regulating the compatibility of architectural styles within historic districts
reflecting unique and established architectural traditions;
      (3)   Foster public appreciation of and civic pride in the beauty of the
city and the accomplishments of its past;
      (4)   Strengthen the economy of the city by protecting and enhancing the
city’s attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors;
      (5)   Stabilize and improve property values within the city; and
      (6)   Promote the private and public use of historic structures and
historic districts for the education, prosperity, and general welfare of the
people.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.091 AREA OF APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all cultural resources within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.092 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
   In addition to the powers and duties described elsewhere in this code, such
as in §§
155.020 through
155.029 and
156.022, the Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Establish criteria and conduct or cause to be conducted a
comprehensive survey of properties within the boundaries of the city, and
publicize and periodically update such survey results;
   (B)   Adopt specific guidelines for the designation of cultural resources,
including landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts;
   (C)   Maintain a local register of cultural resources, including historic
districts, landmark sites, and landmarks within the city;
   (D)   Review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing and
redevelopment, municipal improvement, and other types of planning and programs
undertaken by any agency of the city, the county, or state, as they relate to
the cultural resources of the community;
   (E)   Adopt prescriptive standards to be used by the Commission in reviewing
applications for permits to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, remove,
or significantly affect any cultural resource;
   (F)   Recommend to the City Council the purchase of fee or less-than-fee
interests in property for purposes of cultural resources preservation;
   (G)   Investigate and report to the City Council on the use of various
federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to
promote cultural resource preservation in the city;
   (H)   Preserve, restore, maintain, and operate historic properties under the
ownership of the city or control of the Commission;
   (I)   Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, applications for permits;
   (J)   (1)   Review all applications for permits, environmental assessments,
environmental impact reports, environmental impact statements, and other
similar documents, as set in this subchapter, pertaining to cultural resources
or related neighboring property within public view.
      (2)   The Commission shall forward its comments to the City Council;
   (K)   Hire staff, retain consultants, and conduct studies, as the Commission
deems desirable or necessary, except that all expenditures of city funds are
subject to prior approval by the City Council;
   (L)   Contract, with prior approval of the City Council, with the county,
state, or federal government, or any agency or subdivision of said governments,
or with any other organization;
   (M)   Cooperate with local, county, state, and federal governments in the
pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation;
   (N)   Adopt procedural rules for the conduct of its business in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter;
   (O)   Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including
voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and
decisions. All such material shall be public record;
   (P)   Render advice and guidance, upon the request of the property owner or
occupant, on the restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping, or
maintenance of any cultural resource, including landmark, landmark site,
historic district, or neighboring property within public view;
   (Q)   Participate in, promote, and conduct public information, educational,
and interpretive programs pertaining to cultural resources; and
   (R)   Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or
motion of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.093 CULTURAL RESOURCE DESIGNATION CRITERIA.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, an improvement may be designated a
cultural resource by the City Council, and any area within the city may be
designated an historic district by the City Council pursuant to §
156.095, if it meets the following criteria:
   (A)   It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural,
social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural history;
   (B)   It is identified with persons or events significant in local, state,
or national history;
   (C)   It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or
method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous
materials or craftsmanship; or
   (D)   It is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer, or
architect.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.094 CULTURAL RESOURCE DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.
   Cultural resources and historic districts shall be established by the City
Council in the following manner.
   (A)   Initiation of proceedings. Any person may request the designation of
an improvement as a cultural resource or the designation of a historic district
by submitting an application for such designation to the Commission. The
Commission or City Council may also initiate such proceedings on their own
motion.
   (B)   Study. The Commission shall conduct a study of the proposed
designation and make a preliminary determination based on such documentation as
it may require as to its appropriateness for consideration. If the Commission
determines that the application merits consideration, but only if it so
determines, it shall schedule a public hearing with due speed.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      (1)   The Commission’s decision to schedule or not to schedule a public
hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Administrator and the
City Clerk. Notice of a decision not to schedule a public hearing shall be
given by mail to the applicant.
      (2)   No building, alteration, demolition, or removal permits for any
improvement, building, or structure within the proposed historic district or
relative to a proposed cultural resource shall be issued while the public
hearing or any appeal related thereto is pending.
   (D)   Cultural resource and cultural resource site. In the case of a
proposed cultural resource and cultural resource site, notice of the date,
place, time, and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to
the applicants, owners, and occupants of the improvement at least 20 days prior
to the date of the public hearing, using the name and address of such owners as
shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and shall be advertised once in
a daily newspaper of general circulation.
   (E)   Notice. In the case of a proposed historic district, notice of the
date, place, time, and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class
mail to the applicant, owner, and occupant of all properties within the
proposed district at least 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing,
using the name and address of such owners as shown on the latest equalized
assessment rolls, and shall be advertised five consecutive days in a daily
newspaper of general circulation.
   (F)   Action of Commission. At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in
no event more than 30 days from the date set for the initial public hearing for
the designation of a proposed cultural resource or historic district, the
Commission shall recommend approval in whole or in part, or disapproval in
whole or in part, of the application in writing.
   (G)   City Council action. The City Council, within 30 days of receipt of
the recommendations from the Commission, shall, by ordinance, approve the
application, in whole or in part, or shall, by motion, disapprove it in its
entirety.
   (H)   Failure to send notice.
      (1)   Failure to send any notice by mail to any property owner where the
address of such owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any
proceedings in connection with the proposed designation.
      (2)   The Commission and City Council may also give such other notice as
they may deem desirable and practicable.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.095 PERMITS.
   (A)   Written approval required. It is unlawful for any person to tear down,
demolish, construct, alter, remove, or relocate any improvement, or any portion
thereof, which has been designated a cultural resource or cultural resource
site pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, or which lies within a
historic district, or to alter in any manner any exterior architectural feature
of such a cultural resource, cultural resource site, or improvement within a
historic district, or to place, erect, alter, or relocate any sign within a
historic district or on a cultural resource or cultural resource site, without
first obtaining written approval to do so in the manner provided in this
subchapter, nor shall the Administrator or Commission grant any permit to carry
out such work on a designated cultural resource or cultural resource site or
within a historic district without the prior written approval of the
Commission.
   (B)   Permit procedure. The following procedures shall be followed in
processing applications for approval of work covered by this subchapter:
      (1)   The Administrator shall report any application for a permit to work
on a designated cultural resource to the Commission;
      (2)   If no permit is required to pursue work on a designated cultural
resource, whoever is responsible for the work, whether it is the tenant,
resident, or property owner, shall apply for approval to the Commission
directly;
      (3)   Such applications shall be accompanied by such materials as are
required by the Commission and are reasonably necessary for the proper review
of the proposed project;
      (4)   The Commission shall complete its review and make a decision within
30 days of the date of receipt of the application. Unless legally required,
there shall be no notice, posting, or publication requirements for action on
the application, but all decisions, interim or final, shall be made at regular
meetings of the Commission. The Commission’s decision shall be in writing and
shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its
decision. This decision may be appealed.
      (5)   In review of permits sought in order to wholly or partially remove
or demolish a cultural resource, cultural resource site, or historic district,
the Commission may approve or disapprove the issuance of said permit or
permits.
   (C)   Permit criteria. The Commission or the City Council, upon appeal,
shall issue an approval for any proposed work as described in division (A) of
this section, if, and only if, it determines:
      (1)   In the case of a designated cultural resource, the proposed work
would not detrimentally alter, destroy, or adversely affect any exterior
architectural feature;
      (2)   In the case of any property located within a historic district, the
proposed construction, removal, rehabilitation, alteration, remodeling,
excavation, or exterior alteration conforms to the prescriptive standards as
adopted by the Commission, and does not adversely affect the character of the
district; or
      (3)   In the case of construction of a new improvement, building, or
structure upon a cultural resource site, the exterior of such improvements will
not adversely affect and will be compatible with the external appearance of
existing designated improvements, buildings, and structures on said site.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.096 APPEALS.
   The following actions by the Commission may be appealed by any interested
party to the City Council:
   (A)   The Commission’s decision not to hold a public hearing on an
application for designation of a cultural resource or historic district;
   (B)   A determination made after a public hearing not to designate a
proposed cultural resource or historic district; and
   (C)   The Commission’s decision to grant or to not grant a permit.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.097 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any
property covered by this subchapter that does not involve a change in design,
material, or external appearance thereof, nor does this susbchapter prevent the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal
of any such feature when the Administrator certifies to the Commission that
such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous
condition.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.098 DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR.
   The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a cultural
resource, or an improvement, building, or structure in a historic district,
shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement,
building, or structure, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to
control as specified in the designating ordinance or permit, and all interior
portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and
decay of any exterior architectural feature.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-9) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.099 SHOWING OF HARDSHIP.
   (A)   The Commission or City Council need not disapprove an application for
permit to carry out any proposed work in a historic district, or on a landmark
or a landmark site, if the applicant presents clear and convincing evidence of
facts demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Commission or City Council that
such disapproval will work immediate and substantial hardship on the applicant
because of conditions peculiar to the person seeking to carry out the proposed
work, whether this be property owner, tenant, or resident, or because of
conditions peculiar to the particular improvement, building, or structure or
other feature involved, and that failure to disapprove the application will be
consistent with the purposes of this subchapter.
   (B)   If a hardship is found to exist under this section, the Commission or
City Council shall make a written finding to that effect, and shall specify the
facts and reasons relied upon in making such finding.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-10) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.100 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Methods of enforcement.
      (1)   In addition to the regulations of this subchapter, other
subchapters of this chapter, and other provisions of law which govern the
approval or disapproval of applications for permits or licenses covered by this
subchapter, the Administrator shall have the authority to implement the
enforcement thereof by any of the following means:
         (a)   Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this
subchapter upon the owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the improvement,
building, structure, or land;
         (b)   Calling upon the City Attorney to institute any necessary legal
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, and the City Attorney
is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; and
         (c)   Calling upon the Chief of Police and authorized agents to assist
in the enforcement of this subchapter.
      (2)   In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the City Attorney may
maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the
correction or removal of any violation of this subchapter, or for an injunction
in appropriate cases.
   (B)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 13-8-11) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
§ 156.115 GENERAL.
   (A)   Individual consideration. It is recognized that an increasing number
of new kinds of uses are appearing daily and that many of these and some other
more conventional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special
nature relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation,
and public facilities that each specific use must be considered individually.
   (B)   Commission action.
      (1)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on each conditional use
permit application, as specified in the Official Schedule of District
Regulations.
      (2)   The Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a
conditional use permit under the conditions as herein specified and considering
such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.116 APPLICATION.
   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the
Administrator by at least one owner or lessee of property for which such
conditional use is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
   (B)   Legal description of property;
   (C)   Description of existing use;
   (D)   Zoning district;
   (E)   Description of proposed special use;
   (F)   A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use showing the
location of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse, and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards, and such other information as the Commission may require to
determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and requirements of
this subchapter; and
   (G)   A narrative statement evaluating the effects of adjoining property;
the effects of adjoining property; the effect of such elements as noise, glare,
odor, fumes, and vibration on adjoining property; a discussion of the general
compatibility with adjacent and other properties in the district; and the
relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.117 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   The Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed conditional use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
   (A)   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established on the
Official Schedule of District Regulations for the zoning district involved;
   (B)   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives
or with any specific objective of the Comprehensive Plan and/or this chapter;
   (C)   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity, and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
   (D)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   (E)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools, or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
   (F)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
   (G)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment,
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property,
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare, or odors;
   (H)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
   (I)   Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural
scenic or historic feature of major importance.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.118 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the provisions of this
section.
   (A)   Public uses.
      (1)   Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground, school, or
other public use as shown on the Future Acquisition Map, as authorized in Idaho
Code § 67-6517  1 , is located, in whole or in part, within a proposed
development, the Commission shall notify the appropriate public agency
concerning the land proposed to be acquired.
      (2)   (a)   Within 30 days of the date of notice, the public agency may
request the governing body to suspend consideration on the permit for 60 days.
         (b)   However, if an agreement is not reached within 60 days, the
Commission shall resume consideration of the conditional use application.
   (B)   Natural features. Existing natural features which add value to
residential developments and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as historic spots and other similar irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved in
the design of the development.
   (C)   Special developments. In the case of planned unit developments and
large scale developments, the Commission may require sufficient park or open
space facilities of acceptable size, location, and site characteristics that
may be suitable for the proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
 
Notes
1 Cite
§ 156.119 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   (A)   In granting any conditional use, the Commission may prescribe
appropriate conditions, bonds, and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   Violations of such conditions, bonds, or safeguards, when made a part
of the terms under which the conditional use, if granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.120 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING, NOTICE.
   (A)   Hearing required. Prior to granting a conditional use permit, at least
one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard shall be held.
   (B)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Publication. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the
time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction.
      (2)   Other media. Notice may also be made available to other newspapers
and to radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction for use as a
public service announcement.
      (3)   Written notice. Notice shall also be provided to property owners
and residents within the land area being considered, within 300 feet of the
external boundaries of the land being considered, and with any additional area
that may be substantially impacted by the proposed conditional use as
determined by the Commission.
      (4)   Notice to 200 or more. When notice is required to 200 or more
property owners or purchasers of record, alternate forms of procedures which
would provide adequate notice may be provided by local ordinance in lieu of
mailed notice, such as by publication in a local newspaper of general
circulation each week for three consecutive weeks.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.121 ACTION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Approval; conditional approval; disapproval. Within 30 days after the
public hearing, the Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the application as presented. If the application is approved or
approved with modifications, the Commission shall direct the Administrator to
issue a conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the
Commission for approval.
   (B)   Additional conditions attached. Upon granting a conditional use
permit, conditions may be attached to a conditional use permit, including, but
not limited to, those:
      (1)   Minimizing adverse impacts on other development;
      (2)   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      (3)   Controlling the duration of development;
      (4)   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      (5)   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      (6)   Requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities
or services;
      (7)   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
for an ordinance; and
      (8)   Requiring mitigation of the effects of the proposed development
upon service delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts,
providing services within the planning jurisdiction.
   (C)   Studies. Prior to granting a conditional use permit, studies may be
required of the social, economic, fiscal, and environmental effects of the
proposed conditional use.
   (D)   Binding precedent. A conditional use permit shall not be considered as
establishing a binding precedent to grant other conditional use permits.
   (E)   Transferability. A conditional use permit is not transferrable from
one parcel of land to another.
   (F)   Specifications on granting or denying. Upon granting or denying an
application, the Commission shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   (G)   Appeal.
      (1)   The applicant or any affected person who appeared in person or in
writing before the Commission may appeal the decision of the Commission to the
City Council in writing.
      (2)   Said appeal is submitted to the City Council within 15 days from
the Commission’s action.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.122 NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT.
   Within ten days after a decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.123 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a written appeal from the action of the Commission,
the City Council shall set a hearing date to consider all information,
testimony, and Commission’s minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision
to uphold, conditionally uphold, or overrule the decision of the Commission.
   (B)   The City Council shall only overrule the Commission by a favorable
two-thirds vote.
(Prior Code, § 13-9-9) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 156.135 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to permit nonconforming uses to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this subchapter that nonconforming uses
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.136 INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts in which such use are located.
   (B)   A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged after passage
hereof by attachment on a building or premises, or by the addition of other
uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which
such use is located.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.137 AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP.
   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
hereof or amendment hereof and upon which actual building construction has been
carried on diligently.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.138 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   The following shall be exceptions to the required lot areas:
   (A)   Lots of record with less than the area required by each use district
or by an imposed subdistrict which existed prior to the adoption hereof; and
   (B)   Lots or development sites which, as a process of their creation, were
approved with substandard area by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.139 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR STRUCTURE AND LAND COMBINATIONS.
   If a lawful use involving individual structures, or a structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date hereof or amendment hereof that would
not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   Enlarged, altered, or reconstructed. No existing structure devoted to
a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
   (B)   Extended. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any
additional land area.
   (C)   Change in use.
      (1)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure and land, may, upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the
Commission, be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, the Commission
shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to
the district than the existing nonconforming use.
      (2)   In permitting such change, the Commission may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Superseded by permitted use. Any structure, or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   (E)   Discontinued; abandoned. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or
structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than
two years (except when government action impedes access to the premises) the
structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
   (F)   Removal or destruction of structure. Where nonconforming use status
applies to a structure and land in combination, removal, or destruction of the
structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.140 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or the
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing; provided, the
cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof which is
unsafe. Nonconforming structures may not be replaced if 66% of the structure is
destroyed.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.141 USES UNDER SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of
this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district but shall
without further action be considered a conforming use.
(Prior Code, § 13-10-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
SIGNS
§ 156.155 INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote and protect the public
health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor
advertising signs.
   (B)   It is intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and
obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents and reduce hazards that
may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 13-11-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.156 PUBLIC SIGNS EXCLUDED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, SIGNS does not include signs erected and
maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or
required by any law, ordinance, or governmental regulation.
(Prior Code, § 13-11-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.157 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The regulations contained in this section shall apply to all signs and all
use districts, and all signs shall conform with the provisions of the current
Uniform Building Code.
   (A)   Illumination; lighting device. In no event shall an illuminated sign
or lighting device be placed or directed to permit the beams and illumination
therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway, or
sidewalk so as to constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
   (B)   Electrical Code. All wiring, fittings, and materials used in the
construction, connection, and operation of electrically-illuminated signs shall
be in accordance with the provisions of the local Electric Code in effect, as
described in §
153.003, if any.
   (C)   Obstruction of fire escape. No sign of any classification shall be
installed, erected, or attached in any form, shape, or manner to a fire escape
or any door or window giving access to any fire escape.
   (D)   Responsibility for maintenance. All signs hung and erected shall be
plainly marked with the name of the person responsible for maintaining the
sign.
   (E)   Unsafe or dangerous. Should any sign be or become unsafe or in danger
of falling, the owner thereof or the person maintaining the sign shall, upon
receipt of written notice from the Administrator, proceed at once to put such
sign in a safe and secure condition or remove the sign.
   (F)   Public rights-of-way.
      (1)   No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except
publicly-owned signs, such as traffic-control signs and directional signs.
      (2)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter, shall be permitted on any
property.
   (G)   Interstates; primary highways. Signs along the interstates and primary
highways shall conform to the State Transportation Department’s regulations.
   (H)   Historical or cultural significance. Signs shall not unreasonably
distract from the historic and cultural significance of the structures upon
which they are placed or surrounding structures.
(Prior Code, § 13-11-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.158 PERMITTED SIGNS.
   Political signs may be permitted; provided, such signs shall not be posted
in any place or in any manner that is destructive to public property upon
posting or removal. No political sign shall be posted in a public right-of-way,
nor shall any such sign be posted on a utility pole.
(Prior Code, § 13-11-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.159 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed, or
maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, the Administrator
shall notify, in writing, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign to
comply with this chapter.
   (B)   Political signs posted in violation of this title are subject to
removal by the Administrator five days after written notice of violation. The
cost of removal shall be borne by the violator.
(Prior Code, § 13-11-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
APPEAL, VARIANCE, AND ACTION BY AFFECTED PERSONS
§ 156.170 GENERAL.
   The Commission shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged
that an error has been made by the Administrator, request for variances from
the terms of this chapter, and requests for hearing from affected persons.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.171 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Appeals to the Commission concerning interpretation
or administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer or bureau of the legislative authority affected by any decision of
the Administrator.
   (B)   Notice of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the
decision of the Administrator by filing with the Administrator and with the
Commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is
being taken.
   (C)   Transmittal of record. The Administrator shall transmit to the
Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.172 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Proceedings in favor of the action appealed shall not be stayed other than
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Commission or by a court of
record on application on notice to the Administrator from whom the appeal is
taken on due cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.173 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Power to authorize. The Commission may authorize, in specific cases,
such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance.
   (B)   Hardship. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience
or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would result in unnecessary hardship.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.174 APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Required information. A variance from the terms of this title shall
not be granted by the Commission unless and until a written application for a
variance is submitted to the Administrator and the Commission containing:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicants;
      (2)   Legal description of property;
      (3)   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      (4)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances that exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved which are not applicable
to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
         (b)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and
         (d)   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district.
   (B)   Findings of fact. A variance shall not be granted unless the
Commission makes specific findings of fact based directly on the particular
evidence presented to it which support conclusions that the above- mentioned
standards and conditions have been met by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.175 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   (A)   In granting any appeal or variance, the Commission may prescribe the
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.176 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Upon receipt of the application for an appeal or a variance, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing, publish a public notice in a newspaper, and give
written notice to all parties as required for conditional use permits, as
described in §
156.120.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.177 ACTION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Commission shall either
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the request for appeal or
variance.
   (B)   Upon granting or denying an application, the Commission shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.178 ACTIONS BY AFFECTED PERSONS.
   (A)   Hearing.
      (1)   Definition. As used herein, an AFFECTED PERSON shall mean one
having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by the
issuance or denial of a permit authorizing the development.
      (2)   Right to petition. Any affected person may at any time prior to
final action on a permit required or authorized under this subchapter, if no
hearing has been held on the application, petition the Commission or City
Council, in writing, to hold a hearing pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-6512;
provided, however, that if 20 affected persons petition for a hearing, the
hearing shall be held.
      (3)   Action taken.
         (a)   After a hearing, the Commission or City Council may:
            1.   Grant or deny a permit; or
            2.   Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for
further study or hearing.
         (b)   Each Commission or City Council shall establish, by rule and
regulation, a time period within which a recommendation or decision must be
made.
      (4)   Judicial review. An affected person aggrieved by a decision may,
within 28 days after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances,
seek judicial review, as provided by Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 52.
   (B)   Eminent domain.
      (1)   Authority. Authority to exercise the regulatory power of zoning in
land-use planning shall not simultaneously displace coexisting eminent domain
authority granted under the State Constitution, Article I, § 14, and Idaho Code
Title 7, Chapter 7.
      (2)   Just compensation. An affected person claiming just compensation
for a perceived taking, the basis of the claim being that a specific zoning
action or permitting action restricting private property development is
actually a regulatory action by local government deemed as necessary to
complete the development of the material resources of the state, or necessary
for other public uses, may seek a judicial determination of whether the claim
comes within defined provisions of State Constitution, Article 1, § 14,
relating to eminent domain. Under these circumstances, the affected person is
exempt from the provisions of division (A) of this section and may seek
judicial review through an inverse condemnation action specifying neglect by
local government to provide just compensation under the provisions of the State
Constitution Article I, § 14, and Idaho Code Title 7, Chapter 7.
(Prior Code, § 13-12-9)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.190 ZONING APPROVAL REQUIRED; BUILDING PERMITS.
   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, approve, or convert a
building or structure used for human habitation, including a garage attached
thereto, or any building used for commercial or industrial purposes, or any
agricultural building, or any public building in the city, without first
obtaining a separate building permit from the appropriate building official for
each such building or structure involved. Zoning approval shall be issued only
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.191 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for zoning approval shall be signed by the owner or
applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on
the application. Each application shall clearly state that the permit shall
expire and may be revoked if substantial work has not begun within one year.
   (B)   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Legal description of property;
      (3)   Existing use;
      (4)   Proposed use;
      (5)   Zoning district;
      (6)   Plan, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of the lot to be
built upon; the exact size and approximate location of existing buildings on
the lot, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed buildings or
alteration;
      (7)   Building heights;
      (8)   Number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths;
      (9)   Number of dwelling units;
      (10)   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
      (11)   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.192 ZONING APPROVAL.
   Within 30 days after the receipt of an application, the Administrator shall
either approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. All zoning approvals shall, however, be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one year. One copy of the plan, when required,
shall be returned to the applicant by the Administrator after the Administrator
shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to
same by his or her signature on such copy. One copy of plans, similarly marked,
shall be retained by the Administrator. The Administrator shall issue a
placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question,
attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.193 EXPIRATION OF ZONING APPROVAL.
   If the work described in any zoning approval has not begun within one year
from the date of issuance thereto, said approval shall expire; it shall be
revoked by the Administrator; and written notice thereof shall be given to the
persons affected.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.194 RECORD OF ZONING APPROVAL.
   The Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning approvals, and
copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.195 FAILURE TO OBTAIN ZONING APPROVAL.
   Failure to obtain a zoning approval shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.196 CONSTRUCTION AND USE.
   Zoning approvals issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the Administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such
approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use,
arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.197 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is discovered, or is alleged
to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint
stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the
Administrator. The Administrator shall record properly such complaint,
immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.198 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   Established. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees,
charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning approval,
amendments, appeal variances, special use permits, plan approvals, and other
matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this chapter
requiring investigations, inspections, legal advising, postage, and other
expenses. The specific fee amounts shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
   (B)   Posting; amendment. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office
of the Administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council.
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-10) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.199 VIOLATIONS.
   The Prosecuting Attorney, in addition to taking whatever criminal action is
deemed necessary, shall take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this
chapter. Penalties for failure to comply with or which violate the provisions
of this chapter shall be as follows.
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official, or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or any other
public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is
necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter or the Idaho
Code.
(Prior Code, § 13-13-9) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.210 GENERAL.
   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning
practices require, the City Council may by ordinance after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the Commission, and subject to procedures provided
by law, amend, supplement, change, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and
boundaries or classification of property.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-1) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.211 INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter may be initiated in one of the following ways:
   (A)   By adoption of a motion by the Commission;
   (B)   By adoption of a motion by the City Council; or
   (C)   By filing of an application by a property owner or a person who has
existing interests in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-2) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.212 APPLICATION.
   Applications for amendments to the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of
this chapter shall contain, at least, the following information:
   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
   (B)   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the City Council;
   (C)   Present land use;
   (D)   Present zoning district;
   (E)   Proposed use;
   (F)   Proposed zoning district;
   (G)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the Administrator may require;
   (H)   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the land being considered;
   (I)   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the city’s
Comprehensive Plan, availability of public facilities, and compatibility with
the surrounding area; and
   (J)   A fee, as established by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-3) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.213 TRANSMITTAL TO COMMISSION.
   Zoning districts shall be amended in the manner described in this section.
Requests for an amendment to this chapter shall be submitted to the Commission,
which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature of the
amendment requested. If the request is in accordance with the city’s adopted
Comprehensive Plan, the Commission may recommend and the City Council may adopt
or reject the ordinance amendment under the notice and hearing procedures
provided in §
156.120 and the procedure in §
156.121. If the request is not in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, the request shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Historic
Preservation Commission, or, in its absence, the City Council, which shall
recommend, and the City Council may adopt or reject an amendment to the city’s
Comprehensive Plan under the notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho
Code § 67-6509. After the City Comprehensive Plan has been amended, this
chapter may then be amended as hereafter provided for.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-4) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.214 COMMISSION TO HOLD PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, after
legal notice is published and written notice sent to all parties as required
for conditional use permits, as described in §§
156.120 and (the procedures of)
156.121.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-5) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.215 RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION.
   Within 60 days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the Commission
shall transmit its recommendation to the City Council. The Commission may
recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a
modification of the amendment requested, or it may recommend that the amendment
be denied. The Commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for
amendments are in accordance with the city’s Comprehensive Plan and established
goals and objectives.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-6) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.216 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Recommendation considered. The City Council, at the next official
meeting following the receipt of the Commission’s report, shall consider the
recommendation of the Commission. The City Council shall accept the
recommendation of the Commission’s report unless rejected by a majority of the
full City Council.
   (B)   Specifications. Upon granting or denying an application, the City
Council shall specify:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   (C)   Approval. In the event the City Council shall approve an amendment,
such amendment shall hereafter be made a part of this chapter upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-7) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 156.217 RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION.
   No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied
by the City Council shall be resubmitted in substantially the same purposes
within a period of one year from the date of such final action, unless there is
an amendment in the city’s Comprehensive Plan which resulted from a change in
conditions as applying to the specific property under consideration.
(Prior Code, § 13-14-8) (Ord. 468, passed 4-15-1980)
CHAPTER 157: MOUNTAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT (MO)
Section
   
157.01   Mountain Overlay Zoning District established
   
157.02   Purposes
   
157.03   District boundaries
   
157.04   Uses permitted
   
157.05   Use restrictions
   
157.06   Design standards
   
157.07   Design review
   
157.08   Application
   
157.09   Action by commission
   
157.10   Procedure for hearing and notice
   
157.11   Variance
   
157.12   Appeals
   
157.13   Enforcement
§ 157.01 MOUNTAIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   The Mountain Overlay (MO) zoning district is established to identify those
areas where, after due investigation, study and deliberation, the Wallace City
Council finds that orderly development of hillside areas is vital to the public
interest; that the City should regulate access to, erosion of, and damage from
construction on hillsides; that it is obligated to protect the public health,
safety and welfare; and that special regulations regarding hillside development
should be imposed within such district. Site alterations within the Mountain
Overlay district require a Mountain Overlay site alteration permit, which is a
type of special use permit authorized by Idaho Code § 67-6512.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.02 PURPOSES.
   The Mountain Overlay zoning district is established for the following
purposes:
   (A)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Wallace;
   (B)   To encourage land uses harmonious with existing natural resources;
   (C)   To protect scenic beauty and scenic values;
   (D)   To prohibit detrimental alteration of existing topography and terrain,
leaving hillsides and steep sided canyons generally open and unobstructed, to
prohibit scarring by roadways;
   (E)   To protect natural land features and wildlife habitat;
   (F)   To minimize or prohibit alteration of hillsides, steep slopes,
canyons, and ridges;
   (G)   To facilitate adequate provision of public services and facilities
(i.e., water and sewer, and police, fire and ambulance protection) through
standards appropriate to local conditions;
   (H)   To minimize or prohibit detrimental effects on the natural topography,
geology, soils, drainage, wildlife and vegetation;
   (I)   To prevent unsafe development into areas at risk to wildfires;
   (J)   To carry out provisions contained in Wallace's comprehensive plan;
   (K)   To minimize the visual impact of building sites and access drives at
higher elevations;
   (L)   To protect hillsides in Wallace which are physically and
topographically unique due to their present lack of access roads and thus their
lack of development;
   (M)   To ensure preservation of hillsides, steep slopes, and ridgelines and
their natural features which are visible from the valley floor from obstruction
by development;
   (N)   To protect and enhance the City of Wallace's designation as a
historical site by preserving the natural environment and mountains surrounding
Wallace;
   (O)   To assure the property owner is not deprived of economically viable
use of his/her property; and
   (P)   To ensure that building, excavation, filling or vegetation on ridges
or hillsides will not have a material visual impact on a significant hillside
or skyline visible from a public vantage point entering the City or within the
City. "Material," as the term is used herein shall be construed in light of the
magnitude of the negative impact on the purposes outlined herein.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The Mountain Overlay zoning district boundaries shall be an overlay district
and shall designate those areas within the City found to be hillside and
mountain areas that, due to their steepness of slope, high visibility from
other areas within and outside of the City by the general public, unique
physical characteristics including, steep mountain slopes, canyons, ridges,
and/or skyline juxtaposition among other mountain slopes, require regulation in
order to carry out the purposes of this district. The Mountain Overlay zoning
district shall include those areas so designated illustratively on the "zoning
map of the City of Wallace, Idaho" as presently exists or as adopted hereafter,
and more specifically defined as follows:
   The Mountain Overlay regulations shall apply to those areas within City
limits having a slope of 25% or greater. Existing parcels zoned for residential
use as of the adoption date of this chapter shall be exempted from the
requirements of the Mountain Overlay regulations.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.04 USES PERMITTED.
   The Mountain Overlay zoning district shall be an overlay district and shall
apply the requirements of the Mountain Overlay in addition to the uses and
requirements contained in the underlying base zoning district.
   (A)   Single family residential use (excluding mobile homes/trailers) is
permitted in the Mountain Overlay zoning district, consistent with regulations
contained in this chapter.
   (B)   Any approved development shall be limited to a single-family dwelling
and one approved outbuilding/garage per ten acre parcel. Setback for buildings
and structures shall be 50 feet from all property lines.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.05 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The regulations contained in this chapter are imposed upon construction,
development and use of all real property within the Mountain Overlay zoning
district. Each of the following activities shall be subject to design review
and shall require approval under the regulations contained in this chapter
prior to issuance of a building permit, Mountain Overlay site alteration permit
or commencement of any work associated with any such activity:
   (A)   Construction or placement of buildings or structures, including
additions to any such structures or buildings existing at the effective date
hereof, upon real property within the Mountain Overlay Zoning District.
   (B)   All grading activity involving more than 50 cubic yards.
   (C)   Any activity regulated by City or state street standards. Included
therein are standards for private driveways.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.06 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following design standards are imposed upon construction, development,
excavation and use of all real property within the Mountain Overlay zoning
district. These standards are intended to provide a framework for development
that is sensitive to the unique characteristics of hillside properties.
   (A)   Criteria and standards. The following list of criteria shall be
considered and addressed by each applicant seeking design review approval. The
commission will use this list of design review criteria as a basis to determine
whether a project is to be approved, approved with conditions or denied:
      (1)   There shall be no building on ridgelines which would have a
material visual impact on a significant skyline visible from a public vantage
point entering the City or within the City.
      (2)   Building, excavating, filling and vegetation disturbance on
hillsides which would have a material visual impact visible from a public
vantage point entering the City or within the City shall be minimized.
      (3)   Preservation of significant landmarks shall be encouraged and
protected, where applicable. A significant landmark is one which gives
historical and/or cultural importance to the neighborhood and/or community.
      (4)   Structure location. Design of building sites shall be sensitive to
the natural terrain. Structures shall be located in such a way as to minimize
grading and to preserve natural features. Careful consideration shall be given
to the general orientation of the slope when locating structures.
      (5)   Development must be compatible with the general scale (height,
dimensions, overall mass) of development in vicinity.
      (6)   Cuts and fills visual mitigation. The visual impact of cuts and
fills shall be mitigated by methods approved by the City. This mitigation may
include, but is not limited to, the placement of buildings in front of the cuts
and/or the placement of retaining walls designed to blend with the surrounding
terrain to stabilize the cut. Mitigation shall predominantly be contour grading
along with plantings as identified on the approved landscape plan that will
stabilize the cut or fill slope and blend with the surrounding vegetation. The
use of retaining walls is to be as limited in scope and height as feasible to
ensure the visual predominance of vegetation. Contour grading techniques shall
be used to provide a natural appearing variety of slope transitions, slope
percentage and slope direction in a three-dimensional, undulating pattern
similar to existing, adjacent terrain.
         (a)   Hard edges left by cut and fill operations shall be given a
rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural contours of the land.
         (b)   Manmade slopes adjacent to roadways shall be softened where
feasible by sufficient berms, contour grading, and/or landscaping to create
visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes.
      (7)   Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 15' each in order to
ensure effective screening by vegetation. Cut and fill slopes shall have a
minimum 20' setback from the property line to provide for vegetation buffer and
screening.
      (8)   Any activity involving roads or driveways shall ensure compliance
with Wallace City Code standards pertaining to Site Development, Excavation
Control, and shall conform to the standards for roadway and street construction
as adopted by the Idaho Transportation Department in existence at the time of
such activity.
      (9)   Grading, excavation, site development, and roadway standards as
well as other applicable building code standards shall be met. All applications
for permitting of grading activity shall be submitted with detailed plans
including location, an analysis of the environmental impact and plan to address
erosion control.
      (10)   All roads or driveways shall be reviewed and approved by the
District Fire Chief in order to ensure fire code minimums are met for safe
access and emergency response vehicles.
      (11)   Any site development involving roads, driveways, grading, or
activities done under the Forest Practices Act must conform to these standards
for any actual or anticipated use other than forestry.
      (12)   All development shall have access for fire and other emergency
vehicles to within 150 feet of the furthest exterior wall of any building.
      (13)   International Building Code (IBC) and International Fire Code
(IFC) and Wallace Fire Department requirements shall be met.
      (14)   Public water and sewer service shall comply with the requirements
of the City.
      (15)   All utilities shall be underground.
      (16)   Finish materials, color, and reflectivity. Building materials and
colors shall be compatible with the natural setting. The color, material and
texture palette shall be reinforced with compatible landscaping. The light
reflective value (LRV) of materials used on all exterior walls and roof areas
shall be similar to the LRV of the surrounding terrain. Generally, the more
visible the structure, the lower its LRV shall typically be.
         (a)   Nonreflective windows and glass are required.
         (b)   Exterior lighting shall be minimized and shielded to reduce
visibility.
         (c)   Roofs must be designed to minimize visibility.
            1.   No metal roofing is permitted.
            2.   Earth colored shingles required.
            3.   Roof pitch must be no steeper than a 5/12 pitch.
      (17)   Drainage shall be controlled and maintained to not adversely
affect other properties. Applicant shall submit an erosion control plan,
reviewed by an Idaho licensed engineer. Alteration or scarring of drainage must
be mitigated.
      (18)   The clearing of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be
limited to the approved locations for streets, driveways, yards and easements;
the approved locations for building pads for structures, main buildings and
accessory structures; and the minimum distance between structures and
surrounding vegetation for established fire prevention and safety standards or
recommendations.
      (19)   Revegetation plan required. Landscaping should consist of low-
combustible species (list available at City hall) and must blend with the
surrounding area.
      (20)   No building or development shall exceed 35 feet in height.
      (21)   Approved outbuildings/garages shall not exceed 600 square feet and
shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.07 DESIGN REVIEW.
   Design review applications shall be made and processed as follows:
   (A)   The applicant may request a preapplication review by the commission.
The purpose of the preapplication review shall be for the commission to
consider conceptually the location of the proposed activity, access and any
other element of the proposal in concept as requested by the applicant. In the
event an applicant does not desire a preapplication review, the applicant is
required to submit an application for a Mountain Overlay Site Alteration Permit
from the Planning and Zoning commission prior to proceeding with any activity
or development of property within the Mountain Overlay District.
   (B)   The fee for the application and permit shall be established by
resolution of the Council and shall be paid at the time preapplication review
is requested, or at the time of application if no preapplication review is
requested and shall be nonrefundable.
   (C)   Information to be submitted with the application shall include, but
not be limited to, a legal survey of the property, topography of sufficient
detail to represent slope of land, cuts and fills required and similar
features; elevations of proposed building pads and public streets providing
access, private access drives; preliminary utility extension plans, drainage
plans and driveway plans; and description of proposed drilling or blasting, if
any. On site information may be required prior to any on site visit to the
subject property by the commission. Such information may include stakes marking
boundaries of buildings, centerlines of access drives or other elements of the
proposal, and/or story poles illustrating proposed heights of structures and
also may include recent photographs evidencing impact(s) of the proposed
development from various vantage points.
   (D)   On site review by the members of the commission may be requested and
if so, shall occur prior to taking action on said application review. Extreme
weather conditions or inordinate depth of snow may cause the commission to
delay said on site review not more than 180 days.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.08 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A completed design review application with all fees paid and all
application materials submitted shall constitute a complete application for
design review and is required prior to review of any design review proposal.
   (B)   All design review plans and drawings shall be prepared by an Idaho
licensed architect or an Idaho licensed engineer.
   (C)   The following is required to be submitted for an application for
design review:
      (1)   Design review application form including project name, location,
applicant, owner, project representatives, and contact information.
      (2)   One PDF electronic set of the complete application containing all
requirements as listed below, plans appropriately scaled, shall be submitted.
Electronic record of the materials and color sample board may be satisfied with
photos. One hard copy set of scalable plans showing at a minimum the following:
         (a)   Legal survey of the property.
         (b)   Vicinity map, to scale, showing the project location in
relationship to neighboring buildings and the surrounding area. Note: A
vicinity map must show location of adjacent buildings and structures.
         (c)   Site plan, to scale. List square footage of subject property
including lot dimensions.
         (d)   Drainage plan (grading, catch basins, piping, and dry wells).
         (e)   Utilities plan (location and size of water and sewer mains and
services, gas, electric, TV and phone).
         (f)   Landscape plan (existing landscaping on the site shown and
adjacent right-of- way as retained, relocated or removed; proposed landscaping
including species type, size and quantity).
         (g)   Floor plan. List gross and net square footage for each floor.
         (h)   Detailed elevations of all sides of the proposed building and
other exterior elements (colors, materials).
         (i)   Exterior lighting plan, showing location, height, type, and
lumen output; spec sheets for fixtures.
         (j)   One 11 inch by 17 inch materials and colors sample board showing
all exterior materials used on the facade of the structure.
         (k)   Building comers for all proposed buildings and additions shall
be staked on the site and all trees proposed to be removed shall be flagged at
least one week prior to the Commission meeting. The applicant shall install
story poles, or other approved method, at the maximum roof peaks of the
proposed buildings as required by the Administrator.
      (3)   The Administrator may waive some submittal requirements if it is
determined the information is not relevant to the design review.
      (4)   Other information or studies as required by the Commission.
      (5)   Design review fee shall be submitted as established by resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.09 ACTION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Approval; conditional approval. Within 60 days after the public
hearing, the Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the applications presented. If the application is approved, or
approved with modifications, the Commission shall direct the Administrator or
Chairperson to issue a Mountain Overlay Site Alteration Permit listing the
specific conditions specified by the Commission for approval.
   (B)   Criteria. The Commission shall determine the following before approval
is given:
      (1)   The project does not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of
the public.
      (2)   The project conforms to all applicable standards and criteria as
set forth in this chapter, this title, and any other standards as adopted or
amended by the City of Wallace from time to time.
   (C)   Conditions. The Commission may impose any condition deemed necessary
to ensure the health, safety, or welfare of the public is not jeopardized. The
Commission may also condition approval of a project with subsequent review and/
or approval by the administrator or planning commission. All conditions of
approval must cite the appropriate standard for imposing such condition.
Conditions which may be attached include, but are not limited to, those which
will:
      (1)   Ensure compliance with applicable standards.
      (2)   Require conformity to approved plans and specifications.
      (3)   Require security for compliance with the terms of the approval,
including monetary security in the form of a bond to be posted in an amount
sufficient to cover anticipated costs of remedying non-compliance.
      (4)   Minimize adverse impact on other development.
      (5)   Control the sequence, timing and duration of development and
ongoing maintenance.
      (6)   Require more restrictive standards than those generally found in
this Code.
      (7)   Requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon
service delivery by any political subdivision, including districts, providing
services within the planning jurisdiction.
   (D)   Studies. Prior to granting a Mountain Overlay Site Alteration Permit,
studies may be required of the social, fiscal, and environmental effects of the
proposed special use.
   (E)   Specifications on granting or denying. Upon granting or denying an
application the Commission shall specify:
      (1)   The standards used in evaluating the application; and
      (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.10 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING AND NOTICE.
   Upon receipt of a complete design review application, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing, publish notice in the newspaper and give written notice
to all parties as required for conditional use permits. See section 156.120 of
this title.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.11 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Power to authorize. The Commission may authorize in specific cases
such variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming
of neighboring lands, structure, or buildings in the same district and no
permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance.
   (B)   Hardship. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience
or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this title
would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (C)   Required information. A variance from the terms of this title shall
not be granted by the Commission unless and until a written application for a
variance is submitted to the Administrator and the Commission containing:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicants.
      (2)   Legal description of property.
      (3)   Description of nature of variance requested.
   (D)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
      (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure, or building involved which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
      (2)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title.
      (3)   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
      (4)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
   (E)   Action by commission.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the application for an appeal or a variance, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing, publish notice in the local newspaper
and give written notice to all affected persons within 300 feet of the subject
property.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursement to the City
for all out-of-pocket costs resulting from the application and may require a
deposit at the time of filing of the application in an amount established by
resolution.
      (3)   Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the Commission
shall either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the request for
appeal or variance. Upon granting or denying an application, the Commission
shall make specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence
presented to it which support conclusions to approve or deny the application,
the standards used in evaluating the application, and the action, if any, that
could be taken by the applicant to obtain approval.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.12 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal of any decision or determination of the Planning and Zoning
or Historic Preservation Commission ("the Commission") made in the
administration or enforcement of this chapter may be taken by any affected
person, as that term is defined by Idaho Code § 67-6521, as it may be amended
from time to time, to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal in writing
with the City Clerk in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
      (1)   Action required by the City Clerk. The clerk shall certify that all
procedural requirements have been satisfied and fees paid and transmit to the
Council the original of all papers constituting the record in the case,
together with the decision or determination of the Commission. A verbatim
transcript of the Commission proceedings shall be prepared and transmitted to
the Council at the appellant's expense.
      (2)   Hearing and notice. The Council shall, following receipt of the
clerk's certificate and the record of the case, set the matter for hearing and
give notice of the date, time, place and purpose thereof and of the right to
request a copy of the decision thereon, to the appellant, the Commission, and
to any other affected person, as defined in Idaho Code § 67-6521, as that
section may be amended from time to time, all in accordance with Idaho Code §§
67-6501 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Authority of Council. Upon hearing the appeal, the Council shall
consider only matters which were previously considered by the Commission as
evidenced by the record, the order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Commission and the notice of appeal, together with oral presentation and
written legal arguments by the appellant, the applicant, if different than the
appellant, and the Commission and/or staff representing the Commission. The
Council shall not consider any new facts or evidence at this point. The Council
may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the decision or
determination of the Commission. Furthermore, the Council may remand the
application to the Commission for further consideration with regard to specific
criteria stated by the Council.
      (4)   Decision by Council. The Council shall enter a decision within 30
days after the hearing on appeal, which shall include its written decision
separately stated. The Council shall transmit a copy of the decision to the
appellant and any affected person who has requested a copy in writing, as
defined in Idaho Code § 67-6521, as that section may be amended from time to
time.
      (5)   Appeal of Council. In the event of an appeal of a decision of the
Council to district court, applications approved by the City will be processed
by the City during the pendency of the appeal.
   (B)   All appeals permitted or authorized by this title shall be taken and
made in the manner and within the time limits as follows:
      (1)   The written notice of appeal shall be filed before 5:00 p.m. of the
fifteenth calendar day after the decision or determination of the Commission
has been made or after findings of fact have been approved by the Commission,
whichever occurs later. The failure to physically file a notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within the time limits prescribed by this section shall be
jurisdictional and shall cause automatic dismissal of such appeal. The notice
of appeal shall be in writing and in such form as shall be available from the
office of the administrator, which shall require to be set forth with
specificity all bases for appeal, including the particulars regarding any
claimed error or abuse of discretion.
      (2)   An affected person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council may
seek judicial review with the District Court within twenty-eight (28) days
after all administrative remedies under local ordinances have been exhausted.
         (a)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8003, an owner of private property
that is the subject of such action may submit a written request for a
regulatory takings analysis with the clerk or the agency or entity undertaking
the regulatory or administrative action. Not more than twenty-eight (28) days
after the final decision concerning the matter at issue, the City Council shall
prepare a written taking analysis concerning the action consistent with the
procedure outlined in Idaho Code § 67-8003.
   (C)   An administrative fee set by resolution of the City Council and a fee
equal to the expense of giving notice and providing the transcript shall be
paid within two days after receipt from the administrator of the amount of the
fee. In the event the fee is not paid as required, the appeal shall not be
considered filed.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
§ 157.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No owner or agent of the owner shall construct, use or occupy any
building, structure or improvement upon real property in violation of this
title. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, or any other person who
commits, allows, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation shall
be found guilty of such a violation. The provisions of this title shall be
enforced in the following manner:
      (1)   A violation of this title shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not
to exceed six months, or both. Each day that such a violation continues shall
constitute a separate criminal offense. A misdemeanor offense occurs where:
         (a)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this title exists in
any building or any other structure or on a tract of land; and
         (b)   An order to remove any such violation has been served upon the
owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of the building, other structure or
tract of land (or any part thereof), or upon the architect, builder, contractor
or any other person who commits or assists in any such violation; and
         (c)   Such person fails to comply with such order within ten days
after service.
      (2)   Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in
equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation,
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, and these
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
      (3)   No building permit or other approval or permit shall be issued for
the construction of any building, structure or improvement in violation of this
title, nor shall any other permit be approved for an applicant where there is
an outstanding unresolved violation by the same applicant or property owner.
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval shall not be construed to be a
permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this
title or of any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the City. No permit
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this title
shall be valid.
      (4)   In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the City attorney,
acting on behalf of the City Council, may maintain an action for an injunction
to restrain any violation of this title. Any costs associated with the
enforcement of this chapter shall be assessed to the property owner, and
failure to pay said costs may result in the costs being certified to the
property and placed upon the tax rolls.
   (B)   The building inspector and his or her authorized representative are
empowered to cause any building, other structure or tract of land to be
inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist therein or threat in violation of any provisions of this title.
After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed on any building,
other structure or tract of land covered by such order, except to correct or
comply with such order. This title shall not be construed to hold the City
responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection
or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect or by
reason of issuing a building permit as herein provided.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-12-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
II.   STREET VACATIONS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
                        An ordinance authorizing the annexation of the City of
2020-05  11-10-2020     Wallace, Shoshone County, into the County Fire
                        Protection District No. I for the propose of fire
                        protection within the city limits.
                        An ordinance removing the Holding District (H) as a
2022-01  5-11-2022      zone and providing for the rezoning of areas identified
                        on the Zoning Map as being part of the Holding
                        District.
                       
 
TABLE II: STREET VACATIONS
 
Ord.  Date         Description
No.   Passed   
2021-              An ordinance providing for the vacation of a portion of Lots 1, 2, and 3 and
02    3-10-2021    the western half of Lot 4 of Block 4 of the Mountain View Addition to the
                   city situated in Section 35, township 48 north, range 4 east.
                   An ordinance providing for the vacation of a portion of D Street lying
2021- 10-13-2021   between Block 17 and Block 18, Ediam’s Mountain View Edition, and a portion
04                 of Wilson Street lying between Blocks 15, 16, 17, and 18, Ediam’s Mountain
                   View Edition.
2021-              An ordinance providing for the vacation of a portion of the western 32 feet
07    11-17-2021   of Fourth Street, located between Elm Street and High Street and adjacent to
                   323 Elm Street.
                  
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord.  Date         Description
No.   Passed   
                   Granting a water system franchise to Citizens Utility Company and its
474   10-13-1981   successors and assigns.
                   (Prior Code, Title 15, Chapter 3)
2004-              Granting a solid waste franchise to Clifford Arthur, dba Clifford Arthur’s
01    5-17-2004    Refuse Service.
                   (Prior Code, Title 15, Chapter 5)
                   Granting a cable television franchise to Cequel III Communications I, LLC,
2009- 5-13-2009    dba Suddenlink Communications, or its lawful successor, transferee, or
01                 assignee.
                   (Prior Code, Title 15, Chapter 4)
2019-              Granting a gas franchise to Avista Corporation, dba Avista Utilities, and
01    3-13-2019    its respective successors and assigns, agents, and contractors.
                   (Prior Code, Title 15, Chapter 1)
2019-              Granting an electric franchise to Avista Corporation, dba Avista Utilities,
02    3-13-2019    and its respective successors and assigns.
                   (Prior Code, Title 15, Chapter 2)
                  
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Idaho Code
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IDAHO CODE
Idaho Code Cite Code Section
Idaho Code Cite      Code Section
Title 7, Chapter 7   156.178
Title 18             130.01
18-111               10.10
                     111.15;
Title 23, Chapter 9  111.19;
                     111.22;
                     111.38
23-1016              111.43
Title 23, Chapter 13 111.60
23-1303(a)           111.60
Title 33, Chapter 26 53.01
33-2603              53.01
33-2608              53.01
Title 39, Chapter 26 91.03
Title 39, Chapter 41 153.006
Title 44, Chapter 25 153.007
                     70.01;
Title 49             72.07;
                     73.99
49-1              94.08
49-208(a)            72.02
49-213               72.09
49-410               72.09
49-937               94.07
49-952               91.34
49-1503              73.99
Title 49, Chapter 4  72.13
50-206               31.01
                     32.33;
50-302               73.99;
                     93.050
50-901               130.01
Title 54, Chapter 52 153.021
54-5205              153.021
54-5217              153.021;
                     153.999
67-4601 et seq.      155.002
67-4612              155.144
Title 67, Chapter 52 156.178
Title 67, Chapter 65 156.003
67-6501 et seq.      157.12
67-6509              156.213
67-6512              156.178
67-6517              156.118
67-6521              157.12
67-6526              150.07
67-8003              157.12
                     
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2022 Code
Prior Code          2022 Code
Preface             10.01
1-1-1               10.01
1-1-2               10.02
1-1-3               10.03
1-1-4               10.04
1-2-1               10.05
1-2-2               10.06
1-2-3               10.07
1-2-4               10.09
1-3-1               10.08
1-3-2               10.10
1-3-3               10.11
1-4-1               10.99
1-4-2               10.99
1-4-3               10.99
1-4-4               10.99
1-5-1               30.01
1-5-2               30.02
1-5-3               30.03
1-5-4               30.04
1-5-5               30.05
1-5-6               30.06
1-5-7               30.07
1-5-8               30.08
1-5-9               30.09
1-5-10              30.10
1-6-1               31.01
1-6-2               31.01
1-6-3               31.01
1-6-4               31.01
1-7-1               31.02
1-7-3               31.03
1-7-4               31.04
1-7-5               31.05
1-7-6               31.06
1-8-1               30.25
1-8-2               30.26
1-8-3               30.27
1-8-4               30.28
1-10-1              11.01
1-10-2              11.02
1-10-3              11.03
1-10-4              11.04
1-11-1              150.01
1-11-2              150.02
1-11-3              150.03
1-11-4              150.04
1-11-5              150.05
1-11-6              150.06
1-11-7              150.07
3-2-1               111.01
3-2-2               111.02
3-2-3               111.03
3-2A-1              111.15
3-2A-2              111.16
3-2A-3              111.17
3-2A-4              111.18
3-2A-5              111.19
3-2A-6              111.20
3-2A-7              111.21
3-2A-8              111.22
3-2B-1              111.35
3-2B-2              111.36
3-2B-3              111.37
3-2B-4              111.38
3-2B-5              111.39
3-2B-7              111.41
3-2B-9              111.43
3-2B-10             111.44
3-2B-11             111.45
3-2B-12             111.46
3-2B-13             111.47
3-2B-14             111.48
3-2B-15             111.49
3-2B-16             111.46
3-2B-17             111.99
3-2C-1-1            111.60
3-2C-1-2            111.60
3-2C-1-3            111.60
3-2C-1-4            111.60
3-2C-1-5            111.60
3-2C-2-1            111.61
3-2C-2-2            111.61
3-2C-2-3            111.61
3-2-3               111.99
3-2-4               111.99
3-4-1               151.01
3-4-2               151.20
3-4-3               151.21
3-4-4               151.22
3-4-5               151.02
3-4-6               151.03
3-4-7               151.04
3-4-8               151.05
3-4-9               151.06
3-4-10              151.07
3-4-11              151.23
3-4-12              151.08
3-4-13              151.24
3-4-14              151.24
3-4-15              151.09
4-1-1               92.01
4-1-2               92.02
4-1-3               92.03;
                    92.99
4-1-4               92.04
4-1-5               92.05
4-1-6               92.06
4-1-7               92.07
4-1-8               92.08
4-1-9               92.09
4-1-10              92.10
4-1-11              92.11
4-1-12              92.12
4-1-13              92.12
4-1-14              92.13
4-1-15              92.14
4-1-16              92.15
4-1-17              92.99
4-2-1               52.01
4-2-2               52.02
4-2-3               52.03
4-2-4               52.04
4-2-5               52.05
4-2-6               52.06
4-2-7               52.07
4-2-8               52.08
4-2-9               52.09
4-2-10              52.10
4-2-11              52.11
4-2-12              52.12
4-2-13              52.13
5-1-1               32.01
5-1-2               32.02
5-1-3               32.03
5-1-4               32.04
5-2-1               130.01
5-2-2               130.02
5-2-3               130.03
5-3-1               130.04
5-3-2               130.04
5-3-3               130.04
5-3-4               130.04
5-3-5               130.04
5-4A-1              90.001
5-4A-2              90.002
5-4A-3              90.003
5-4A-4              90.020;
                    90.999
5-4A-5              90.021
5-4A-6              90.022
5-4A-7              90.004
5-4A-8              90.035
5-4A-9              90.023
5-4A-10             90.036
5-4A-11             90.050
5-4A-12             90.051
5-4A-13             90.052
5-4A-14             90.053
5-4A-15             90.038
5-4A-16             90.039
5-4A-17             90.065
5-4A-18             90.006
5-4A-19             90.066
5-4A-20             90.054
5-4A-21             90.039
5-4A-22             90.067
5-4A-23             90.068
5-4A-24             90.080
5-4A-25             90.037
5-4A-26             90.999
5-4A-27             90.005
5-4A-28             90.999
5-4A-31             90.001
5-4B-1              90.081
5-4B-2              90.082
5-4B-3              90.083
5-4B-4              90.084
5-4B-5              90.085
5-4B-6              90.999
6-1-1               70.01
6-1-2               70.01
6-1-3               70.01
6-2-1               71.01
6-2-2               Ch. 74, Schd. II
6-2-3               71.02
6-2-4               71.03
6-2-5               71.04
6-2-6               71.05
6-2-7               71.06
6-2-8               71.07
6-2-9               71.08
6-2-10              71.09
6-2-11              71.10
6-3-1               72.01
6-3-2               72.02
6-3-3               72.03
6-3-4               72.04
6-3-5               72.05
6-3-6               72.06
6-3-7               72.07
6-3-8               72.08
6-3-9               72.09
6-3-10              72.10
6-3-11              72.11
6-3-12              72.12
6-3-13              72.14
6-3-14              72.13;
                    72.14
6-4-1               Ch. 74, Schd. I
6-5-1               73.01
6-5-2               73.02
6-5-3               73.03
6-5-4               73.04
6-5-5               73.05
6-5-6               73.06
6-5-7               73.07
6-5-8               73.99
6-5-9               73.06
6-6-1-1             73.35
6-6-1-2             73.36
6-6-1-3             73.37
6-6-1-4             73.38
6-6-1-5             73.39
6-6-1-6             73.40
6-6-1-7             73.41
6-6-1-8             73.42
6-6-2               73.20
6-6-3               73.21
6-6-4               73.99
7-1-1               32.15
7-1-2               32.16
7-1-3               32.17
7-1-4               32.18
7-1-5               32.19
7-2-1               32.30
7-2-2               32.31
7-2-3               32.32
7-2-4               32.33
7-2-5               32.34
7-3-1               91.01
7-3-2               91.01
7-4-1               91.02
7-4-2               91.38
7-5-1               91.31
7-5-2               91.32
7-5-3               91.33
7-5-4               91.34
7-5-5               91.35
7-5-6               91.36
7-5-7               91.38
7-5-8               91.38
7-6-1               91.30
7-6-2               91.38
7-7-1               91.15
7-7-2               91.16
7-7-3               91.17
7-7-4               91.18
7-7-5               91.19
7-7-6               91.38
7-8-1               91.03
7-9-1               91.04
7-9-2               91.38
8-1-1               93.001
8-1-2               93.001
8-1-3               93.001
8-2-1               93.002
8-2-2               93.003
8-2-3               93.004
8-2-4               93.005
8-2-5               93.006
8-2-6               93.007
8-2-7               93.008
8-2-8               93.009
8-2-9               93.010
8-2-10              93.011
8-2-11              93.010
8-2-12              93.012
8-2-13              93.013
8-4-1               93.045
8-4-2               93.046
8-4-3               93.047
8-4-4               93.048
8-4-5               93.049
8-4-6               93.050
8-4-7               93.051
9-1-1               153.001
9-1-2               153.002
9-1-3               153.003
9-1-5               153.004
9-1-6               153.005
9-1-7               153.006
9-1-8               153.007
9-1-9               153.008
9-1-10              153.009
9-2-1               153.020
9-2-2               153.021;
                    153.999
9-2-3               153.022
9-2-4               153.023
9-2-5               153.024
9-3-1               153.035
9-3-2               153.036
9-3-3               153.037
9-3-4               153.038
9-3-5               153.039
9-3-6               153.040
9-4-1               153.055
9-4-2               153.056
9-4-3               153.057
9-4-4               153.058
9-4-5               153.059
9-4-6               153.060
9-4-7               153.061
9-4-8               153.062
9-5-1               153.075
9-5-2               153.076
9-5-3               153.077
9-5-4               153.078
9-5-5               153.079
9-5-6               153.080
9-6-1               153.095
9-6-2               153.096
9-6-3               153.097
10-1-1              50.01
10-1-2              50.02
10-1-3              50.03
10-1-4              50.04
10-1-5              50.05
10-2-1              51.01
10-2-2              51.02
10-2-3              51.03
10-2-4              51.04
10-2-5              51.05
10-2-6              51.06
10-2-7              51.99
10-3-1              153.110
10-3-2              153.111
10-3-3              153.111
10-3-4              153.112
10-3-5              153.113
10-3-6              153.114
10-3-7              153.115
10-3-8              153.116
10-3-9              153.117
10-3-10             153.118
10-3-11             153.119
10-3-12             153.120
10-3-13             153.121
10-3-14             153.122
10-3-15             153.123
10-3-16             153.124
10-3-17             153.125
10-3-18             153.125
10-3-19             153.126
10-4-1              51.20
10-4-2              51.21
10-4-3              51.22
10-4-4              51.23
10-4-5              51.24
11-1-1              154.01
11-1-2              154.02
11-1-3              154.03
11-1-4              154.04;
                    154.99
11-1-6              154.05
11-1-7              154.06
11-1-8              154.07
11-1-9              154.08
11-1-10             154.09
11-1-11             154.10
11-1-12             154.11
11-1-13             154.12
11-2-1              154.25
11-2-2              154.26
11-2-3              154.27
11-2-4              154.28
11-2-5              154.29
11-2-6              154.99
12-1-1              155.001
12-1-2              155.002
12-1-3              155.003
12-1-4              155.004
12-2-1              155.020
12-2-2              155.021
12-2-3              155.022
12-2-4              155.023
12-2-5              155.024
12-2-6              155.025
12-2-7              155.026
12-2-8              155.027
12-2-9              155.028
12-2-10             155.029
12-3-1              155.040
12-3-2              155.041
12-3-3              155.042
12-3-4              155.043
12-4-1              155.055
12-4-2              155.056
12-4-3              155.057
12-4-4              155.058
12-4-5              155.059
12-4-6              155.060
12-5-1              155.075
12-5-2              155.076
12-5-3              155.077
12-5-4              155.078
12-5-5              155.079
12-5-6              155.080
12-5-7              155.081
12-5-8              155.082
12-5-9              155.083
12-5-10             155.084
12-6-1              155.095
12-6-2              155.096
12-6-3              155.097
12-6-4              155.098
12-6-5              155.099
12-6-6              155.100
12-7-1              155.115
12-7-2              155.116
12-7-3              155.117
12-7-4              155.118
12-7-5              155.119
12-7-6              155.120
12-8-1              155.135
12-8-2              155.136
12-8-3              155.137
12-8-4              155.138
12-8-5              155.139
12-8-6              155.140
12-8-7              155.141
12-8-8              155.142
12-8-9              155.143
12-8-10             155.144
12-8-11             155.145
12-8-12             155.146
12-8-13             155.147
12-8-14             155.148
12-8-15             155.149
12-9-1              155.005
12-10-1             155.006
12-10-2             155.006
13-1-1              156.001
13-1-2              156.003
13-1-3              156.004
13-1-4              156.005
13-1-5              156.006
13-1-6              156.007
13-2-1              156.020
13-2-2              156.021
13-2-3              156.022
13-2-4              156.023
13-3-1              156.002
13-3-2              156.002
13-4-1              156.035
13-4-2              156.036
13-5-1              156.037
13-5-2              156.038
13-6-1              156.050
13-6-2              156.051
13-6-2-1            156.052
13-6-2-2            156.053
13-6-2-3            156.054
13-6-2-4            156.055
13-6-2-5            156.056
13-6-2-6            156.057
13-6-2-7            156.058
13-6-2-8            156.059
13-6-2-9            156.060
13-6-2-10           156.061
13-7-1              156.075
13-7-2              156.076
13-7-3              156.077
13-7-4              156.078
13-7-5              156.079
13-8-1              156.090
13-8-2              156.091
13-8-3              156.092
13-8-4              156.093
13-8-5              156.094
13-8-6              156.095
13-8-7              156.096
13-8-8              156.097
13-8-9              156.098
13-8-10             156.099
13-8-11             156.100
13-9-1              156.115
13-9-2              156.116
13-9-3              156.117
13-9-4              156.118
13-9-5              156.119
13-9-6              156.120
13-9-7              156.121
13-9-8              156.122
13-9-9              156.123
13-10-1             156.135
13-10-2             156.136
13-10-3             156.137
13-10-4             156.138
13-10-5             156.139
13-10-6             156.140
13-10-7             156.141
13-11-1             156.155
13-11-2             156.156
13-11-3             156.157
13-11-4             156.158
13-11-5             156.159
13-12-1             156.170
13-12-2             156.171
13-12-3             156.172
13-12-4             156.173
13-12-5             156.174
13-12-6             156.175
13-12-7             156.176
13-12-8             156.177
13-12-9             156.178
13-13-1             156.190
13-13-2             156.191
13-13-3             156.192
13-13-4             156.193
13-13-5             156.194
13-13-6             156.195
13-13-7             156.196
13-13-8             156.197
13-13-9             156.199
13-13-10            156.198
13-14-1             156.210
13-14-2             156.211
13-14-3             156.212
13-14-4             156.213
13-14-5             156.214
13-14-6             156.215
13-14-7             156.216
13-14-8             156.217
                    152.01 -
14-1-1              152.04;
                    152.08 -
                    152.10
14-1-2              152.05
                    152.06;
14-1-3              152.07;
                    152.99
14-1-4              152.25 -
                    152.27
14-1-5              152.40 -
                    152.44
Title 15, Chapter 1 TSO Table III
Title 15, Chapter 2 TSO Table III
Title 15, Chapter 3 TSO Table III
Title 15, Chapter 4 TSO Table III
Title 15, Chapter 5 TSO Table III
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     111.15 -
294      6-20-1947   111.17;
                     111.19 -
                     111.22
310      5-14-1951   32.02
                     10.99;
                     32.17;
350      9-14-1959   32.19;
                     111.22;
                     130.04
356      4-10-1960   130.03
359      12-12-1960  111.18
                     151.01 -
360      4-13-1961   151.09;
                     151.20 -
                     151.24
375      1-9-1967    130.04
393      4-13-1970   130.04
395      1-4-1971    70.01
401      6-22-1971   111.60
405      11-9-1971   32.17
412      11-14-1972  153.003
418      5-8-1973    153.002
420      1-8-1974    111.61
                     52.01;
                     52.02;
                     52.04 -
426      2-11-1975   52.06;
                     52.08;
                     52.12;
                     52.13
440      6-21-1977   91.30
                     91.31 -
465      3-11-1980   91.35;
                     91.37
                     52.03;
466      3-27-1980   52.07;
                     52.09
                     156.001 -
                     156.007;
                     156.020 -
                     156.023;
                     156.035 -
                     156.038;
                     156.050 -
                     156.061;
                     156.075 -
                     156.079;
                     156.090 -
468      4-15-1980   156.100;
                     156.115 -
                     156.123;
                     156.135 -
                     156.141;
                     156.155 -
                     156.159;
                     156.170 -
                     156.177;
                     156.190 -
                     156.199;
                     156.210 -
                     156.217
474      10-13-1981  50.01;
                     TSO Table III
                     111.40;
482      12-13-1983  111.42;
                     111.43
                     155.001 -
                     155.006;
                     155.020;
                     155.024 -
                     155.026;
                     155.028;
                     155.029;
                     155.040 -
                     155.043;
492      7-14-1987   155.055 -
                     155.060;
                     155.076 -
                     155.084;
                     155.095 -
                     155.100;
                     155.115 -
                     155.120;
                     155.135 -
                     155.149
500      12-13-1988  153.001
504      8-16-1989   30.03;
                     31.03
                     155.021;
505      8-16-1989   155.022;
                     155.027
507      10-10-1989  153.004
508      11-14-1989  155.078
509      2-13-1990   93.001
510      3-13-1990   130.02
511      5-8-1990    91.01
513      6-11-1991   153.005
92-4     1-10-1992   32.30 -
                     32.34
92-3     11-10-1992  155.026;
                     155.075
                     93.045 -
92-5     11-10-1992  93.049;
                     93.050;
                     93.051
                     73.20;
93-1     4-20-1993   73.21;
                     73.40;
                     73.99
                     73.01 -
93-5     2-22-1994   73.07;
                     73.99
94-4     9-13-1994   93.002 -
                     93.012
95-B     12-13-1994  73.05
93-5B    12-13-1994  73.06
95-04    5-30-1995   92.01 -
                     92.15
95-01-A  8-8-1995    150.01 -
                     150.07
95-04A   9-5-1995    92.99
95-08    11-3-1995   72.01 -
                     72.14
95-01-B  1-9-1996    150.02
96-01    3-7-1996    31.01
404(A)   4-14-1998   30.04
492-A    7-14-1998   155.023
98-05    11-10-1998  153.007
98-06    11-10-1998  91.02
99-03    5-11-1999   91.03
99-04    5-11-1999   30.26;
                     30.28
2000-01  3-14-2000   10.01
                     111.01 -
2000-02  5-9-2000    111.03;
                     111.99
2001-02  2-13-2001   153.115
2002-02  12-10-2002  153.001;
                     153.022
2004-01  5-17-2004   52.10;
                     TSO Table III
                     154.01 -
2004-02  5-17-2004   154.12;
                     154.99
2006-01  6-14-2006   153.021;
                     153.999
2007-01  5-9-2007    155.139
                     154.25 -
2008-01  2-13-2008   154.29;
                     154.99
                     153.001;
2008-02  2-13-2008   153.008;
                     153.009
2009-01  5-13-2009   TSO Table III
2008-02A 1-12-2011   153.001
2013-01  5-8-2013    155.139
                     90.001 -
                     90.006;
                     90.020 -
                     90.023;
                     90.035 -
2013-02  7-10-2013   90.039;
                     90.050 -
                     90.054;
                     90.065 -
                     90.068;
                     90.080;
                     90.999
2014-04  12-10-2014  153.001
                     152.01 -
                     152.10;
                     152.25 -
2015-02  6-10-2015   152.27;
                     152.40 -
                     152.44;
                     152.99
                     90.081 -
2018-01  4-11-2018   90.085;
                     90.999
                     51.01 -
2018-05  12-12-2018  51.06;
                     51.99
2018-06  12-12-2018  51.20 -
                     51.24
2019-01  3-13-2019   TSO Table III
2019-02  3-13-2019   TSO Table III
                     112.01 -
                     112.08;
2020-01  3-11-2020   112.99;
                     113.01 -
                     113.09;
                     113.99
2020-04  10-28-2020  155.160 -
                     155.162
2020-05  11-10-2020  TSO Table I
2021-01  2-10-2021   156.059;
                     156.060
2020-06  2-10-2021   93.025 -
                     93.032
2020-07  2-10-2021   93.065 -
                     93.072
2021-02  3-10-2021   TSO Table II
2021-03  4-14-2021   153.001
2021-04  10-13-2021  TSO Table II
2021-07  11-17-2021  TSO Table II
2022-01  5-11-2022   156.053;
                     TSO Table I
                     154.01 -
2022-02  4-13-2022   154.12;
                     154.99
2022-04  9-8-2022    Adopting Ordinance
2022-06  10-12-2022  157.01 -
                     157.13
2022-07  11-9-2022   30.04
2023-03  10-26-2023  30.11
2024-02  6-12-2024   94.01–
                     94.14
2024-03  9-11-2024   110.01 –
                     110.14
                     111.04;
                     111.05;
                     111.18;
2024-04  10-16-2024  111.38;
                     111.39;
                     111.40;
                     111.41;
                     111.61
2025-01  3-12-2025   114.01 –
                     114.11
                    
 
 
