AMITY, OREGON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 687, passed 8-6-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 671
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF AMTIY,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Oregon empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the City of Amity has authorized a
general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the City
of Amity of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in
book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY OF AMITY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Amity.”
SECTION 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.   General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30.   Organizations and Employees
31.    Finance
32.   General Administrative Policies
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50.   General Utility Provisions
51.   Water System
52.   Cross-Connection
53.   Sewer System
54.   Sewer System Connection Fees; Service Fees
55.   Industrial Pretreatment Regulations
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70.   General Provisions
71.   Traffic Regulations
72.   Parking Rules
73.   Recreational Vehicles
74.   Abandoned and Inoperable Vehicles
75.   Parade and Processions
76.   Traffic Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90.   Nuisances
91.   Animals
92.   Streets, Sidewalks, and Trees
93.   Recreation Facilities
94.   Library
95.   Camping
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110.   General Licensing Provisions
111.   Soliciting
112.   Amusements
113.   Marijuana and Other Drug-Related Businesses
114.   Liquor
115.   Transient Room Tax
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130.   General Offenses
131.   Offenses Against Property
132.   Offenses Against Public Morals
133.   Offenses Against Public Peace
134.   Offenses Involving Minors
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150.   Building Regulations; Construction
151.   Mobile Homes, Trailers, and Campers
152.   Public Improvements
153.   Historic Resources
154.   Comprehensive Plan
155.   Unified Development
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
I.      Franchise Agreements
II.      Zoning
III.      Funds
PARALLEL REFERENCES
      References to Oregon Revised Statutes
      References to Resolutions
      References to Ordinances
INDEX
SECTION 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code, to include
design and development codes or standards.
SECTION 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the City Clerk of the City of
Amity is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
SECTION 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
SECTION 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
AYES:  6  
NAYS:   0
ABSTENSIONS:  0
APPROVED BY THE INTERIM MAYOR this  1st  day of  September  2021.
Rachel King /s/
Rachel King, Mayor
Attest:
Natasha Johnson /s/
Natasha Johnson, City Recorder/Treasurer
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
   We, the voters of Amity, Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent
possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this
Home Rule Charter.
CHAPTER I: NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
§ 1. TITLE.
   This charter may be referred to as the 2006 City of Amity Charter.
§ 2. NAME.
   The City of Amity, Oregon continues as a municipal corporation with the name
City of Amity.
§ 3. BOUNDARIES.
   The City includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or
are legally modified. The City will maintain as a public record an accurate and
current description of the boundaries.
CHAPTER II: POWERS
§ 4. POWERS.
   The City has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and common law of
the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the City, as
fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.
§ 5. CONSTRUCTION.
   The charter will be liberally construed so that the City may exercise fully
all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law.
§ 6. DISTRIBUTION.
   The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all
municipal legislation to City voters. This charter vests all other City powers
in the Council except as the charter otherwise provides. The Council has
legislative, administrative, and quasi-judicial authority. The Council
exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by
resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The Council may not delegate
its authority to adopt ordinances.
CHAPTER III: COUNCIL
§ 7. COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of a Mayor and six Councilors nominated and elected
from the City at large.
§ 8. MAYOR.
   The Mayor presides over and facilitates Council meetings, preserves order,
enforces Council rules, and determines the order of business under Council
rules. The Mayor votes only in the event of a tie vote of the Council members
voting, when a majority of the Council as a whole must approve an action, in
which the Mayor shall be entitled to vote regardless of whether or not there is
a tie. With the consent of Council, the Mayor appoints members of commissions
and committees established by ordinance or resolution. The Mayor must sign all
records of Council decisions.
§ 9. COUNCIL PRESIDENT.
   At its first meeting each year, the Council must elect a President from its
membership. The President presides in the absence of the Mayor and acts as
Mayor when the Mayor is unable to perform duties.
§ 10. RULES.
   The Council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings.
§ 11. MEETINGS.
   The Council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated
by its rules. Other meetings may be scheduled in accordance with rules
established by Council. The Mayor or two members of Council (not including the
Mayor) may call for a special or emergency meeting in accordance with Oregon
public meetings laws.
§ 12. QUORUM.
   A majority of the Council members is a quorum to conduct business, but a
smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed
by Council rules.
§ 13. VOTE REQUIRED.
   The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the Council is necessary
for any Council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a
majority of the Council.
§ 14. RECORD.
   A record of Council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by the
Council rules.
CHAPTER IV: LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
§ 15. ORDINANCES.
   The Council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances.
The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of Amity ordains as
follows:”.
§ 16. ORDINANCE ADOPTION.
   (a)   Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance
requires approval by a majority of the Council at two meetings.
   (b)   The Council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the
unanimous approval of at least a quorum of the Council, provided the proposed
ordinance is available in writing to the public at least one week before the
meeting. The ordinance need only be read by title only.
   (c)   Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud
or made available in writing to the public before the Council adopts the
ordinance at that meeting.
   (d)   After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be
entered into the Council minutes.
   (e)   After adoption of an ordinance, the City custodian of records must
endorse it with the date of adoption and the custodian’s name and title.
§ 17. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a
later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as
adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an
emergency clause.
CHAPTER V: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
§ 18. RESOLUTIONS.
   The Council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving
resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions may state “The City of Amity
resolves as follows:”.
§ 19. RESOLUTION APPROVAL.
   (a)   Approval of a resolution or any other Council administrative decision
requires approval by the Council at one meeting.
   (b)   Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made
available in writing to the public before the Council adopts the resolution at
that meeting.
   (c)   After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the
vote of each member must be entered into the Council minutes.
   (d)   After approval of a resolution, the City custodian of records must
endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian’s name and title.
§ 20. EFFECTIVE DATE OF RESOLUTIONS.
   Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of
approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution.
CHAPTER VI: QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
§ 21. ORDERS.
   The Council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving
orders. The approving clause for orders may state “The City of Amity orders as
follows:”.
§ 22. ORDER APPROVAL.
   (a)   Approval of an order or any other Council quasi-judicial decision
requires approval by the Council at one meeting.
   (b)   Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made
available in writing to the public at the meeting before the Council adopts the
order.
   (c)   After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision,
the vote of each member must be entered in the Council minutes.
   (d)   After approval of an order, the City custodian of records must endorse
it with the date of approval and the custodian’s name and title.
§ 23. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDERS.
   Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final
approval, or on a later day provided in the order.
CHAPTER VII: ELECTIONS
§ 24. COUNCILORS.
   The term of a Councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term
for which the Councilor was elected. At each general election after the
adoption, three Councilors will be elected for four-year terms.
§ 25. MAYOR.
   The term of the Mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues until
the beginning of the first odd-numbered year after adoption. At every other
general election after the adoption, a Mayor will be elected for a four-year
term.
§ 26. STATE LAW.
   City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or
ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for City offices must be
nonpartisan.
§ 27. QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The Mayor and each Councilor must be a qualified elector under state
law, and reside within the City for at least one year immediately before
election or appointment to office and remain a resident to maintain position.
   (b)   No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one
City office.
   (c)   Neither the Mayor nor a Councilor may be employed by the City.
   (d)   The Council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of
its members.
§ 28. NOMINATIONS.
   The council must adopt an ordinance prescribing the manner for a person to
be nominated to run for mayor or a city councilor position.
§ 29. TERMS.
   The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first
Council meeting of the year immediately after the election, and continues until
the successor qualifies and assumes the office.
§ 30. OATH.
   The Mayor and each Councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the
duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United
States and Oregon.
§ 31. VACANCIES.
   The Mayor or a Council office becomes vacant:
   (a)   Upon the incumbent’s:
      (1)   Death,
      (2)   Adjudicated incompetence, or
      (3)   Recall from the office.
   (b)   Upon declaration by the Council after the incumbent’s:
      (1)   Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the
term of office is to begin,
      (2)   Absence from the City for 30 days without Council consent, or from
all Council meetings within a 60-day period,
      (3)   Ceasing to reside in the City,
      (4)   Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,
      (5)   Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,
      (6)   Resignation from the office, or
      (7)   Removal for cause.
§ 32. FILLING VACANCIES.
   A Mayor or Councilor vacancy will be filled by appointment by a majority of
the remaining Councilors. The appointee’s term of office runs from appointment
until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that
office. If a disability prevents a Council member from attending Council
meetings or a member is absence from the City, a majority of the Council may
appoint a Councilor pro tem.
CHAPTER VIII: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
§ 33. CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Council may create the position of City Administrator and delegate
appropriate authority pursuant to ordinance, resolution, or contract.
§ 34. CITY ATTORNEY.
   The office of City attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the
City government. A majority of the Council must appoint and may remove the
attorney. The attorney must appoint and supervise, and may remove any office
employees.
§ 35. MUNICIPAL COURT AND JUDGE.
   (a)   A majority of the Council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. A
municipal judge will hold court in the City at such place as the Council
directs. The court will be known as the Municipal Court.
   (b)   All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing
justices of the peace and justice courts.
   (c)   All areas within the City and areas outside the City as permitted by
state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.
   (d)   The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by
City ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created
by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless
limited by City ordinance.
   (e)   The municipal judge may:
      (1)   Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;
      (2)   Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the City;
      (3)   Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a City offense;
      (4)   Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;
      (5)   Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for
trials before the court;
      (6)   Penalize contempt of court;
      (7)   Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the
court;
      (8)   Issue search warrants; and
      (9)   Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by
ordinance.
   (f)   The Council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tern.
   (g)   The Council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal
court to an appropriate state court.
CHAPTER IX: PERSONNEL
§ 36. COMPENSATION.
   The Council must authorize the compensation of City officers and employees
as part of its approval of the annual City budget.
§ 37. MERIT SYSTEMS.
   The Council by resolution will determine the rules governing recruitment,
selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of
City employees based on merit and fitness.
CHAPTER X: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 38. PROCEDURE.
   The Council may by ordinance provide for procedures governing the making,
altering, vacating, or abandoning of a public improvement. A proposed public
improvement may be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by owners of the
real property to be specially assessed for the improvement. The number of
owners necessary to suspend the action will be determined by ordinance.
§ 39. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing special assessments for
public improvements or other services charged against real property will be
governed by ordinance.
CHAPTER XI: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 40. DEBT.
   City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law in ORS
223.295. A charter amendment is not required to authorize City indebtedness.
§ 41. ORDINANCE CONTINUATION.
   All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect
remain in effect until amended or repealed.
§ 42. REPEAL.
   All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are
repealed.
§ 43. SEVERABILITY.
   The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by
a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.
§ 44. TIME OF EFFECT.
   This charter takes effect January 1, 2007.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.19   Sanctions regarding incarceration
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Amity Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS DAY. Any 24-hour day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or federal
or state legal holiday.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The area within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Amity as presently established or as
amended by ordinance, annexation, or other legal actions at a future time. The
term CITY, when used in this code, may also be used to refer to the City
Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNTY. Yamhill County, Oregon.
      DAY. Calendar day unless otherwise indicated as business day or working
day.
      GOVERNING BODY. City Council.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive. (See SHALL.)
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this City unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to, and includes, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (See MAY.)
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oregon.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this City shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City
Council or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this City exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, the spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this City for the transaction of all City business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean at least 24 hours’ notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council shall take effect as provided in
the City charter. If there is no City charter, all ordinances passed by the
City Council shall take effect as provided by the City Council or applicable
state law.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption, or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and any amending ordinances are listed following
the text of the code section.
      Example: (Ord. 161, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 170, passed 1-2-1979; Ord.
185, passed 4-1-1990)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
         Example: (ORS 192.410)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
         Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see ORS 192.314
§ 10.18 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.19 SANCTIONS REGARDING INCARCERATION.
   Any and all ordinances of the City which contain sanctions, which could be
applied to a person or other entity, which include incarceration in jail for
any period of time, are hereby amended to delete the sanction of incarceration
in jail.
(Ord. 494, passed 7-13-1987)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which no other
specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500, subject to division (B) below.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this code which is identical to
a state statute containing a penalty shall, upon conviction, be punished by the
penalty prescribed by state statute.
   (C)   Each calendar date on which a violation occurs constitutes a separate
violation.
   (D)   (1)   Infractions are categorized for the purpose of determining fines
in the following categories:
         (a)   Class 1;
         (b)   Class 2;
         (c)   Class 3; and
         (d)   Class 4.
      (2)   The schedule of fines for each category shall be as follows:
         (a)   Class 1: $1,000;
         (b)   Class 2: $500;
         (c)   Class 3: $100; and
         (d)   Class 4: $25.
      (3)   Future City ordinances shall utilize these categories when
establishing the level of infraction for purposes of determining fees.
(Ord. 628, passed 2-1-2012)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ORGANIZATIONS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   FINANCE
      
32.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
33.   CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CHAPTER 30: ORGANIZATIONS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Criminal history record check policies
Emergency Response
   
30.15   Establishment
   
30.16   Director
   
30.17   Planning group or advisory committee
Planning Commission
   
30.30   Establishment
   
30.31   Membership
   
30.32   Appointment and term
   
30.33   Vacancies and removal
   
30.34   Officers
   
30.35   Meetings
   
30.36   Roll call
   
30.37   Quorum
   
30.38   Voting
   
30.39   Powers and duties
   
30.40   Expenditures
   
30.41   Conflict of interest, bias, and ex-parte contact
   
30.42   Procedures in handling parliamentary motions and voting
   
30.43   Decorum
   
30.44   Hearings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECK POLICIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the City law
enforcement to access Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal offender information
through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS) for applicants seeking
employment, elected officials, and/or volunteer work with the City, in
accordance with OAR 257-10-0025(l)(a).
   (B)   Procedure. All proceedings pursuant to this section shall be conducted
in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-10-0025, which establishes
procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon
State Police (OSP) through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS) and as
supplemented below.
      (1)   All applicants for employment, elected officials, and appointed
volunteers with the City will be required to authorize the City to conduct a
criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system.
      (2)   The City’s law enforcement will conduct the check on the
prospective employee or volunteer and report to the Department Head or Mayor
requesting the check advising if the check revealed “criminal record” or “no
criminal record.”
      (3)   The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired
or appointed as a volunteer will be retained in accordance with the
requirements of OAR 166-200-0305 for a period of three years and thereafter
will be destroyed by shredding.
      (4)   The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a
criminal history that are hired or appointed will become a part of the
confidential personnel file of that employee or volunteer. Access to
confidential personnel files is limited to authorized persons who have an
official need to access such files as sanctioned by law or regulation.
      (5)   Applicants for employment or appointment as a volunteer that have a
felony criminal history or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude or theft will be closely examined by the selecting official(s)
to determine if the applicant possesses the required degree of public trust and
confidence. Each selection will, however, be made on an individual, case by
case basis, taking into account the applicant’s qualifications, the
requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for, and the
results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of the offender
at the time of the offense, the type of offense, and subsequent rehabilitation,
and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration shall be taken
into account in evaluating a criminal history report.
      (6)   Hiring an applicant or appointing a volunteer with a criminal
history record will require the approval of the City Administrator or governing
body, after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history of the
applicant.
(Ord. 613, passed 6-6-2007)
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
§ 30.15 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The statutes of the state relating to civil defense are hereby adopted by
said City, and the establishment of an Emergency Response Program for the City,
in accordance with the state’s plans and programs, is hereby authorized and
directed; and said program is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid with
other counties of the state, with municipalities and with any other political
subdivisions of the state.
(Ord. 301, passed 1-21-1957)
§ 30.16 DIRECTOR.
   The City Administrator shall be the City’s Director of Emergency Response.
The Deputy (or alternate) Director shall be the Public Works Superintendent.
(Ord. 301, passed 1-21-1957)
§ 30.17 PLANNING GROUP OR ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   There may be appointed by the City Administrator a planning group or
advisory committee to assist in an advisory capacity in the organization and
administration of the Emergency Response. The City Administrator with input
from the Public Works Superintendent shall determine the necessity for, and
composition of, such assistance.
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 30.30 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby re-established a Planning Commission for the City.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.31 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members who are neither
officials nor employees of the City. No more than two of the said members shall
be engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for
profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or
employees of any corporation that is engaged principally in buying, selling, or
developing of real estate for profit. No more than two of said members shall be
engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade, or profession. No more
than two of said members shall make their primary residence outside of City
Limits, unless the City Council votes in approval of each additional
commissioner appointed in excess of this limit. Commission members shall
receive no compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses duly authorized by
the City Council.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.32 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   (A)   Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council to serve for a term of four years. The terms of the five Planning
Commission members shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two
commissioners expire in any one year. The terms shall begin on the first day of
the calendar year. Upon an expired term, the member’s position shall be filled
by the City Council by appointment to a four-year term. The City Council shall
appoint new members as soon as practicable, making every effort to appoint
members at the first regular meeting of December of the year in which the
member term expires.
   (B)   Although there is no limit upon the consecutive or nonconsecutive
terms served by a member, a member must re-apply each time to continue serving;
reappointments are not automatic, but members may be requested to continue
serving until a replacement is found. The City Council reserves the right to
not reappoint a Commissioner.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.33 VACANCIES AND REMOVAL.
   Appointments to fill vacancies prior to expiration shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term. A member may be removed by the City Council,
after a hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is
absent from three consecutive meetings, without an excuse approved by the
Planning Commission, is rebuttably presumed to be in non-performance of duty.
The Planning Commission Chairperson shall notify the City Council of the
member’s misconduct or nonperformance and recommend that it schedule and
conduct a hearing. The City Council shall then hold a hearing followed by a
vote whether to declare the position vacant. The City Council shall declare the
position vacant unless finding otherwise following the hearing. The City
Council shall then fill said vacancy.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.34 OFFICERS.
   (A)   At its first meeting of each calendar year, the Planning Commission
shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson to serve one year terms.
Officers may be reappointed to subsequent terms.
   (B)   The Chairperson shall be a voting member of the Planning Commission
and shall preside over all meetings of the Planning Commission. The Chairperson
shall sign plats and other official documents on behalf of the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   The Vice-Chairperson shall be a voting member of the Planning
Commission and shall exercise the powers of the Chairperson when the
Chairperson is absent.
   (D)   In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the remaining
members shall call the meeting to order and elect an acting Chairperson who
shall conduct the meeting.
   (E)   The City Recorder shall ensure that minutes of all Planning Commission
meetings are recorded.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.35 MEETINGS.
   The regular standing meeting of the City Planning Commission shall be the
second Monday of each month, at 6:30 p.m., at the City Hall. Regular meetings
may be rescheduled due to observed holidays. Meetings of the Planning
Commission shall be open to the public. The Chairperson may, at the request of
at least two members of the Commission, call a previously unannounced special
meeting of the Commission, for a time not earlier than 24 hours after notice is
given. Notice of a previously unannounced meeting, other than to Commission
members, shall be given as provided by law. The Planning Commission shall not
start a meeting until a quorum is present, as defined below.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.36 ROLL CALL.
   A City Staff member will conduct a roll call in alphabetic order immediately
following the call to order of each meeting.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.37 QUORUM.
   (A)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum.
   (B)   No quorum present. If a quorum is not present, the Chairperson shall
immediately inform the absent members, except those known to be unavailable for
the meeting, that their presence is required to enable the Commission to
proceed. If the absent member or members do not appear after the notice, the
Commissioners present shall adjourn until a specific time and place stated, or
until the next regular meeting.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.38 VOTING.
   A majority of the Commissioners present at a meeting shall be necessary to
decide any question before the Commission. All officers may vote on matters
before the Planning Commission. A tie vote fails for lack of a majority.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.39 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the powers and duties which are now or may
hereafter be assigned to it by charter, ordinances, or resolution of this City
and general laws of this state, including the ORS Chapter 227. The Planning
Commission shall administer the development ordinance of the City, and may make
recommendations to the City Council, to public officials, and to individuals
regarding land use, locations of thoroughfares, public buildings, parks, and
other public facilities, and regarding any other matter relating to the
planning and development of the City and the surrounding areas. The Commission
may make studies, hold hearings, and prepare reports and recommendations on its
own initiative or at the request of the City Council, provided appropriate
funding is available and has been authorized. The Planning Commission shall, on
October 1 of each year, make and file a report of all its transactions with the
City Council. All recommendations, suggestions, and reports made to the City
Council by the Planning Commission shall be in writing.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.40 EXPENDITURES.
   The Planning Commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on
behalf of the City, or to obligate the City for payment of any sums of money
except as herein provided, and only after the City Council shall have first
authorized such expenditure by appropriate action.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.41 CONFLICT OF INTEREST, BIAS, AND EX-PARTE CONTACT.
   (A)   The Chairperson shall, prior to the beginning of every public hearing,
call for declarations of conflict of interest, bias, and ex-parte contact by
the Planning Commissioners. Commissioners shall declare all actual and
potential conflicts of interest with sufficient details to allow the Planning
Commissioners and public to determine a member’s ability to participate in a
public hearing. All declarations, including actual and potential conflicts of
interest, shall be recorded in the official minutes of the meeting. POTENTIAL
AND ACTUAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST are defined in detail in ORS Chapter 244, but
are generally defined as follows.
      (1)   ACTUAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST. Any action or any decision or
recommendation by a person acting in a capacity as a public official, the
effect of which would be to the private pecuniary benefit or detriment of the
person or the person’s relative or any business with which the person or a
relative of the person is associated unless the pecuniary benefit or detriment
arises out of the following:
         (a)   An interest or membership in a particular business, industry,
occupation, or other class required by law as a prerequisite to the holding by
the person of the office or position;
         (b)   Any action in the person’s official capacity which would affect
to the same degree a class consisting of all inhabitants of the state or a
smaller class consisting of an industry, occupation, or other group including
one of which or in which the person, or the person’s relative or business with
which the person or the person’s relative is associated is a member or is
engaged; and
         (c)   Membership in or membership on the board of directors of a
nonprofit corporation that is tax-exempt under I.R.C. § 501(c) being 26 U.S.C.
§ 501(c).
      (2)   POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST. Any action or any decision or
recommendation by a person acting in a capacity as a public official, the
effect of which could be to the private pecuniary benefit or detriment of the
person or the person’s relative, or a business with which the person or the
person’s relative is associated, unless the pecuniary benefit or detriment
arises out of the following:
         (a)   An interest or membership in a particular business, industry,
occupation, or other class required by law as a prerequisite to the holding by
the person of the office or position;
         (b)   Any action in the person’s official capacity which would affect
to the same degree a class consisting of all inhabitants of the state or a
smaller class consisting of an industry, occupation, or other group including
one of which or in which the person or the person’s relative or business with
which the person or the person’s relative is associated is a member or is
engaged; and
         (c)   Membership in or membership on the board of directors of a
nonprofit corporation that is tax-exempt under I.R.C. § 501(c) being 26 U.S.C.
§ 501(c).
      (3)   RELATIVE.
         (a)   The spouse, parent, stepparent, child, sibling, stepsibling,
son-in-law, or daughter-in- law of the public official or candidate;
         (b)   The parent, stepparent, child, sibling, stepsibling, son-in-law,
or daughter-in-law of the spouse of the public official or candidate;
         (c)   Any individual for whom the public official or candidate has a
legal support obligation;
         (d)   Any individual for whom the public official provides benefits
arising from the public official’s public employment or from whom the public
official receives benefits arising from that individual’s employment; or
         (e)   Any individual from whom the candidate receives benefits arising
from that individual’s employment.
   (B)   When an actual conflict of interest has been declared, the
Commissioner shall recuse themselves from participating in the public hearing
and shall leave the room for the remainder of the agenda item. The Commissioner
may return for subsequent agenda items.
   (C)   When a potential conflict of interest has been declared, the
Commissioner shall indicate whether they are capable of being an impartial
participant.
   (D)   Any party may challenge the declarations made or not made by a member
of the Planning Commission. The Chairperson may poll fellow Planning
Commissioners whether they believe the declaring member is capable of
participating in an impartial manner. If the Planning Commission vote
determines that the Commissioner does have a conflict of interest and is not
capable of participating in an impartial manner, the Commissioner shall recuse
themselves and shall leave the room. The Commissioner may return for subsequent
agenda items.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.42 PROCEDURES IN HANDLING PARLIAMENTARY MOTIONS AND VOTING.
   (A)   To make a motion, a Commissioner must be recognized by the Chairperson
when there is no other business on the floor. The Commissioner then says, “I
move to...”
   (B)   Another member of the Commission may second the motion. This can be
done without being recognized by the Chairperson. If no member seconds the
motion, the motion “dies” for lack of a second. The Chairperson will then move
on to the next item of business.
   (C)   If a motion is made and seconded, the Chairperson restates the motion.
This procedure is necessary for the motion to come before the Commission. Prior
to this step, the Chairperson can suggest changes in the motion and the mover
can amend or withdraw his, her, or their original motion. No debate can take
place until the Chairperson states the motion is on the floor. At this point,
the mover may withdraw the motion.
   (D)   The Commissioners then debate the motion. The original mover is
entitled to speak first. Each Commissioner may speak but should not have the
floor a second time until all who wish to speak have spoken once.
   (E)   The Chairperson then puts the question to a vote. When the debate
appears to have closed, the Chairperson may call for the question. If no one
takes the floor, the Chairperson restates the motion and calls for a vote. The
Chairperson will decide the method of voting. Unless otherwise specified by the
Chairperson, the vote will be by polling of the Commissioners.
      (1)   Voice vote. The ayes are called first and then the nays. This is
the standard method of voting within Commission meetings.
      (2)   Polling of the Commissioners. Whenever the Chairperson shall call
for a polling of the members of the Commission, the order of polling shall be a
random order determined by the person recording the poll.
      (3)   Majority. A vote succeeds by a majority vote of the members
present.
      (4)   Tie vote. In the case of a tie vote, the motion dies due to lack of
majority.
      (5)   Abstentions. Abstentions, including a statement by the Commissioner
abstaining noting his, her, or their reason, shall be recorded in the meeting
minutes.
   (F)   The Chairperson announces the voting results. This step is included to
ensure the Commissioners, staff, and members of the public understand the
outcome of the vote and so that City Staff can accurately reflect the action
taken in the minutes and for the record.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.43 DECORUM.
   (A)   Every Commissioner desiring to speak to an issue will address the
Chairperson and, upon recognition, will confine remarks to the issue under
debate. Except by permission of the Chairperson, a Commissioner shall address
any remarks to the Planning Commission and not to the audience.
   (B)   Commissioners questioning, seeking clarification, or soliciting a
recommendation from City Staff will direct the concern to the appropriate staff
member. The City Staff member may respond as requested or redirect the inquiry
to another member of the staff.
   (C)   Upon recognition and permission of the Chairperson, a person in the
audience may address the Commission relative to any matter being considered by
the Commission at that time. All persons speaking in a Planning Commission
meeting shall state his or her name and address; limit comments to the issue
under discussion; limit remarks to three minutes; and be courteous to the
Commissioners, staff, and audience. Members of the public wishing to speak
during a public hearing may only do so during the designated public testimony
period, under the rules stated by the Chair upon opening the hearing and
pursuant to procedures adopted by the City and the Oregon Revised Statutes.
Failure to do so may result in forfeiture of the remaining comment period or
removal from the meeting.
   (D)   The City Administrator or, in his or her absence, an appropriate
designee, will assist the Chairperson (or acting Chairperson) in maintaining
the order and decorum at all meetings.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 30.44 HEARINGS.
   All hearings conducted by the Planning Commission shall be pursuant to
procedures adopted by the City and the Oregon Revised Statutes for the conduct
of hearings.
(Ord. 661, passed 5-6-2020)
CHAPTER 31: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Fee schedule
Public Safety Fee
   
31.15   Purpose and intent
   
31.16   Definitions
   
31.17   Establishment and imposition
   
31.18   Setting fee and other charges
   
31.19   Dedication of funds
   
31.20   Billing and collection
   
31.21   Program administration
   
31.22   Appeal process
   
31.23   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   All General Fund fees, water system fees, sewer system fees, charges,
and monetary penalties shall hereafter be established, abolished, amended, or
modified by resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting, in any way,
the levy of real or personal property taxes.
   (C)   The General Fund, Water System, and Sewer System Fee Schedules are
adopted by resolution. The City Recorder keeps the most current copy of these
Fee Schedules.
   (D)   All fees, charges, and monetary penalties charged by the City shall be
that amount shown on the then current Fee Schedules.
   (E)   The Fee Schedules shall be reviewed at least annually and prior to the
adoption of the City’s General Fund budget.
(Ord. 568, passed 4-2-2002)
PUBLIC SAFETY FEE
§ 31.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The principal purpose of the public safety fee adopted under this
subchapter is to safeguard, facilitate, and encourage the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents and businesses of the City. The City Council finds
that continuous and consistent police services provide a multitude of economic
and social benefits to the public, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Increased police protection;
      (2)   Prevention of crime;
      (3)   Enhanced protection of property;
      (4)   Promotion of business and industry; and
      (5)   Promotion of community spirit and growth.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide a funding mechanism to
help pay for the benefits conferred on City residents and businesses by the
provision of an adequate level of police protection and public safety within
the City.
   (C)   The public safety fee enacted in this subchapter is intended to
supplement existing funding and is not intended to provide full funding for
police services. In the event that the public safety fee revenues collected are
insufficient to offset the costs of police services, additional funding may be
allocated by the City Council from other non-dedicated City funds, provided,
however, the City Council may direct the reimbursement to such other non-
dedicated City funds if additional public safety fee revenues are collected.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018; Ord. 659, passed 12-5-2018)
§ 31.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. A parcel of real property, or portion thereof, on which
improvements have been constructed. Improvements include, but are not limited
to, buildings, structures, parking lots, and outside storage.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A developed property which is primarily not for
personal domestic accommodation, including, but not limited to, business or
commercial enterprise. A non-residential structure which provides facilities
for one or more businesses or tenants, including, but not limited to, permanent
provisions for access to the public, shall have each distinct unit or tenancy
considered as a separate NON-RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A business that leases storage
space does not create separate units for each storage space so long as the
lease does not provide for general public access to the storage space from
which the lessee runs a business.
   PERSON. A natural person, unincorporated association, tenancy in common,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, cooperative, trust,
governmental agency (including the state but excluding the City), or other
entity in law or in fact.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A developed property primarily used for personal domestic
accommodation which provides complete individual living facilities for one or
more persons, including, but not limited to, permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, and sanitation. A home business within a RESIDENTIAL UNIT is not a
separate non-residential unit. An accessory dwelling unit on a parcel is a
separate RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Each individual dwelling unit within a multi-family
residential property, condominium, or mobile home park is a separate
RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A business that provide long term assisted living care,
including, but not limited to, a long-term care facility, but that does not
provide full individualized living facilities for each dwelling unit is a
single non-residential unit, not separate residential units. Transient lodging
is not a RESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person owing the public safety fee. Unless another
RESPONSIBLE PARTY has agreed in writing to pay the public safety fee and a copy
of that writing is filed with the City, the person(s) paying the City’s utility
charges is the RESPONSIBLE PARTY. If there is no service to or billing for the
developed property or if service or billing has been discontinued, the
RESPONSIBLE PARTY is the person(s) having the right to occupy the property.
   TRANSIENT LODGING. A hotel, motel, or inn dwelling unit that is used for
temporary overnight human occupancy; a space used for parking a recreational
vehicle or erecting a tent during temporary periods of human occupancy; or
other dwelling units or portions of dwelling units that are used for temporary
human occupancy. For the purposes of this definition, TEMPORARY means less than
30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.17 ESTABLISHMENT AND IMPOSITION.
   (A)   Establishment.
      (1)   The City Council hereby establishes a public safety fee.
      (2)   The public safety fee shall be paid by the responsible party for
each developed property
within the City.
      (3)   Collection of the public safety fee for each developed property
shall be made by a monthly charge which shall commence on the first day of
August 2018.
   (B)   Imposition.
      (1)   The public safety fee shall be assessed to each residential unit
and to each non-residential unit.
      (2)   The obligation to pay the public safety fee exists when a person
uses or otherwise benefits from public safety services. It is presumed that
public safety services are used and that a benefit arises whenever a property
is a developed property.
      (3)   All developed properties within the City shall be charged the
public safety fee.
      (4)   Undeveloped properties within the City are not subject to the
public safety fee.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.18 SETTING FEE AND OTHER CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council shall have power and authority to establish the
amount of the public safety fee and all rates, deposits, penalties, and other
charges provided for under this subchapter.
      (2)   Such fees, rates, deposits, penalties, and other charges shall be
established by Council resolution without the necessity of amending this
subchapter, and such resolution when duly passed shall provide the lawful fee,
rates, deposits, penalties, and other charges of the City in connection with
the public safety fee created by this subchapter; provided, however, the
requirements of law be complied with in connection therewith.
   (B)   The Council shall review the public safety fee rates on an annual
basis in preparation for the City’s annual budget. The fee rates should be
reviewed in conjunction with desired public safety service levels and the
associated costs of providing those service levels.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.19 DEDICATION OF FUNDS.
   All public safety fee revenues shall be distinctly and clearly noted in the
City budget and shall only be used for the purposes stated within this
subchapter.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.20 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The public safety fee shall be billed and collected monthly from the
responsible party. Statements for the fee shall be included as an additional
item on the City monthly utility billing wherever feasible, unless otherwise
specified below.
   (B)   Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay and a
copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person normally responsible
for paying the City’s water and sewer utility charges is responsible for paying
the public safety fee.
   (C)   In the event a developed property is not served by a domestic water
meter, sewer hook-up, or if water and sewer service is disconnected, the public
safety fee shall be paid by the persons having the right to occupy the
property.
   (D)   (1)   A presumption shall exist that a property is a developed
property under this subchapter when a property receives water service, receives
sewer service, is under lease, is issued a building permit, or receives an
occupancy permit.
      (2)   Thereafter, to avoid the public service fee, the responsible person
for the property shall have the burden to show that the property is not a
developed property.
   (E)   There shall be no charge for an undeveloped property until such time
as building permits are issued for that property.
   (F)   The imposition of surcharges shall be calculated on the basis of the
number of residential or non-residential units supported, without regard to the
number of water meters serving that property.
   (G)   Monies received from responsible parties will first be credited toward
the public safety fee and then to other outstanding City charges.
   (H)   The City Council may, in its fee rate resolution, provide for
penalties for delinquency of payments to ensure prompt payment of public safety
fee billings.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.21 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this
subchapter, including the development of administrative procedures for receipt
and administration of fees and all other activities related to the purpose of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.22 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by
the City Administrator under this subchapter may appeal the decision to the
City Council in accordance with this section.
   (B)   To initiate an appeal, the aggrieved responsible person shall file
with the City Recorder a written notice of appeal together with a written
statement listing how the City erred, including any supporting documentation to
justify the appeal.
   (C)   The City Council shall make all reasonable attempts to resolve appeals
utilizing available existing information, including supporting documentation
filed with the appeal, within 35 days of the date the appeal was filed. If,
however, more detailed site-specific information is necessary, the City Council
may request the applicant provide additional information.
   (D)   The City Council shall file a report within 90 days of the date the
appeal was filed explaining the disposition of the appeal, along with the
rationale and supporting documentation for the decision reached.
   (E)   When a responsible party disputes an interpretation given by the City
as to a property’s classification or the responsible party’s liability for the
fee, if the appeal is successful, relief will be reassignment to a more
appropriate billing category. In such instances, a refund of fees to the
responsible party will be limited to any overpayment, retroactive to the filing
date of the appeal. In deciding such an appeal, factors to be taken into
consideration include, but are not limited to, availability of more accurate
information; equity relative to billing classifications assigned to other
developments of a similar nature; changed circumstances; and situations
uniquely affecting the party filing the appeal.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
§ 31.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In the event funds received for payments on a City monthly service
bill are inadequate to satisfy in full all of the water, sewer, and public
safety charges, credit shall be given first to the public safety fee, second to
the sewer service charges, and third to charges for water service.
   (B)   In addition to other lawful enforcement procedures, the City may
enforce the collection of charges required by this subchapter by withholding
delivery of water to any premises where the public safety fee is delinquent.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the City may
institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and collection of
charges owing. The City’s enforcement rights shall be cumulative.
(Ord. 656, passed 7-3-2018)
CHAPTER 32: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
Initiative and Referendum
   
32.01   Process for initiatives and referendums
Nomination for Elective City Offices
   
32.10   Nomination for elective city offices
Electronic Message Board and Newsletter
   
32.15   Purpose
   
32.16   Application
   
32.17   Message requirements
   
32.18   Duration of message
   
32.19   Priority use
   
32.20   Approval and denial process
   
32.21   Fee or charges
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
§ 32.01 PROCESS FOR INITIATIVES AND REFERNDUMS.
   Any initiatives and referendums to change the City’s ordinances shall follow
the guidance provided in Oregon Secretary of State, Elections Division, County,
City, and District Initiative and Referendum Manual, adopted by OAR 165-014-
0005.
NOMINATION FOR ELECTIVE CITY OFFICES
§ 32.10 NOMINATION FOR ELECTIVE CITY OFFICES.
   Any person possessing the qualifications required by the City Charter may
file for candidacy for city office by the following method:
   (A)   Nomination may be made by filing a declaration of candidacy
accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of not less than 20
qualified voters in the city;
   (B)   Filing for candidacy shall conform to state law applicable to the
election.
(Ord. 615, passed 8-6-2008)
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD AND NEWSLETTER
§ 32.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the electronic message board and Grapevine newsletter
are to enable the City and local community organizations to inform the public
of community events, meetings, and emergency situations. The message board and
Grapevine newsletter are not intended for private use, personal, or commercial
gain.
   (B)   Local community organizations may include the City, special districts
(schools, fire, and the like), non-profits (Amity DIG, fire district
volunteers, performing arts, scouts, food pantry, and the like), law
enforcement, local churches, the state’s Department of Transportation, and
other emergency service providers.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.16 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application must be completed on forms provided by the City. These
forms may be modified or updated as needed.
   (B)   Applications are considered on a first come/first serve basis,
timelines of the event, and the overall community benefit.
   (C)   Applications must be received and approved at least five working days
prior to the event in order for the event to be posted.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.17 MESSAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   There is no exclusive use of the message board.
   (B)   The City may use the electronic message board for promotion of City-
sponsored activities.
   (C)   Events posted on the electronic message board and Grapevine newsletter
must appeal to a wide local audience. The event must be open to the public and
not be exclusively for commercial or personal gain.
   (D)   Promotion of alcohol or tobacco products or any political candidate is
prohibited. Publishing any political, factional, sectarian, racist, sexist,
bigoted, false, misleading, or deceptive viewpoint is prohibited.
   (E)   Events posted by a local religious organization must be open to the
public, appeal to a broad audience, and shall not include hours of worship or
religious opinion.
   (F)   The electronic message board or Grapevine newsletter shall not be used
for activities or events including, but not limited to: birthdays,
anniversaries, weddings, hours of worship for religious organizations, events
not occurring within the City community, business advertisements for sales or
promotional events, political opinion or political campaign advertisement, and
support for or against a ballot measure, initiative, or referendum.
   (G)   All messages may not imply City endorsement/approval of the event.
   (H)   The City reserves the right to edit, reword, or condense the message.
   (I)   The City reserves the right to refuse to post any message.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.18 DURATION OF MESSAGE.
   (A)   Each message will appear for no more than seven days. The message ends
at the time the event ends.
   (B)   No more than one message per event will be considered.
   (C)   The message sponsor or applicant must notify the City if the event is
cancelled.
   (D)   The City reserves the right to reduce the time period and determine
the frequency that the message appears in any 24-hour period in order to
accommodate as many events as possible.
   (E)   Messages will be posted in a timely manner but not necessarily
immediately upon submission or approval.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.19 PRIORITY USE.
   (A)   The City shall determine the priority of messages.
   (B)   Emergency messages including those from Fire and EMS services, law
enforcement, ODOT, or other emergency service providers authorized by the City
Administrator or his or her designee have priority over all other messages.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.20 APPROVAL AND DENIAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall approve or deny
the application within three working days of receipt of the application form.
   (B)   Denial may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall be
submitted in writing within three working days from the date of denial and
filed with the City Recorder at City Hall. The City Recorder shall include the
written appeal on the Council agenda at the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting.
   (C)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 32.21 FEE OR CHARGES.
   There shall be no fee or charge for an application, however, donations are
encouraged to help offset the cost of maintaining the message board.
(Res. 2012-07, passed 8-1-2012)
CHAPTER 33: CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Section
   
33.01   Office created
   
33.02   Powers and duties
   
33.03   Authority over City employees
   
33.04   Appointment
   
33.05   City Council meetings
   
33.06   Compensation
§ 33.01 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of City Administrator of the City of
Amity, Oregon; and the appointee to said office shall have general supervision,
direction, and control over all nonelective officers and employees of the City
of Amity, except the Municipal Court Judge and the City Attorney, in the
exercise of their duties, and of the work of all City employees.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 33.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
   (A)   The City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the City Council
(unless excused by the Mayor); keep the City Council advised at all times of
the affairs and needs of the City; make reports as requested by the City
Council including but not limited to reports on City department operations.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall oversee all aspects of the personnel
records for all employees.
   (C)   To represent the City to outside groups and agencies; coordinate City
activities with those of other cities, counties, and outside agencies and
organizations.
   (D)   Prepare the annual budget for consideration by the City Council and
Mayor, and Budget Committee; serve as budget officer.
   (E)   Prepare, publish and post all legal notices as required; submit press
releases to the news media; communicate with the public.
   (F)   Supervise preparation and presentation to the Council of ordinances
and policies designed to maintain or improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of City government.
   (G)   Act as purchasing agent for all departments of the City subject to
such limitations and requirements as may be adopted by the City Council.
   (H)   To act as business manager for the City: supervising expenditures of
all departments; overseeing collection of all sums of money due the City;
analyzing the functions of all departments; making recommendations for greater
efficiency of City government.
   (I)   Enforce all City ordinances in accordance with Council policies and
priorities.
   (J)   Ensure enforcement of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits or
other agreements granted by, or entered into by the City.
   (K)   Participate in Council goal setting and long-range planning, and
implement Council goals, priorities and policies.
   (L)   To address and resolve citizen complaints and concerns consistent with
City ordinances and Council policies.
   (M)   To supervise the recording, filing, and maintenance of all City
records including deeds, easements, bonds, contracts, ordinances, resolutions,
leases and other legal documents.
   (N)   The City Administrator shall perform such other duties required of him
or her by Council, not inconsistent with law and the ordinances of the City.
   (O)   Endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact,
patience, and professional courtesy in actions and communications in order to
maintain the highest possible standard in public service.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 33.03 AUTHORITY OVER CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The City Administrator shall have general supervision and control, including
hiring, discipline and discharge, over all City employees, except the Municipal
Court Judge and the City Attorney for which Council retains exclusive control,
and shall designate the duties employees shall perform and all matters
pertaining to their work for the City. The City Council may, by resolution or
ordinance, provide rules under which the City Administrator shall exercise said
direction and supervision.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 33.04 APPOINTMENT.
   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council, and shall
serve as City Administrator until such time that the City Council declare the
position vacant. The Council may enter into contract with the City
Administrator stating terms and conditions of employment.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 33.05 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Administrator shall sit with the City Council at all meetings
thereof and at all meetings of committees of the City Council, and shall have
the right to take part in all discussions coming before the City Council or
committees, and shall have no vote therein.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 33.06 COMPENSATION.
   The salary and benefits of the City Administrator shall be such as
determined by actions of the City Council.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-5-2023)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER SYSTEM
      
52.   CROSS-CONNECTION
      
53.   SEWER SYSTEM
      
54.   SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEES; SERVICE FEES
      
55.   INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Connection outside City Limits prohibited
   
50.02   Adoption of public works design standards and construction
specifications
Water Utility Franchise Fee
   
50.30   Grant of franchise
   
50.31   Use of public spaces
   
50.32   Term
   
50.33   Conditions of franchise
Sewer Utility Franchise Fee
   
50.45   Grant of franchise
   
50.46   Use of public spaces
   
50.47   Term
   
50.48   Conditions of franchise
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 CONNECTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   The City, as a matter of policy, will no longer grant connections to or
extensions of the water and/or sewer system(s) to any parcel outside the City
Limits.
(Res. 98-1, passed 2-3-1998)
§ 50.02 ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS DESIGN STANDARDS AND CONSTRUCTION
SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The latest version of the City of Amity Public Works Design Standards
are adopted as the City’s design standards for all public improvements within
the City and may be cited as “Design Standards.”
   (B)   The 1970 Edition of Oregon Standards Specifications for Construction
published by the state Chapter, American Public Works Association, are adopted
as the standard specifications for public works construction in this City and
may be cited as “City of Amity Standard Specifications” or “Construction
Standards.”
   (C)   A copy of the edition is available on file in the office of the City
Recorder.
   (D)   Work done and materials used for public works construction awarded or
otherwise authorized shall conform to these standards unless otherwise provided
in the particular specifications for work authorized by the Council.
(Ord. 383, passed 12-3-1973)
WATER UTILITY FRANCHISE FEE
§ 50.30 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   The City Water Department, hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“utility,” is hereby granted, subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the
franchise right and privilege to erect, construct, maintain, and operate a
domestic water system within the corporate limits of the City, herein sometimes
referred to as the “City,” as the same now exist or may be hereafter
constituted; and the franchise right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain its facilities, in, upon, along, across, above, over, and
under the streets, alleys, and public ways now laid out or dedicated, and all
extensions thereof, and additions thereto, for the provision of water services
in the City.
(Ord. 655, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.31 USE OF PUBLIC SPACES.
   The fee imposed by this franchise is compensation for the use of City
streets, alleys, easements, and other public spaces for the necessary operation
of the utility.
(Ord. 655, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.32 TERM.
   All rights and privileges hereby granted shall be effective as of July 2018
and shall continue indefinitely.
(Ord. 655, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.33 CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE.
   The rights and privileges granted by this subchapter are granted upon the
conditions herein contained and also upon the following considerations and
conditions, to wit:
   (A)   In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the
utility shall pay to the City a franchise fee in the amount of 5% of the gross
revenue as defined herein;
   (B)   The fee required by this subchapter shall be paid to the City in
quarterly installments, based on a written statement of the utility verifying
the amount of gross receipts for the three month periods ending September 30,
December 31, March 31, and June 30 shall be made to the City within 30 days;
and
   (C)   Gross revenue, as used in this subchapter, shall be deemed to include
any revenue earned within the City from the service fees charged for the
provision of water services.
(Ord. 655, passed 6-6-2018)
SEWER UTILITY FRANCHISE FEE
§ 50.45 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   The City Sewer Department, hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“utility,” is hereby granted, subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the
franchise right and privilege to erect, construct, maintain, and operate a
domestic wastewater collection and treatment system within the corporate limits
of the City, herein sometimes referred to as the “City,” as the same now exist
or may be hereafter constituted; and the franchise right and privilege to
construct, maintain, and operate lines, pumps, and equipment necessary or
convenient to wastewater collection within the City as the same now are or may
be hereafter constituted.
(Ord. 654, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.46 USE OF PUBLIC SPACES.
   The fee imposed by this franchise is compensation for the use of City
streets, alleys, easements, and other public spaces for the necessary operation
of the utility.
(Ord. 654, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.47 TERM.
   All rights and privileges hereby granted shall be effective as of July 2018
and shall continue indefinitely.
(Ord. 654, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 50.48 CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE.
   The rights and privileges granted by this subchapter are granted upon the
conditions herein contained and also upon the following considerations and
conditions, to wit:
   (A)   In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the
utility shall pay to the City a franchise fee in the amount of 5% of the gross
revenue as defined herein;
   (B)   The fee required by this subchapter shall be paid to the City in
quarterly installments, based on a written statement of the utility verifying
the amount of gross receipts for the three month periods ending September 30,
December 31, March 31, and June 30 shall be made to the City within 30 days;
and
   (C)   Gross revenue, as used in this subchapter, shall be deemed to include
any revenue earned within the City from the service fees charged for wastewater
collection and/or treatment.
(Ord. 654, passed 6-6-2018)
CHAPTER 51: WATER SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Enforcement
   
51.02   Public Works Superintendent
   
51.03   Water service installation charges and water rates
   
51.04   Water meters
   
51.05   Service pipe connection
   
51.06   Payment due date
   
51.07   Delinquent payments
   
51.08   Discontinuing water supply
   
51.09   Duty to pay
   
51.10   Deposit
   
51.11   Disconnection for late payment
   
51.12   Repairing pipes
   
51.13   Fire hydrants
   
51.14   Tapping or hooking
   
51.15   Water leak
   
51.16   Right to shut off water
   
51.17   Right to discontinue water supply
   
51.18   Water line requirements
   
51.19   Connecting a lateral
   
51.20   Liability for leaks in lateral lines
   
51.21   Taking water
   
51.22   Damaging the water system prohibited; right to shut off water for
nonpayment
Connection to City’s Water System
   
51.35   Definition
   
51.36   Buildings adjoining right-of-way
   
51.37   Ceasing use of private water supply
   
51.38   Exemption for irrigation of crops
   
51.39   Installation of backflow prevention assembly
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Council shall have general supervision of the water system with power to
enforce the provisions of all ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to
said water system and to fix water rates where no specific provision is made by
ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.02 PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
   The City Administrator shall have the power and authority to appoint a
Public Works Superintendent and to fix his or her salary, under whose
supervision all connections with water mains or pipes shall be made and who
shall have general supervisory control over the City water system with power to
enforce the rules and regulations of the Council in relation thereto.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.03 WATER SERVICE INSTALLATION CHARGES AND WATER RATES.
   Water service installation charges, water rates and charges, and excess
usage charges assessed by the City shall be set by Council resolution.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 515, passed 10-9-1991; Ord. 546, passed 10-
12-1996; Res. 2019-09, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 51.04 WATER METERS.
   The meters installed to measure the water used by all water users shall be
read by the City once each month, or as often as the City deems necessary, to
accurately measure the water used, and all statements for water used shall be
paid at the rates and at the times provided by this chapter. The Public Works
Superintendent must have free and clear access to all water meters at all
times. Access to the water meters must not be impeded in any manner, including,
but not limited to, obstruction by shrubbery, trees, fences, or by unleashed
animals. If the Public Works Superintendent is unable to gain access to a water
meter, 24-hour notice will be given to the property owner to have the problem
corrected or water service will be discontinued. If the obstruction has not
been cleared within 30 days, the Public Works Superintendent shall remove said
obstruction.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 SERVICE PIPE CONNECTION.
   (A)   The service pipes connected to the water mains must be so arranged
that the supply to each separate house or premises may be controlled by a
separate stopcock placed within or near the line of the street curb. Where
water is now supplied through one service and meter to a duplex, apartment, or
other multiple dwelling or business unit or combination of same, to be used by
separate families or businesses or combinations of same, each such house,
apartment, or separate family or business unit using water must pay the minimum
rate as established by the City.
   (B)   In the event of noncompliance with this section, the Council or Public
Works Superintendent may decline to furnish water until separate services are
provided or may shut off the water to such premises until such time as the
provisions of this section have been complied with by the owner or owners of
the premises involved.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 PAYMENT DUE DATE.
   The water rates and charges as fixed by the Council shall be due and payable
on and between the first and fifteenth days of each month following the
rendering of such service, and shall be payable at the office of the City
Recorder. Payments processed after the fifteenth of the month will be assessed
a late fee as set by council resolution.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.07 DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
   Should any water user become delinquent in the payment of his or her water
rent or charge, he or she shall pay in addition thereto a penalty, as set by
Council resolution, and in the event he or she fails or neglects to pay said
water rent and penalty on or before the fifteenth day of the first month
following the month when such service was rendered, the Public Works
Superintendent shall shut off the water to said premises and a financial charge
as set by Council resolution shall be made when said water is turned on.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.08 DISCONTINUING WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Should any person desire to permanently discontinue the use of the
water supply to their premises, the person shall notify the City Clerk's
office, at least seven days prior to shut off, and pay in full all assessments
in arrears at the office of the City Recorder, and for all service rendered, up
to and including the requested date of disconnection. The water will then be
turned off by Public Works and no further billing shall be applied. No
remission of any water charge will be made for a period of less than one
billing cycle, or without notice to the Public Works Superintendent as provided
in this section.
   (B)   Should any person desire to temporarily discontinue the use of the
water supply to their premises for the duration of a vacation or absence of not
less than one billing cycle, but not more than six months, in one calendar
year, the person shall notify the City Clerk's office, at least seven days
prior to shutoff, and pay in full all assessments in arrears at the office of
the City Recorder. The person shall establish with the City Clerk a date for
the resumption of service, which may be revised upon mutual written agreement
of the person and City Clerk. Only one revision is allowed. The water will be
turned off by Public Works and a lock will be installed on the meter.
      (1)   During the period of temporary discontinuance, the City will charge
a standby rate as set by Council resolution. The City Council establishes the
initial standby rate of $90 per month, which includes public safety and street
fees. This rate may be revised by Council resolution, as required.
      (2)   Upon the date established in the request, or as revised, the lock
shall be removed, service restored, and normal billing rates resumed.
      (3)   The removal of a City-installed lock without permission shall be
considered a violation of §§
51.21 and
51.22.
   (C)   Upon a voluntary discontinuation of water service, a person may
request the removal of their water meter at a cost as set by Council
resolution. Future reinstallation of the water meter and reconnection shall
require the payment of all required connection and inspection fees as shall be
then required for all new connections.
   (D)   Landlords or next-of-kin who seek to discontinue water service due to
an unexpected property vacancy shall notify the City Clerk's office and may
request discontinuance in accordance with divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this
section. The City Clerk's office may require a death certificate or other
documentation to validate the request.
   (E)   Upon a voluntary discontinuation of water service, if the property
owner does not state otherwise, Public Works shall install a lock upon the
meter to prohibit the flow of water. A City-installed lock may be removed upon
application for new service, for which a charge, as set by Council resolution,
will be made. The removal of a City-installed lock without permission shall be
considered a violation of §§
51.21 and
51.22.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 675, passed 6-1-2022)
§ 51.09 DUTY TO PAY.
   The owner of premises to which water is furnished by the City shall be
responsible for the payment of all water rental and charges for services
rendered and it shall be the duty of each such property owner renting his or
her premises to require his or her tenant to pay such water rental and charges.
The City shall not be required to notify any property owner as such delinquent
charges, and, should the property owner fail to pay such charges the City, may
turn off the water to said premises and not again turn the same on until all
charges and penalties, as provided by Council resolution, are paid.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The Recorder shall require a deposit set by resolution from all
persons desiring water service to property covered by this chapter before water
service to said premises is turned on by the Public Works Superintendent. Such
deposits shall be held by the City and returned to the user upon final
termination of water service, provided all water charges are then paid in full.
   (B)   The deposit required by this section shall not be applied to any
monthly water service charge except upon termination of water service, and
shall not be considered a credit in the event of any delinquency as defined in
§
51.07 hereof.
   (C)   In the event that the charges for water service to said premises are
paid in full and not delinquent for any consecutive 24-month period the City
Recorder may, upon written request from the person making said deposit, return
all or a portion of said deposit to said person.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 523, passed 10-12-1993) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the City to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The City’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will
be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten
days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the City official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the City to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for services then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge as
set by resolution.
§ 51.12 REPAIRING PIPES.
   No person shall be permitted or allowed to do any work upon or make any
repairs to any pipe or pipes or appurtenances of the water system of the City
without first obtaining permission from the Public Works Superintendent.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person or persons, except firefighters in the discharge of their duties,
shall, without permission of the Public Works Superintendent, open or attempt
to open or in any way tamper with any fire hydrant or other fixture connected
with the mains or pipes of the water system of the City.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 TAPPING OR HOOKING.
   All tapping or hooking on to any mains or pipes of the water system shall be
done only by the Public Works Superintendent or under his or her supervision.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.15 WATER LEAK.
   When it appears that there may be a water leak under any street, it shall be
the duty of the Public Works Superintendent to make an excavation to determine
the cause of the same. If said leak results from a break in the main or service
line to the stopcock near the curb line, the repairs shall be made at the
expense of the City; if the leak results from a break in the private service
pipe, the cost of repairs and excavation shall be charged to the property owner
and shall be a lien upon his or her property until paid.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.16 RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER.
   The City shall have the right at any time to shut off the water in the water
mains without notice for repairs, extensions, or any other necessary bursting
pipes or by collapse of boilers, water tanks, or water fixtures upon the
premises of any user.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988)
§ 51.17 RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE WATER SUPPLY.
   The City expressly reserves the right to discontinue furnishing water to any
and all water users and consumers either inside or outside the corporate limits
of said City, or to limit or restrict his, her, or their use of such water in
the event of water shortage or other public emergency or catastrophe. Should it
be necessary, on account of water shortage or other public emergency or
catastrophe, to curtail, reduce, or terminate water service in any part of the
City’s water system, the service to those subscribers and users of water from
the water system living outside the City shall first be curtailed or
terminated, as the case may be.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 523, passed 10-12-1992)
§ 51.18 WATER LINE REQUIREMENTS.
   All water lines hereafter extended to the City Limits and all water lines
presently extending to the City Limits which are hereafter reconstructed shall
be not less than eight inches in diameter or the diameter of the City line to
which it is connected, whichever is the greater; all such construction shall be
done by or under the supervision of the Public Works Superintendent, and the
cost of all pipe, fittings, and the like; excavation; and covering of any lines
outside the City, as well as the repair and maintenance of same, shall be the
obligation of the out-of-town users on said line or lines.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.19 CONNECTING A LATERAL.
   Any property owner outside the City Limits desiring to connect a lateral to
any main line outside the City must first obtain permission from the office of
the City Recorder and execute an agreement relating to the use of the City
water, prepared by the City; the water used by users outside the City shall be
measured by meter; and each user shall pay the connection charge established by
the City.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.20 LIABILITY FOR LEAKS IN LATERAL LINES.
   Each user of water on any line outside the City Limits shall be individually
liable for any water wasted by leaks in their respective lateral lines, and
users on the main line outside the City shall be collectively liable for any
water wasted resulting from a leak or break in the main line resulting from
negligence or failure to maintain and repair said line after such leak or break
is discovered.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21 TAKING WATER.
   Any person who shall take or attempt to take water from the municipal water
system contrary to the provisions of this section or §§
51.12 through
51.14 of this chapter shall be fined per §
51.99.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 DAMAGING THE WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED; RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER FOR
NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   A water account holder shall be subject to a Class 2 fine for any
manipulation, tampering or modification of a City-installed water transmission
line or water meter to alter its read by any entity or individual other than a
City employee, an entity or individual authorized by the City, or law
enforcement or a firefighter responding to a call for service.
   (B)   The City shall utilize whatever lock, restrictor, clamp or other
device it deems necessary to shut off the flow of water to any user of the
water system for nonpayment of bills after notice and meaningful opportunity to
be heard on disputed bills. Removal of a city device that shuts off water is
prohibited unless performed by a City employee, an entity or individual
authorized by the City, or law enforcement or a firefighter responding to a
call for service.
   (C)   A water account holder shall be subject to a Class 2 fine for the
removal of any City-installed device as established in division (B) upon a
water meter to shut off the flow of water, if done by any entity or individual
other than a City employee, an entity or individual authorized by the City, or
law enforcement or a firefighter responding to a call for service.
   (D)   A water account holder, entity or individual, other than a City
employee, an entity or individual authorized by the City, or law enforcement or
a firefighter responding to a call for service, shall be subject to a Class 1
fine should that water account holder, entity or individual in any manner pipe
around a water meter or otherwise divert water from the system except through
approved outlets.
   (E)   The water account holder shall be solely liable for any damage caused
to a City water meter or other city property or equipment by the account
holder, or his or her tenants or agents, due to actions established in
divisions (A), (C) and (D). Liability shall include the full replacement cost
of a new water meter and all the costs to repair the damage to City property or
equipment. Damage determination and cost assessments will be conducted and made
available by Amity Public Works.
   (F)   The City will include the information provided in this section and in
§
51.99 (C) in the agreement provided to the water user at the time of
application.
(Ord. 672, passed 10-6-2021) Penalty, see §
51.99
CONNECTION TO CITY’S WATER SYSTEM
§ 51.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONNECTION. The meter, pipes, valves, and appurtenances necessary to supply
water from a water line through the meter to a customer, but this does not
include the customer line.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY. Water procured through a well, underground aquifer,
rain capture system, or other means of water collection not provided by the
City.
   WATER LINE. Any pipe that carries water for the City is a water line. A
WATER LINE is the physical distribution means located in streets, highways,
public, and private rights-of-way which supply water for general public usage.
   WATER SERVICE. The provision of a metered service by the City to an
individual customer for the purposes of activities such as, but is not limited
to, consumption or manufacturing or domestic use or agriculture or processing
activities. It includes, but is not limited to, the pipes, valves, and
appurtenances necessary to supply water from the meter for customer usage. The
charges applied to the WATER SERVICE are payable to the City.
   WATER SYSTEM or WATER INFRASTRUCTURE. The City’s water utility enterprise,
to include, but not limited to, its facilities, pipes, lines, reservoirs,
treatment plant, intake system, and valves, and other apparatus up to the
metered connection.
(Ord. 657-2, passed 11-6-2019)
§ 51.36 BUILDINGS ADJOINING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Every owner of a building, dwelling, or other structure on a lot or parcel
which either adjoins the right-of-way where a City water line is located or is
within 200 feet of a right-a-way where a water line is located shall connect to
said water line consistent with the requirements contained in City ordinances
and codes and may not use a private water supply for the provision of water
service to the building, dwelling, or other structure.
(Ord. 657-2, passed 11-6-2019)
§ 51.37 CEASING USE OF PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   All existing users of a private water supply for water service must cease
said use within six months of the effective date of this subchapter and connect
to the City’s water system within that time, unless the City has documentation
(or documentation is provided) of prior exemption by the City. All new building
construction within City Limits shall connect to the City’s water system.
(Ord. 657-2, passed 11-6-2019)
§ 51.38 EXEMPTION FOR IRRIGATION OF CROPS.
   Notwithstanding the above, all current users of private water supplies who
otherwise would be required to comply with the mandates of §§
51.36 and
51.37, who use the private water supply solely and exclusively for the
provision of irrigation or water of crops or other commercial vegetation, shall
be allowed to continue said use of a private water supply provided they give
notice of said limited use to the City and certify that they will not use said
private water supply for any other purpose.
(Ord. 657-2, passed 11-6-2019)
§ 51.39 INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Backflow prevention assemblies must be installed where required by
City Ordinance, OAR, and the most recently adopted Public Works Design
Standards.
   (B)   Current users of private water supplies who, once connected to the
City’s water system, choose to retain a connection to his, her, or their
private water supply shall install a Public Works approved backflow prevention
assembly that must be installed on the connection to the premises. If water
from a supply other than that provided by the City is found without proper
backflow protection the City’s water supply to the premises shall be
immediately shut off with or without notice, while the associated account
remains active. In case of such discontinuance, service shall not be
reestablished until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross-connection,
or potential cross-connection, has been completely and permanently eliminated
or that an approved backflow prevention assembly commensurate to the degree of
hazard has been installed on the service connection to the premises, and the
assembly has been inspected, tested, and approved by Public Works. All costs
incurred will be the responsibility of the owner and/or account holder, not the
City.
(Ord. 657-2, passed 11-6-2019)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent or employee of any
person, firm, or organization violating the provisions of §§
51.05,
51.06,
51.10 through
51.14, and
51.19 through
51.21 shall, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be punished by a
fine, as set by Council resolution, for each offense for each day of the
violation.
   (B)    Per §
51.21, the sum of not less than $100 for each offense for each day of
violation.
   (C)   (1)   A water account holder violating the provisions established in §
51.22(A), (C) - (E) shall, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be
punished by a fine, penalty, and liability for each offense. The Municipal
Court will adjudicate each violation on a case-by-case basis. Fines, penalties,
and liabilities shall be processed separately from water billing.
      (2)   The City will apply all fines and liability as established in
divisions (A), (C) - (E) to the individual whose name is on the account’s
application and billing software. Upon conviction in Municipal Court, all
fines, penalties, and liabilities shall be paid in full within the timeframe
established by the Court. Fines, penalties, and liabilities not paid in this
timeframe shall be turned over for collection by a third-party agency. A
failure to appear in the Municipal Court shall result in the fines, penalties,
and liabilities being upheld upon the account holder.
      (3)   Actions as established in §
51.22(A), (C) - (E) may be considered by the City or law enforcement as
“criminal mischief” under ORS 164.345 and prosecuted as a Class C felony.
(Ord. 500, passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 672, passed 10-6-2021; Ord. 676, passed 7-6-
2022)
CHAPTER 52: CROSS-CONNECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Application and responsibilities
   
52.04   Costs of compliance
   
52.05   Recovery of costs
   
52.06   Termination of service
   
52.07   Falsifying information
Equipment Requirements
   
52.20   Cross-connection regulated
   
52.21   Backflow prevention assembly requirements
   
52.22   New construction
   
52.23   Retrofitting
   
52.24   Irrigation systems
   
52.25   Thermal expansion
   
52.26   Mobile units
   
52.27   Installation requirements
   
52.28   Pressure loss
   
52.29   Fire systems
   
52.30   Temporary meters and hydrant valves
   
52.31   Plumbing Code
   
52.32   Right-of-way encroachment
   
52.33   Access to premises
   
52.34   Annual testing and repairs
   
52.35   Maintenance of assemblies
   
52.36   Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water supply and distribution
system of the City from contamination or pollution due to any existing or
potential cross-connections and to comply with the OAR Chapter 333-061-0070,
0071, 0072, 0073, and 0074, or as amended.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word
or term used in this ordinance is not contained in the following list, its
definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or
definitions listed in the OAR Chapter 333, or the most recent edition of the
Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California
(“USC”).
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY or ASSEMBLY. An
assembly to counteract backpressure and/or prevent back-siphon age. This
assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the state’s
Department of Human Services - Health Services.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the City water
system.
   BACKFLOW. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the
introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system
of the City.
   CERTIFIED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER. A person who has successfully completed
and maintains all requirements as established by the Department of Human
Services - Health Services to be a tester in the state.
   CERTIFIED CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL SPECIALIST. A person who has successfully
completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Department of
Human Services - Health Services to be a specialist in the state.
   CITY. The City of Amity.
   CITY WATER SYSTEM. The CITY WATER SYSTEM, which shall include wells,
treatment mechanisms or processes, pumping stations, reservoirs, supply trunk
or feeder lines, service lines, meters and all other appurtenances, device
lines, and items necessary to the operation of the system and to supply water
service to individual property or premises and shall include the City’s potable
water with which the system is supplied.
   CONTAMINATION. The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of
any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other non-drinkable water system or
auxiliary system, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir,
plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, or any other device which contains, or may
contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe
quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary or
permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow may occur, are
considered to be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. The non-health hazard or health hazard or high hazard
classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross-
connections.
   DHS. Department of Human Services - Health Services.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, DOUBLE CHECK
ASSEMBLY, DOUBLE CHECK, or DCVA. An assembly which consists of two
independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The
assembly comes complete with a resilient seated shut-off valve on each side of
the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY or DCDA. An assembly which consists of two
independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The
assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as
well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. It shall also be provided
with a factory bypass arrangement with a meter and a minimum of an approved
double check assembly.
   HEALTH HAZARD. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical,
chemical, or biological nature to the public potable water system or the
consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health.
   MOBILE UNITS. Units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water
system through a legally-permitted hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of
a permanent nature that is part of the City’s water system or a permanent water
service to a premises. Examples can include, but are not limited to, the
following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units
or tanks, waste hauler’s tracks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or
steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/
concrete batch plants, or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a
threat of backflow in the City water system. Uses that are excluded from this
definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance
with other City policies pertaining to recreational vehicles and homeowner
devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions
of this or other City policies, pertaining to provision of water service to a
premises.
   NON-HEALTH HAZARD. The classification assigned to an actual or potential
cross-connection that could allow a substance that may be objectionable, but
not hazardous to one’s health, to backflow into the potable water supply.
   OAR. Oregon Administrative Rule.
   PERSON(S). A natural person (individual), corporation, company, city,
partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture company, or city,
and other such entity.
   POINT OF USE ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention within the
consumer’s water system at or near the point at which the actual or potential
cross-connection exists.
   POLLUTION HAZARD. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties
of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable
water system, but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as
defined. The maximum intensity of pollution to which the potable water system
could be degraded under this definition would cause minor damage to the system
or its appurtenances.
   PREMISES. Any piece of property to which water service is provided,
including, but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures, and other
structures located upon it.
   PREMISES ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service
connection between the public water system and the premises. This location will
be at or near the property line and downstream from the service connection
meter.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or REDUCED PRESSURE
PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY, or RP ASSEMBLY. An assembly containing two independently-
acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated,
mechanically-independent pressure differential relief valve located between the
check valves, and at the same time, below the first check valve. The assembly
shall include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off
valves.
   REDUCED PRESSURE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY or RPDA. An approved assembly consisting
of two approved reduced pressure backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipped
with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or
use. The assembly should include properly located test cocks and two tightly
closing shut off valves.
   RESIDENT. A person or persons living within the area(s) served by the City
water system.
   RETROFITTING. To furnish a service connection with parts or equipment made
available after the time of construction or assembly installation.
   SPECIALIST. A Department of Human Services - Health Services certified
cross-connection specialist, either employed with the City or contracted by the
City.
   SUBMERGED HEADS. Irrigation sprinkling or delivery devices that are located
below the surface of the landscaped area in which they are installed.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Public Works Superintendent.
   THERMAL EXPANSION. The pressure created by the expansion of heated water.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.03 APPLICATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   This chapter applies throughout the City water system and to every premises
and property served by the City water system. It applies to all premises,
regardless of date of connection to the City water system. Every owner,
occupant, or person in control of any concerned premises is responsible for the
terms and provisions contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.04 COSTS OF COMPLIANCE.
   All costs associated with purchase, installation, surveys, testing,
replacement, maintenance, parts, and repairs of tire backflow prevention
assembly and all costs associated with enforcement of this chapter are the
financial responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or other person in
control of the premises.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.05 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any water customer violating any of the provisions of this
chapter and who causes damage to or impairs the City’s water system, including,
but not limited to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution, or
used water to enter the City’s water system, shall be liable to the city for
any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation.
      (2)   The city shall collect from the violator the cost incurred by the
City for any cleaning, purifying, repair, or replacement work or any other
expenses caused by the violation.
      (3)   Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and shall result in the termination of service.
   (B)   All costs associated with any disconnect or reconnect fees resulting
from the enforcement of this chapter are the sole responsibility of the
property owner.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.06 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   (1)   Failure on the part of any owner, occupant, or person in control
of the premises to install a required assembly, have it tested annually, and/or
to discontinue the use of all cross-connections and to physically separate
cross-connections in accordance with this chapter is sufficient cause for the
discontinuance of public water service to the premises pursuant to OAR Chapter
333-061-0070, or as amended.
      (2)   In the case of an extreme emergency or where an immediate threat to
life or public health is found to exist, discontinuance or termination of
public water service to the premises shall be immediate.
   (B)   The City may, at the property owner’s expense, install a reduced
pressure assembly at the meter. Testing, maintenance, and repair of the
assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.07 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record,
report, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
subchapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
backflow assembly, device, or method required under this subchapter shall be
subject to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see § 52.99
EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS
§ 52.20 CROSS-CONNECTION REGULATED.
   (A)   No cross-connections shall be created, installed, used, or maintained
within the area(s) served by the City water system, except in accordance with
this chapter.
   (B)   The specialist shall carry out or cause surveys to be carried out to
determine if any actual or potential cross-connection exists. If found
necessary, an assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be installed
at the service connection.
   (C)   The owner, occupant, or person in control of any given premises is
responsible for all cross-connection control within the premises.
   (D)   All premises requiring isolation as stipulated by the OAR shall
install a reduced pressure backflow assembly at the service connection in
accordance with this chapter.
   (E)   It is the responsibility of the property owner/occupant to purchase,
install, test, repair, and maintain all backflow assemblies.
   (F)   If there is a change in ownership of any and all property within the
City’s service area, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to
determine that all assemblies are in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.21 BACKLFOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A specialist employed by or under contract with the City shall
determine the type of backflow assemblies to be installed within the City’s
water system. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection
unless it is determined by the specialist and approved by the Superintendent
that it should be installed at the point of use.
   (B)   An approved assembly shall be required in each of the following
circumstances, but the specialist is in no way limited to the following
circumstances:
      (1)   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous
to health which is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into potable
water system, the potable water system shall be protected by an approved air
gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly;
      (2)   When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the
materials used in connection with any activity at premises, or materials stored
at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply;
      (3)   When a premises has one or more cross-connections, as that term is
defined in §
52.02;
      (4)   When internal cross-connections are present that are not
correctable;
      (5)   When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it
impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist;
      (6)   When the premises has a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished;
      (7)   When entry to the premises is restricted so that surveys for cross-
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure cross-
connections do not exist;
      (8)   When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur,
a health hazard could result;
      (9)   When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not
been filed with the City Superintendent;
      (10)   Any and all used water return systems;
      (11)   If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as
required by this subchapter, the installation of a reduced pressure principle
assembly will be required at the service connection;
      (12)   There is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than
potable City water and that piping or other equipment is under pressure and
installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross-connection;
      (13)   When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is
deemed by a specialist to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this
subchapter;
      (14)   The use of any type of chemical spray attachment connected to the
premises plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators,
is not allowed within the City’s water system without proper protection from
the potential of backflow occurring;
      (15)   The use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the
premises plumbing is not allowed within the City’s water system without proper
protection from backflow occurring;
      (16)   Wherever reclaimed water or ditch water is used on premises;
      (17)   When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which is
interconnected to the City water service or supply system;
      (18)   In a nonresidential multi-story building or any building with a
booster pump or elevated storage tank; and
      (19)   When required by the current OAR.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.22 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   On all new non-residential construction, an approved backflow assembly
shall be installed at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be
commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by a specialist.
   (B)   When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use
of the building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to
provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most
hazardous use of the building.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.23 RETROFITTING.
   Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or
potential cross-connection exists, and wherever else the City deems
retrofitting necessary to comply with the OAR and this subchapter.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.24 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   All irrigation systems shall be protected according to Plumbing Code
regulations. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a
reduced pressure principle assembly will be required.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.25 THERMAL EXPLOSION.
   If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow
prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the
property owner, the occupant, or person in control of the property to eliminate
the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the
Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.26 MOBILE UNITS.
   Any mobile unit or apparatus using City water or water from a premises
attached to the City’s system shall first meet all cross-connection
requirements imposed by the City and obtain a permit prior to using City water
if there is a possibility that the attachment may contaminate the City’s water
system.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.27 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All backflow prevention assembly installations shall follow the requirements
as stipulated by the City and current OAR Chapter 333, division 61. If the
premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at an alternate
location, the City must have access to the assembly. No connections shall be
made between the meter and the backflow assembly. The type of backflow
prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard
that exists and must, at all times, meet the standards of the Department of
Human Services - Health Services. All backflow prevention assemblies required
under this section shall be of a type and model approved by the DHS.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.28 PRESSURE LOSS.
   Any decrease in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow
assembly shall not be the responsibility of the City.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.29 FIRE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   An approved double check detector assembly shall be the minimum
protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not
approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-
through. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly must be installed if
any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler
system. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Where improper maintenance has occurred;
      (2)   On all high hazard systems;
      (3)   Wherever a specialist deems necessary; and
      (4)   Wherever required by the OAR.
   (B)   In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a
detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.30 TEMPORARY METERS AND HYDRANT VALVES.
   Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant
valves before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the
degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by a City
specialist.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.31 PLUMBING CODE.
   As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and
operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the current Oregon
Plumbing Specialty Code, or as amended. If there is a conflict between this
subchapter and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, the more stringent
supersedes.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.32 RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT.
   All backflow assemblies must be installed in accordance with the right-of-
way encroachment stipulated by the City’s “Right-of-Way” Encroachment Document.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.33 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   Authorized personnel of the City, with proper identification and sufficient
notice, shall have access during reasonable hours to all parts of a premises
and within the structure to which water is supplied. However, if any owner,
occupant, or person in control refuses authorized personnel access to a
premises or to the interior of a structure during these hours for inspection, a
reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection
to that premises.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.34 ANNUAL TESTING AND REPAIRS.
   All backflow prevention assemblies installed within the area(s) served by
the City shall be tested immediately upon installation, and at least annually
thereafter by a DHS certified backflow assembly tester. All such assemblies
found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the
expense of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the premises. In the
event an assembly is moved, repaired, or replaced, it must be retested
immediately. All repairs on backflow assemblies within the City area must be
performed according to all state and County regulations. If the plumbing
conditions ever change and the assembly is required to meet the conditions
stipulated in this enforcement document, it will be the responsibility of the
property owner to test and maintain the assembly as stipulated by this
enforcement document.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.35 MAINTENANCE OF ASSEMBLIES.
   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained, tested, and repaired in
accordance with the requirements set out in this subchapter, the OAR and all
applicable state agencies regulations. The assembly owner is responsible for
protecting their assembly from freezing and vandalism. In the event an assembly
is not properly tested and repaired, the City will have the assembly tested and
repaired and apply all costs associated with this to the assembly owner’s
utility bill.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 52.36 RESPONSIBILITIES OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTERS.
   (A)   All backflow assembly testers operating within the City water system
service area shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations
of the DHS.
   (B)   Persons certified as backflow assembly testers shall agree to abide by
all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (“OSHA”) and Oregon Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (“OR-OSHA”).
   (C)   It is the responsibility of backflow assembly testers to submit
records of all backflow assembly test repairs to the City within ten days of
completing the test.
   (D)   No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester
within the city without first notifying the city and they shall be
appropriately registered with the state.
(Ord. 620, passed 10-7-2009)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER SYSTEM
Section
General Regulations
   
53.01   City’s declaration of intent to operate and maintain
   
53.02   Intent and purpose
   
53.03   Objectives
   
53.04   Definitions
   
53.05   Abbreviations
   
53.06   General organization and operation
   
53.07   Use of public sewers required
   
53.08   Private wastewater disposal
   
53.09   Building sewers and connections
   
53.10   Monitoring of building sewers
Capping of Sewer Service Laterals
   
53.25   Disconnection of sanitary sewer service laterals
   
53.26   Failure of property owner to comply; City to cap lines
   
53.27   Notification of hearing
   
53.28   Cost of capping; lien against property
Building Sewer Maintenance and Repair
   
53.40   Authority
   
53.41   Standard of maintenance
   
53.42   Application within City
   
53.43   Responsibility for building sewer preventive and corrective maintenance
responsibility
   
53.44   Responsibility for building sewer structural maintenance
   
53.45   Projects to address high inflow/infiltration flows
   
53.46   Inspection of building sewers
   
53.47   Notice of defects and required connections
   
53.48   Repair of defects
   
53.49   Enforcement and remedies
   
53.50   Incentive for timely completion of repairs
   
53.51   Financial assistance
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 53.01 CITY’S DECLARATION OF INTENT TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN.
   Pursuant to the general laws of the state and the charter of the City, the
City Council declares its intention to own, acquire, construct, equip, operate,
and maintain, either within or without the corporate limits in whole or in
part, sewers, including maintenance, enlargement, or extension of the present
sewer system of the City, wastewater treatment, or disposal plant or plants,
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, force mains, pumping stations, or ejector
stations, with all appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for the
treatment and disposal of wastewater.
§ 53.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly
functioning of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City; and to
enable the City to comply with applicable state and federal laws, particularly
the Clean Water Act of 1977 being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (and amendments
thereto) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403). Except
as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Superintendent shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the Public Works Superintendent may be delegated by the
Public Works Superintendent to a duly authorized City employee.
§ 53.03 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To provide control of construction and use of the wastewater
system;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting biosolids;
      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, into receiving waters or
the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (4)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
biosolids from the system;
      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system in compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s
requirements;
      (6)   To assure the financial self-sufficiency of the sewerage system;
      (7)   To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements,
and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works
is subject; and
      (8)   To protect the health and safety of the wastewater treatment works
personnel who may be affected by wastewater or biosolids in the course of their
employment and to protect the health and safety of the general public.
   (B)   In activating the objectives of this chapter, it shall be the policy
of the City to actively promote the health of the industrial community through
accommodation, assistance, and cooperation; consistent with the City’s
responsibility to protect the waters of the state from pollution and to secure
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the community. To that end,
this chapter shall be implemented using good professional judgment with
associated decisions taking all known facts into consideration.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of the industrial users of
the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of control mechanisms such
as permits (both individual and general and best management practices (BMPs)),
and through enforcement activities; assures that existing customers’ capacity
will not be preempted; and requires industrial user reporting.
§ 53.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter,
Chapter 54, and
Chapter 55, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   AMMONIA NITROGEN (NH3). The total free ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen
and expressed in milligrams per liter.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for industrial wastewater discharge permit or
general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
      (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively;
      (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
their designee; and
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1), (2), and (3) above may
designate a DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the City.
   AVAILABLE SEWER. Any sewer that can be used without the need to acquire
easements and where sufficient grade and capacity exists to serve the property
and where the public sewer is within 150 feet of the property.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in §
55.001(A) and (B) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPS
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes within or adjoining the building or structure, and conveys the
same to the building sanitary sewer.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector for the City, or his or her duly
authorized representative or agent. This may be a service provided by the
County.
   BUILDING SEWER. The portion of a sanitary sewer system extending from the
sewer main to the building. The building sewer receives the discharge of the
building drain and conveys it to a public sewer.
   BUILDING STORM SEWER. The part of the piping of a stormwater drainage system
which begins at the connection to the building storm drain at a point five feet
outside the established line of the building or structures, and conveys
stormwater, surface water, and other unpolluted water to the public storm
sewer, street, and other point of disposal.
   BUSINESS BUILDING. Buildings used wholly or in part for the conducting of
any commercial, retail, or wholesale business or service agency, but this
enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive, and all other buildings or premises
used for any commercial purpose other than a residence or for manufacturing and
industrial purposes shall be deemed a business building.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or categorical standard.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category
of users and that appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405
through 471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   CITY. The municipality of the state, a municipal corporation of the state,
acting through the City Council or any board, committee, body, official, or
person to whom the City Council shall have lawfully delegated the power to act
for or on behalf of the City.
   COLLECTION SYSTEM. Facilities maintained by the City for collection,
pumping, conveying, and controlling wastewater.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer that is designated as both a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample made up of a number of combined individual grab
samples collected at uniform intervals based on an increment of either time or
flow.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A manhole installed as required by the Public Works
Superintendent under the provisions of this chapter; or if no manhole has so
been installed, the term CONTROLLED MANHOLE means such a point as shall be
determined by the Public Works Superintendent to which industrial wastewater is
produced on the premises and discharged into a sanitary sewer are accessible
for testing.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum value of a particular parameter recorded from
effluent samples collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   DEFECTS. Cracks, broken pipe, crushed pipe, open or offset joints, root
intrusion, or other imperfection in a sanitary sewer pipe which can potentially
allow entry of ground water into the sanitary sewer system. DEFECTS shall also
include direct connections as defined below.
   DIRECT CONNECTIONS. The connections of roof drains, foundation drains, or
similar conduits to the sewer lateral or main which may allow entry of rain,
surface drainage, or ground water into the sanitary sewer system.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
into the waters of the state.
   DISCHARGE. The deposit of pollutants into the City sewerage system.
   DORMITORY, FRATERNITY, or SORORITY. A building designed, intended, or used
for accommodation for students or living groups of unrelated persons which may
or may not furnish meals with said accommodation.
   DRAINAGE WATER. Stormwater, groundwater, surface drainage, subsurface
drainage, spring water, well overflow, roof drainage, or other like drainage
other than wastewater or industrial wastewater.
   DWELLING UNIT. A facility designed for permanent or semipermanent occupancy
and provided with minimum kitchen, sleeping, and sanitary facilities for one
family.
   ENGINEER. An engineer licensed by the state.
   ENVIRONMENT. Any naturally occurring river, stream, creek, or other
waterway, and land mass, the atmosphere, or any subsurface water, aquifer, or
groundwater or any human-made edifice directly or indirectly connected to the
waterways, land masses, atmosphere, or groundwater as herein listed.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU). A nonresidential unit which is deemed
equivalent to a residential dwelling unit as provided herein or as provided in
the state’s Plumbing Specialty Code.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge that is not a “new source.”
   FIXTURE UNIT (FU). Fixture load values for drainage piping and shall be as
specified in §
54.05(A)(1)(a) and as specified in the state’s Plumbing Specialty Code and
Administrative Rules being OAR 918-750-0010 et seq.
   FLOW. The daily total of wastewater flow from an industrial or residential
source.
   FRONTAGE shall be measured along the adjacent street or along the sewer
itself where it traverses a parcel. FRONTAGE measurements will be only for
those portions of a parcel being developed including parking lots, lesser
structures, and general improvement. The balance of the parcel shall be subject
to future charges at rates then in force.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GOVERNMENTAL BUILDING. Buildings used wholly or in part by the City service
districts, the County, the state, and the United States Government or any
agency of the before-mentioned governmental divisions.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the
flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   GRACE PERIOD. The 90 calendar day period beginning on the date of the notice
of a defect. The City may make incentives available during the grace period to
encourage property owners to replace defective building sewers. Penalty
assessments shall begin at the end of the GRACE PERIOD.
   HOLDING TANKS OR SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Waste from chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, coffee stands, or septic tanks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any
nonresidential source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act being 33
U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.
   INDUSTRIAL OR MANUFACTURING BUILDING. Buildings used wholly or in part for
the manufacturing and fabrication of any article or thing.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any person, including a mobile waste hauler, who discharges
wastewater from a source other than a residential dwelling unit(s) directly
connected into the City wastewater system. An INDUSTRIAL USER is a source of
indirect discharge.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit to discharge industrial
wastewater into the City sewer system issued under the authority of this
chapter and which prescribes certain discharge requirements and limitations.
This may be an individual or general permit, which may incorporate best
management practices (BMPs).
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. Any nonresidential liquid, gaseous substance, or
semisolid from any producing, manufacturing business or trade, or processing
operation of whatever nature (as distinct from residential wastewater).
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   INSTITUTION. Any building or group of buildings used as a correction
facility, schools, care facilities, hospitals, and similar; publicly or
privately owned.
   INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING. A building used wholly or in part by an institution.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its biosolids processes, use, or disposal; and,
therefor, is a cause of a violation of the City’s NPDES permit or of the
prevention of biosolid use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
stringent state or local regulations including: § 405 of the Act; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state biosolids management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.; the Clean Air Act; the
Toxic Substances Control Act being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and
33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq..
   LATERAL. Any side lateral pipeline off a sewer main which is in the public
right-of-way or easement, operated, and maintained by the City and to which a
building sewer connects or may connect.
   LATERAL OR BUILDING SEWER PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE MAINTENANCE. Those
activities required to preserve or restore functional operation and the free-
flowing condition of the sewer. These activities include, but are not limited
to, inspection, root and blockage removal, and cleaning.
   LATERAL OR BUILDING SEWER STRUCTURAL MAINTENANCE. Those construction, pipe
repair, and pipe replacement activities required to correct defects and
preserve the structural integrity and watertight condition of the sewer.
   LOCAL LIMIT. A specific discharge limit developed and enforced by the City
upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. All trailer courts and other similar installations
offering accommodations for two or more manufactured homes, whether or not such
manufactures homes are on wheels, skids, or permanent or semi-permanent
foundations.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive. (See SHALL.)
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   MOBILE WASTE HAULER. A person whom, by contract or otherwise, collects
wastewater, including residential wastewater and septage, for transportation to
and discharged at City designated sites.
   MOBILE WASTE HAULER PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   MONTH. As used in this chapter, refers to billing cycle or month as
determined by the City.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all daily values measured during a calendar
month divided by the number of daily value discharges measured during that
month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of “daily discharges”
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured
during that month.
   MOTEL or HOTEL. A building or group of buildings designed, intended, or used
for the accommodation of tourists, transient and seasonally permanent guests
for compensation.
   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING. A building or group of buildings or dwelling units or
portion thereof designed for occupancy by two or more families, living
independently of each other.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENT. All buildings and structures used primarily for
housing more than a single family, and will include duplexes, triplexes, four-
plexes, apartments, condominiums, and manufactures home parks.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to ORS 468B.050 and the Act.
   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARD. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307 (b)
and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes
prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD.
Prohibited discharges under the authority of 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is or may be discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after
the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the Act
which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as existing source shall be
considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined herein, has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities, which
is necessary for placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a building contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without such substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation.
   NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS). The standard used by
federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the
purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to
the U.S. business economy, which was developed under the auspices of the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) and adopted in 1997 to replace the Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) system.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to assure the dependable and
economical function of treatment works.
      (1)   MAINTENANCE. Preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of
equipment and structures. This includes preventative maintenance, corrective
maintenance, and replacement of equipment.
      (2)   OPERATION. Control of the unit processes and equipment which make
up the treatment works. This includes financial and personnel management
records, laboratory control, safety, and emergency operation planning.
   OSPSC. The current edition of the state’s Plumbing Specialty Code, as
adopted by the state’s Department of Consumer and Business Services, Building
Codes Division.
   PASS THROUGH. The occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits the POTW
into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause
of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
   PARAMETER. A characteristic of wastewater that may be measured or calculated
and is used in this chapter as a discharge limitation.
   PERMITTEE. Any person or business that holds a control mechanism (permit or
BMP) issued by the City for the purpose of discharging wastewater into the
municipal sewer system.
   PERSON(S). Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assignees. This definition includes all federal,
state, or local government entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units (SU).
   PLANT MANAGER. The person designated by the City to supervise the operation
of the POTW or a duly authorized representative thereof.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural, and industrial
wastes; and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   POLLUTION. The degradation of the chemical, physical, biological, or
radiological quality of the ground, surface, subsurface, or storm drainage
waters by humans, or the activities thereof.
   POLLUTION PREVENTION. Source reduction and other practices that reduce or
eliminate the creation of pollutants through:
      (1)   Increased efficiency in the use of raw materials, energy, water, or
other resources;
      (2)   Protection of natural resources by conservation; and
      (3)   Education outreach.
   PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES. Any device, structure, or method which
will remove specified pollutants and/or chemicals from the wastewater prior to
its discharge into the public sewer.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
   PRIVATE COLLECTION SYSTEM. A privately owned and maintained sewer system
installed to serve multi-unit structures on single ownership properties, which
cannot legally be further divided, such as apartments, manufactured home parks,
and schools. A single-family residence with an unattached garage or shop with
sanitary facilities is exempt from this definition.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT. The Community Development Director or his or
her duly authorized representative or agent.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the City. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature
and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A facility intended for the short term transitory
use of a recreational vehicle trailer or motor home. The use is primarily for
vacation or travel. The length of stay is generally one week or less, but
occasionally could be up to one month. This use does not include a trailer or
motor home being used as a permanent residence.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design or useful life, whichever
is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for
which such works were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL SEWAGE OR WASTE. Wastewater of the type commonly introduced into
a treatment works by residential users, and includes the contents of chemical
toilets, septic tanks, and waste holding tanks provided they contain wastewater
of the type commonly introduced by residential users.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. The occupant or lessee of a dwelling unit as defined in
this chapter. The dwelling unit may be single-family dwelling or a portion of a
multifamily dwelling.
   SANITARY SEWER. A conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.
   SEPTAGE. The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank, cesspool,
or similar residential wastewater treatment system or a holding tank when the
system is cleaned or maintained.
   SETTLEABLE SOLIDS. Those solids that are capable of being settled in a
standard Imhoff cone as outlined in “Standard Methods.”
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM (SYSTEM). The entire wastewater collection and treatment
system, exclusive of building sewers. This includes all conduits, pumps,
treatment equipment, and any other components involved in the collection,
transportation, treatment, and disposal of sanitary and industrial wastewater
and biosolids.
   SEWER MAIN. Any public sewer except for laterals.
   SEWER USER. Any person using a City sewer; or who has a residence, multi-
family or commercial building, institutional building, industrial facility, or
other structure containing plumbing, requiring connection to a sanitary sewer
as outlined by this chapter,
Chapter 54, and
Chapter 55.
   SEWER USER CHARGE. A charge levied on sewer users of a treatment works for
the sewer user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of such works.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (See MAY.)
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Except as provided in division (2)(c) below, a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER is:
      (1)   An industrial user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
      (2)   An industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
divisions (1) and (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the City may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user should not be
considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING or SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. Any residential building
designed for occupancy by only one family.
   SLUGLOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
55.001. A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of a not routine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or
permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972; as amended from time to time.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Works Health Association,
the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation.
   STORM DRAIN. The portion of the storm drainage system that is within the
public right-of-way or easement operated and maintained by the City. This may
include, but is not limited to, pipes, culverts, ditches, waterways, or any
other appurtenances used for the removal or transportation of rainwater or
other unpolluted water.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes wastewater.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE (SDC) or CONNECTION FEE. The fees to be paid for
the privilege of connecting any premises to any City sewer within or without
the corporate limits of the City.
   TOTAL PHOSPHORUS (TP). The concentration of total phosphorus as determined
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136, or as EPA otherwise determines.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANTS. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the EPA.
   TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW which is designed to provide
treatment of residential sewage and industrial waste.
   UNIT. The division of measurements used which, in regard to residential, is
one unit equals one family, be it in single-family, multiple-family,
manufactured home, apartment, or other.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water to which no wastewater or industrial wastewater has
been added or water which has been used in such a manner that no pollutants
have been introduced to the flow.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which an industrial user unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the discharge requirements
set forth in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
industrial user; and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof.
   WASTEWATER or SEWAGE. Liquid- or water-carried pollutants including any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated
or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATER USER. Any person using water through the facilities of the municipal
water system.
§ 53.05 ABBREVIATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter,
Chapter 54, and
Chapter 55, the following abbreviations mean:
   (A)   BOD5 - biochemical oxygen demand (five day);
   (B)   BMP - Best Management Practice;
   (C)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations;
   (D)   CIU - categorical industrial user;
   (E)   COD - chemical oxygen demand;
   (F)   DEQ - Oregon Department of Environmental Quality;
   (G)   EDU - equivalent dwelling unit;
   (H)   EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;
   (I)   GPD - Gallons per day;
   (J)   l - Liter;
   (K)   mg - milligram;
   (L)   mg/l - milligram per liter;
   (M)   NAICS - North American Industry Classification System;
   (N)   NH3 - Ammonia Nitrogen;
   (O)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;
   (P)   ORS - Oregon Revised Statutes;
   (Q)   OSPSC - Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code;
   (R)   POTW - publicly owned treatment works;
   (S)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act;
   (T)   SIC - Standard Industrial Classification;
   (U)   SNC - significant noncompliance;
   (V)   SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.;
   (W)   TP - total phosphorus;   
   (X)   TSS - total suspended solids; and
   (Y)   USC - United States Code.
§ 53.06 GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION.
   (A)   Management of the wastewater disposal system. The City wastewater
disposal system shall be and remain under the management, supervision, and
control of the City Administrator who may employ or designate such person or
persons in such capacity or capacities as he or she deems advisable to carry
out the efficient management and operation of the system. The City
Administrator or his or her designee may make such rules, orders, or
regulations, as deemed advisable and necessary to assure the efficient
management and operation of the system; subject, however, to the rights,
powers, and duties with respect thereto which are reserved by law to the City
Council.
   (B)   Standards, rules, and regulations. The standard, rules, and
regulations established in or pursuant to this chapter are deemed to be
consistent with the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare; to
prevent pollution of the environment; and to fulfill the obligations of the
City with respect to state and federal law and all rules and regulations
adopted in conformance thereto. The discharge into the system of any substance
which exceeds the limitations contained herein, or which, in any manner, fails
to conform hereto, is declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this
chapter,
Chapter 54, and
Chapter 55.
   (C)   Use of wastewater disposal system. Any person who conforms to the
standards, rules, and regulations established in or pursuant to this chapter
shall be permitted to discharge effluent into the system provided there exists
adequate sewer service available to which he or she can connect.
§ 53.07 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful of any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal
excretion, garbage, or other objectionable waste material which creates an
offensive odor or health hazard and/or attracts vermin.
   (B)   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any wastewater, commercial or
industrial wastewater, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 54, and
Chapter 55, and where authorized by the DEQ.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater within City Limits.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the City,
and abutting on any street, alley, easement, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer of the City, is
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official
notice to do so, provided that the sewer is within 200 feet of the property
line.
§ 53.08 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
53.07(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system
complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the County
sanitarian. The application for such permit shall be made in writing and
supplemented by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed
necessary by the County sanitarian and Public Works Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee as required shall be paid to the proper agency at the time
the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for the private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the County
sanitarian. The agent of the City shall be allowed to inspect the construction
and no underground portions shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer
or natural outlet.
   (D)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, a connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools,
and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and after
pumping filled with suitable material at the time of said connection.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
   (F)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer.
§ 53.09 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Superintendent.
   (B)   The owner of the sewer or his or her agent shall make application for
the permit to the Public Works Superintendent. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Public Works Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation of the sewer
connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly by occasioned by the
installation.
   (D)   A separate sewer connection shall be provided for every building (or
portion of the building in separate ownership) and/or ownership.
   (E)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, upon examination and test, to meet all requirements
of this chapter. Replacement of unsatisfactory building sewers shall be the
responsibility of the owner and all costs associated with replacement shall be
borne by the owner.
   (F)   All building sewer design and construction shall be in accordance with
the most recently adopted Design Standards and Construction Standards in
addition to the most recent publication of the state’s Plumbing Specialty Code
being OAR 918-750-0010 et seq.
§ 53.10 MONITORING OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   New and existing building sewers may be periodically monitored by the
City for leaks or discharges of extraneous water. This monitoring may take the
form of, but is not limited to: direct visual observations; indirect
measurements; television inspection; or air or water pressure tests, smoke
tests, or exfiltration tests.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent, such monitoring
shows a building sewer to be defective, no further proof is needed for the
Public Works Superintendent to require the building sewer be repaired to
current standards at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Existing building sewers that exceed a maximum allowable infiltration/
inflow rate of more than 300 gallons per day per single detached living unit;
1,200 gallons per acre per day; or 3,000 gallons per day per inch-diameter
miles of sewer are deemed unsafe and unsanitary and shall be repaired at the
owner’s expense.
   (D)   Those sewer users who do not comply with the infiltration/inflow
regulations shall have a period of time as determined by the Public Works
Superintendent, to reach compliance with the regulations.
CAPPING OF SEWER SERVICE LATERALS
§ 53.25 DISCONNECTION OF SANITARY SEWER SERVICE LATERALS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon application by a person or persons to:
         (a)   Demolish a structure (under provisions of the state’s Plumbing
Specialty Code being OAR 918-750-0010 et seq.);
         (b)   Move a structure (to a new site); or
         (c)   To build a structure on a lot and not connect to a service
lateral provided to the lot, a fee shall be deposited with the City to assure
that all sanitary sewer laterals are capped and sealed to prevent the
infiltration of debris, groundwater, other substances foreign to the sewer
system, or rodents.
      (2)   This deposit shall be refunded in full to the applicant after the
site has been inspected and all sanitary sewer lines have been sealed to City
specifications. The sewer lateral capping fee shall be set by resolution.
   (B)   (1)   The Public Works Superintendent shall provide the applicant with
instructions and requirements, regarding the capping of a sanitary sewer line
at the time the permit is issued.
      (2)   The sewer lateral shall be capped as close to the curb line as
practicable taking into consideration location of sidewalk, landscaping, other
utilities, and the like.
      (3)   All lines shall be capped and inspected by the Public Works
Superintendent within seven days of demolition or removal or prior to final
inspection for new construction.
   (C)   The deposit referred to above shall be cash, cashier’s check, or
performance bond.
   (D)   Failure to obtain inspection of capped line will be cause for
forfeiture of deposit.
§ 53.26 FAILURE OF PROPERTY OWNER TO COMPLY; CITY TO CAP LINES.
   (A)   In the event the applicant has not sealed the sewer line within seven
days of the demolition or removal of the structure, the City may proceed to cap
the line.
   (B)   In the event the property owner fails to comply with the above
provisions and the Public Works Superintendent estimates the cost of capping
the lateral(s) on the site exceeds the deposit, the Public Works Superintendent
shall submit a report to the City Council with a recommendation of the City to
proceed to cap the lines.
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent and City Administrator shall set a
time for this matter to be heard by the City Council.
§ 53.27 NOTIFICATION OF HEARING.
   The Public Works Superintendent shall implement the following procedures:
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent shall send notice to property owner by
regular mail (plain envelope) and certified mail to the address listed on the
County tax roll records:
      (1)   Notice to be mailed at least ten working days prior to hearing;
      (2)   Notice to state time and place for hearing and specify that citizen
will have opportunity to testify;
      (3)   Notice to make reference to specific chapter violation;
      (4)   Notice to state work to be done;
      (5)   Notice to state name of staff member citizen to contact for
details;
      (6)   Notice to state action the Public Works Superintendent is
requesting City Council to take in regard to property; and
      (7)   Notice to state the Public Works Superintendent’s estimated cost if
the City performs the work; the Public Works Superintendent to note that
estimate is not binding upon the City and merely provided for property owner’s
information and convenience.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall receive report of Public Works
Superintendent and staff comments and receive testimony of property owner;
      (2)   After discussion of testimony presented, the City Council may
either deny request of the Public Works Superintendent, or approve the Public
Works Superintendent’s request and direct the City to undertake work if
property owner has not complied in ten working days or has not made other
specific arrangements that are approved by Public Works Superintendent (such as
consideration of weather, contractor availability, and the like) to complete
the work after notice of City Council decisions has been made.
   (C)   A notice to the property owner of the City Council decision shall be
sent by regular mail (plain envelope) and certified mail. The notice shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Result of hearing;
      (2)   Requirements that action occur within ten working days of date of
notice;
      (3)   Inform owner of opportunity to make arrangements with the Public
Works Superintendent for prompt completion of work, taking into consideration
weather or other work in progress. The Public Works Superintendent will
evaluate the request in relation to these factors;
      (4)   State name of staff member citizen may contact for details or to
make other arrangements to the satisfaction of the Public Works Superintendent;
and
      (5)   Notice of property owner that if work is not performed, the City
will contract to have work done and will add 25% administrative charge to
costs; will charge interest at 12% annually; and, in addition, City Council
will levy assessment against property and file lien in the City lien docket
with collection upon foreclosure or upon sale of property.
§ 53.28 COST OF CAPPING; LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.
   (A)   In the event the owner(s) of the property or properties subject to the
above procedure has/have failed to cap the lateral sewer(s) as directed by the
City Council and the Public Works Superintendent has caused the sewer lateral
to be capped, the Public Works Superintendent shall report to the City Council
the cost thereof, including 25% for administration costs, together with the
name or names of the owner(s) of record of the real property. Upon the approval
of the City Council by ordinance, the same shall become a lien against said
real property. The lien shall have priority over all other liens against such
property, save and except such liens or taxes as by law take precedence.
   (B)   The deposit will be applied against any cost assessed by the City
Council.
BUILDING SEWER MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
§ 53.40 AUTHORITY.
   The standards and criteria contained in this chapter for the identification,
prevention, and removal of infiltration and inflow are based upon the authority
of the City Charter §§
4 and
6.
§ 53.41 STANDARD OF MAINTENANCE.
   All property owners shall be responsible to maintain the building sewer
serving their property in a condition free from defects, as provided in this
chapter.
§ 53.42 APPLICATION WITHIN CITY.
   These rules shall apply throughout the City to all areas served by the
public sanitary sewer collection system.
§ 53.43 RESPONSIBILITY FOR BUILDING SEWER PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE MAINTENANCE
RESPONSIBILITY.
   All building sewer preventive and corrective maintenance activities outside
the publicly owned sewer main shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
§ 53.44 RESPONSIBILITY FOR BUILDING SEWER STRUCTURAL MAINTENANCE.
   Structural maintenance of the portion of the building sewer outside the
publicly owned sewer main shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property served by the building sewer.
§ 53.45 PROJECTS TO ADDRESS HIGH INFLOW/INFILTRATION FLOWS.
   Projects shall be defined by the Public Works Superintendent and will
include those located in basins of the sanitary sewer system as identified by
the City’s adopted Waste Water Facilities Planning Study as high flow basins,
and such other areas as the Public Works Superintendent may designate or by
inclusion within the City’s Capital Improvement Plan for system repair and/or
replacement projects to reduce inflow and infiltration.
§ 53.46 INSPECTION OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   Inspection and investigation methods.
      (1)   The City may at any time inspect and investigate the condition of
building sewers using:
         (a)   Flow monitoring;
         (b)   Television inspection;
         (c)   Smoke testing;
         (d)   Dye testing;
         (e)   Air or water pressure tests;
         (f)   Exfiltration tests;
         (g)   Direct visual observation of material or function;
         (h)   Indirect measurement; and/or
         (i)   Other appropriate methods.
      (2)   Investigation and inspection may additionally include public sewer
mains and manholes. Investigation and inspection methods shall not be harmful
to the operation of the system and may be used to identify, verify, and
quantify locations and amounts of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary
sewer system. The City shall determine the scope and methods to be used for the
portion of the system to be inspected.
   (B)   Inspection and investigation notice.
      (1)   Notice to property owners. Where inspection or investigation
methods such as building sewer television inspection or location require
physical entry onto private property by City Staff and equipment, the City
shall obtain permission to perform the inspection from the owner. If the
property owner refuses to allow the City to enter the property, the City may
obtain an administrative search warrant. Notice shall also be given to any
occupants as provided in division (B)(2) below.
      (2)   Notice to occupants. Where investigation methods such as smoke
testing are used that may impact structures or their occupants, the City shall
attempt to notify occupants prior to performing the investigation and inform
them of any precautions they may wish to take to reduce potential inconvenience
to themselves or the property. The City shall not be required to notify
property owners of inspections or investigations which do not require staff or
equipment to enter the property, in addition, notice shall be given by door
hangers or personal contact, and may be given by general press release.
§ 53.47 NOTICE OF DEFECTS AND REQUIRED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   General. Where inspection or investigation reveals defects in the
building sewer on private property outside the City’s sewer main, no further
proof is needed for the City to require the building sewer be replaced to
current standards. The property owner shall be required to correct the defects
or pay a penalty in accordance with this chapter. The City shall inform the
property owner in writing of the type and location of the defect and of the
time in which correction of the defect is required. If the owner and sewer user
of the building sewer elects to dispute the opinion of the City, the owner may
test the service at his, her, or their own expense in the presence of the City.
The test shall meet the requirements of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty
Code (OSPSC) and any other City standards that may apply. The results of the
test will be the basis of the final replacement decision, if it is determined
the building sewer is not defective, the City shall reimburse the property
owner for the reasonable cost of the test.
   (B)   Permit required. Any person intending to perform structural
maintenance work on a building sewer may do so only after obtaining all City
and other required permits.
   (C)   Notice of completion of repairs. The property owner shall notify the
City that the permitted corrections have been completed and shall request an
inspection from the City. The City retains the right to require additional
information from the property owner and to inspect the correction or repair to
assure that it has been done in accordance with all applicable rules and codes.
If the repair is found to be inadequate, the City shall notify the owner and
the owner shall make the necessary corrections. The City shall notify the
property owner of acceptance of the repair.
   (D)   Notice of defects; correction not required. Where inspection or
investigation reveals apparent flaws in a structure’s interior plumbing
(building drain), which do not contribute infiltration or inflow to the
sanitary sewer system, the City may, but is not required to, inform the
property owner of the type and location of such flaws, if known.
§ 53.48 REPAIR OF DEFECTS.
   (A)   The City shall determine the schedule for its sewer main and/or
lateral structural maintenance work in designated rehabilitation areas and may
perform work with its crews or by contract according to that schedule. Nothing
in this chapter shall require the City to modify its structural maintenance
schedule or compensate property owners for structural maintenance work
performed ahead of the City’s schedule.
   (B)   If, when performing structural maintenance on a lateral, the City
discovers that the condition, location, or material of the existing building
sewer pipe is such that a structurally sound connection at the right-of-way
line cannot be made without further repair or replacement on private property,
the City shall make a temporary connection, document the nature of the defect,
and secure the excavation area. The City shall provide written notice to the
property owner of the existence of the building sewer defect and temporary
connection. Unless the excavation area is a public safety hazard, the notice
shall provide a time certain not less than five nor more than ten days for the
property owner to complete the required repair on private property. Upon
expiration of such time, the City may backfill the excavation area. The City
shall not be required to correct defects or perform building sewer repair work
on private property nor shall it be responsible for any additional cost to the
property owner due to failure to perform repairs within the time specified in
the notice.
   (C)   If the investigation shows only a portion of the building sewer is
defective, the owner may elect to perform a spot repair. Spot repairs are
limited to concrete, cast iron, and PVC pipe material only. Upon completion of
the repair, the building sewer shall be tested and must pass the requirements
of the OSPSC and City standards. Tests for spot repairs are at the property
owner’s expense and are not reimbursable.
§ 53.49 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Civil penalty. Failure to take action to correct identified defects
as required in these rules shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and a
violation of City ordinances for such nuisances. For any failure to correct
defects in a privately owned or maintained building sewer, the schedule of
civil penalties shall be as provided in this section. Penalties shall be
assessed beginning at the end of a 90-calendar day grace period following
mailing or posting a notice of defect to the property owner. The civil penalty
schedule shall be $50 per month, subject to any extensions or suspensions that
the City may approve pursuant to these rules.
      (2)   Suspension of penalty collection. If the property owner requests
it, the City may suspend collection of penalties for up to ten months to allow
the property owner additional time to make the required repair. Penalties will
continue to accrue during the suspension period. If corrective action has not
been taken within the ten-month suspension period, all accrued penalties shall
become due and payable on the first day of the first month following the
suspension period and monthly thereafter. The suspension of penalty period will
not be available to property owners with direct connection defects only.
   (B)   Other remedies. Any civil penalty imposed under these rules shall be
in addition to the collection of the regular sewer service fee or charge and
any other fines, penalties, damages, or legal remedies available to the City.
§ 53.50 INCENTIVE FOR TIMELY COMPLETION OF REPAIRS.
   (A)   Subject to budgetary limitations established by the City Council, the
City may offer a monetary incentive as provided in this section to encourage
property owners to make the required repairs quickly and to help offset the
cost of the repairs. The City shall not be required to offer or continue the
incentive program, except as authorized by the City Council.
   (B)   The incentive program, if offered, shall apply to the grace period
following the date of the notice of defect. If the property owner has requested
an inspection, but the inspection authority is unable to perform the inspection
within the time limits, the date of the documented inspection request shall be
used to determine the amount of the incentive.
   (C)   The City may approve and make payments to the property owners
completing repair of defects as provided in this section. If repairs are
completed and accepted within the grace period, the property owner shall be
eligible for a maximum monetary incentive equal to 10% of the pipe repair costs
up to a maximum limit of $250. Eligible repair costs are limited to those costs
for pipe material, excavation, and burying pipe in the soil between the
building and the connection to the lateral. This specifically excludes
landscape repairs, sidewalk repairs, driveway repairs, and other repair costs
incidental to replacing the pipe in the ground.
   (D)   (1)   Any property owner requesting a monetary incentive payment as
provided in this section shall submit a complete application to the City no
later than 60 days following inspection and acceptance of the repair by the
City.
      (2)   A complete application shall include:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner; and
         (b)   Certification by the applicant that repairs were not paid for by
a renter, lessor, or any other person.
§ 53.51 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
   Upon application by a property owner required to repair a building sewer as
required by this chapter, the City Administrator is granted authority to enter
into a contract with the property owner for installment payments on the
following basis:
   (A)   The property owner shall select a licensed contractor to complete the
required work and provide the City with a cost estimate of the work to be
completed.
   (B)   Prior to authorizing the contractor to proceed with the work, the
property owner shall meet with the City Recorder (as City Treasurer) and sign
an application and agreement to pay the repair costs based on the estimate plus
25%. The application for installment payments shall be on the prescribed form
and shall constitute a lien upon the property.
   (C)   The application shall provide for a monthly payment for a period not
to exceed 24 months. Interest shall accrue on the balance due at the prime
interest rate plus 3.5%.
   (D)   At the time of completion and inspection of the repair work, the City
shall make payment to the property owner and contractor based on the actual
billing submitted to the owner by the contractor and adjust the monthly
installment payment to reflect the actual cost.
CHAPTER 54: SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEES; SERVICE FEES
Section
Connection Fees
   
54.01   Permit required
   
54.02   Permit application; issuance conditions and enforcement
   
54.03   Connection permit duration and forfeiture upon expiration
   
54.04   New service; payment guarantee
   
54.05   System development charges; designated; method of computation; credits
   
54.06   SDC; designated; method of computation
   
54.07   Sewer construction plan approval required
   
54.08   Unpaid charges; liens; collection
   
54.09   Disposition of moneys
Service Fees
   
54.25   Operation and maintenance; findings
   
54.26   Purpose and imposition of charges
   
54.27   Basis for determination; annual review
   
54.28   Service fees
   
54.29   Charges for users not connected to the City sewer system
   
54.30   Charges for unmetered users
   
54.31   Churches and educational institutions
   
54.32   Additional surcharge for special discharges
   
54.33   Reduced when
   
54.34   Septic waste
   
54.35   Billing and collection
   
54.36   Basis for determining charges
   
54.37   City’s authority not restricted
   
54.38   Collection; penalty for delinquent payment
 
   
54.99   Penalty
CONNECTION FEES
§ 54.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Prior to connection of any building sewer to any lateral sewer or any sewer
main the person desiring to make such connection shall receive a permit
therefor from the City Building Inspector and shall comply with all of the
requirements of
Chapter 53, this chapter, and
Chapter 55.
§ 54.02 PERMIT APPLICATION; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   All applications for sewer connections under this chapter will
be made to the City Building Inspector. The applicant shall furnish
satisfactory evidence to the Building Inspector supporting the proposed land
use and a plot plan of the area to be served by the proposed sanitary sewer,
and shall meet all the requirements of
Chapter 53, this chapter, and
Chapter 55.
      (2)   The Building Inspector may issue the permit or refer the
application to the Public Works Superintendent for approval or disapproval.
Thereupon the Public Works Superintendent shall make an investigation and
report, with his or her recommendation of his or her approval or disapproval.
In the event such an application is rejected by the Public Works
Superintendent, such application may be appealed to the City Council at its
next regular meeting.
      (3)   A building permit shall not be issued until all applicable Systems
Development Charges (SDC) and associated charges have been paid. It shall be
the duty of the City Administrator or Public Works Superintendent to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Sewer connection charges are those charged for any and all of the
following:
      (1)   Sewer connections to the City sewer system;
      (2)   Change in the use of an existing connection, including, but not
limited to, building additions or expansions which include sanitary facilities;
and
      (3)   Substantial increase(s) in the flow or alteration of the character
of wastewater to an existing connection.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the Building Inspector to notify the
Public Works Superintendent in writing whenever a land parcel or a structure
falls within the classifications listed in division (B) above. The Public Works
Superintendent shall compute and file with the Building Inspector his or her
findings in regard to this matter.
§ 54.03 CONNECTION PERMIT DURATION AND FORFEITURE UPON EXPIRATION.
   A sewer connection permit expires 180 days following its date of issuance.
Failure to complete the sewer connection and obtain inspection and approval of
such connection by the City or designated approval authority, within 180-day
period or within any extension of time or reinstatement period as provided
below, shall result in forfeiture of all connection fees paid and the
nullification of the permit.
   (A) Upon submittal of a written request and fee (to be set by resolution) to
the City prior to the expiration of the 180-day period described above, the
City may, in its discretion, grant an extension of time up to 30 days from the
expiration date for good cause. Such request shall state the building permit
number and the reason for the extension request. The request shall be signed by
the property owner. Only one extension of time shall be allowed; thereafter,
the property owner must apply for permit reinstatement.
   (B)   An expired connection permit may be reinstated upon showing of good
cause for an additional 90-day period, provided the request for reinstatement
has been made within 90 days of the original expiration date of the permit. The
90-day reinstatement period shall begin from the expiration date of the
original permit. The application for reinstatement shall state the building
permit number, the reason for the need for reinstatement; shall be signed by
the property owner; and shall be accompanied by the reinstatement fee (to be
set by resolution). A permit may be reinstated only once.
   (C)   Permit fees will be computed at the rate in force at the time a
building permit has been applied for and the plan check fee paid.
§ 54.04 NEW SERVICE; PAYMENT GUARANTEE.
   (A)   In all new subdivisions and all new areas not served by existing sewer
lines where sanitary sewer service is required, the City Council may require
the payment or guarantee of payment of the SDC covering the construction and
installation of sanitary sewers in such areas.
   (B)   Such payments shall be made immediately upon demand and shall be
credited against SDC and charges, or the City Council may create a sanitary
sewer district, and after the costs have been determined and apportioned, cause
the premises to be assessed and such assessments entered in the docket of City
liens.
§ 54.05 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES; DESIGNATED; METHOD OF COMPUTATION; CREDITS.
   (A)   (1)   The System Development Charge (SDC) to connect to a City
sanitary sewer shall be computed by unit or Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU).
Unit charges will be computed based on classification of service at the rate
and charges as follows:
         (a)   1.   Residential method:
               a.   Single-family dwelling units, including manufactured homes:
CALCULATION: One EDU = One unit;
               b.   Duplexes, apartments, condominiums, dormitories,
convalescent/residential care facilities, hotels, and motels in which the units
include individual kitchens: CALCULATION: One EDU = One unit;
               c.   Dormitories, convalescent/residential care facilities,
hotels, and motels in which the units do not include individual kitchens:
CALCULATION: One EDU = Two units (in the case of convalescent/residential care
facilities, one unit=one bed);
               d.   Bed and breakfast facilities and other similar commercial
lodging facilities: CALCULATION: One EDU for the first five bedrooms plus one
EDU for every two bedrooms over five; and
               e.   Recreational vehicle park: CALCULATION: One EDU = Two
recreational vehicle spaces with sewer hookups.
            2.   The calculations for the residential method shall apply
whether the dwelling unit is occupied or not. The calculated charge includes
all facilities such as common laundries, kitchens, and recreation areas,
provided they are intended for the sole use of the residents and guests. If the
structure also contains commercial operations available for use by the general
public, the charges for those facilities used for commercial operations shall
be calculated using the fixture count method.
            3.   An individual manufactured home located on a platted site will
be charged for the SDC on the same basis as any other structure. A site for a
manufactured home unit located within a manufactured home park will not be
charged for each change of a manufactured home unit if the sanitary sewer
connection has a trap and vent system independent of the structure.
         (b)   Fixture count method:
            1.   This method shall apply to all nonresidential uses, when the
Industrial Method is not required to be used. The Fixture Count Method shall
apply to all commercial, nonmetered industrial uses, restaurants, laundries,
laundromats, schools, hospitals, public facilities, swimming pool filters, and
all other similar nonresidential uses. The fixture unit values shall be as
listed in division (A)(1)(b)(2) below. CALCULATION: One EDU = 16 fixture units;
            2.   a.   Fixture unit value shall be as shown below. Any fixture
unit rating not addressed in this table shall be calculated pursuant to the
current state’s Plumbing Specialty Code being OAR 918-750-0010 et seq.
Fixture         Fixture Unit Value
Baptistery/font 4
Bath
Fixture                              Fixture Unit Value
Baptistery/font                      4
Bath
(1) Jacuzzi/whirlpool                3
(2) Tub/shower combination           3
Car Wash
(1) Each stall                       6
(2) Drive through                    16
Cuspidor/water aspirator             1
Dishwasher
(1) Commercial                       4
(2) Residential                      2
Drinking fountain                    1
Floor drain, mop sink, or floor sink
(1) 2-inch                           2
(2) 3-inch                           5
(3) 4-inch                           6
Garbage disposal
Residential 3/4 horsepower           0/16*
Commercial 3/4-5 horsepower          32
Industrial more than 5               48
 
   *Fixture unit values for garbage disposals of three-fourths horsepower or
less, installed in nonresidential applications, shall be based on the proposed
use of the facility. Uses associated with commercial food processing,
preparation, handling, or group food service (cafeterias) shall be charged 16
fixture units. Uses for individual employee support (e.g., employee lunchrooms)
shall not be separately charged.
Fixture Fixture Unit Value
Fixture                           Fixture Unit Value
Ice machine/refrigerator drains   1
Oil separator (gas stations)      6
Recreational vehicle dump station 16
Shower                            2 per head
Sink
(1) Bar or lavatory               2
(2) Commercial                    3
(3) Service                       3
(4) Wash fountain                 3
Swimming pool filter              3
Washer, clothes                   6
Water extractor                   6
Water closet, toilet              6
Urinal                            6
 
               b.   Note that a separate water meter is required for car
washes, and that adjustments to the SDC for car washes may be made based on
actual water use after six months of operation.
            3.   Industrial method: Industrial connections are for those
structures used primarily for manufacturing. Minor and major industrial
connection and sewer service charges cover only the industrial waste/wastewater
portion of the industrial user’s discharge. The minor and major industrial user
must also pay connection and sewer service charges, based upon fixture units,
for its nonindustrial wastewater discharge. There are three industrial
categories as follows:
               a.   Category I. Dry industrial user does not generate or
discharge any industrial waste or wastewater. Industrial users that discharge
less than 50 gallons of industrial wastewater on any one day may be included in
this category with the approval of the Public Works Superintendent.
CALCULATION: One EDU = 16 fixture units or fraction thereof;
               b.   Category II. Minor metered water use or wastewater
discharge is less than 25,000 gallons per day (gpd). CALCULATION: One EDU = 300
gpd. If waste discharged is not known, then the fixture unit rates will be
used. Any adjustment in connection charge will be made after six months of
operation; and
               c.   Category III.
                  i.   Major metered water use or wastewater discharge is equal
to or greater than 25,000 gpd or strength of waste discharged is more than:
 
700 mg/l Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)
300 mg/l Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
350 mg/l Total Suspended Solids (TSS)
8 mg/l Total Phosphorus (TP)
25 mg/l Ammonia (NH3)
 
                  ii.   The Public Works Superintendent shall select one or
more of the following calculations for determining the connection charge:
 
One EDU = 300 gpd average value
One EDU = 0.70 pounds BOD per day average value
One EDU = 1.4 pounds COD per day average value
One EDU = 0.70 pounds TSS per day average value
One EDU = 0.11 pounds NH3 per day average value
One EDU = 0.028 pounds TP per day average value
 
                  iii.   Such selection shall be made on the basis of the
impact the industrial user’s discharge is anticipated to have upon the sewerage
system and shall be aimed at ensuring that the industrial user in question pays
his or her fair share in light of the impact of its discharge, as determined by
the City. The City may, in its discretion, require the user to separate its
industrial wastewater discharge from its nonindustrial waste discharge.
      (2)   Large parcel depth over 120 feet or one-half block shall be subject
to additional unit charges for any units lying therein and the cost of sewer
line extensions required to service same.
      (3)   Where a sewer is financed and constructed by a developer for City
ownership and operation, the facility development fee will be waived and only
the SDC will be levied.
      (4)   All construction will conform to the applicable City and state’s
Plumbing Specialty Code standards. The City reserves the right to reject any
sewer constructed for connection to the sewer main.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a SDC is computed on property for which the SDC has
been previously paid, a credit may, in the discretion of the Public Works
Superintendent, be allowed. The amount of credit shall be determined by the
Public Works Superintendent by taking into consideration the SDC calculation
method at the time of the payment of the earlier SDC along with the number of
existing and proposed Equivalent Dwelling Unit or EDUs and then computing the
extent and amount of the credit, if any.
      (2)   If records of such previous charges are not available, the burden
of proof shall be on the property owner to establish the amount of the earlier
charges. The exact manner of calculation of any credit allowed shall be in the
discretion of the Public Works Superintendent.
§ 54.06 SDC; DESIGNATED; METHOD OF COMPUTATION.
   (A)   Owners of property applying to connect facilities directly to the City
sanitary sewer system who will receive special and peculiar benefit from such
connection, but who have not directly contributed to the cost of the line to
which they will make connection shall, in addition to the regular sewer
connection charge, be charged and assessed for the special and peculiar benefit
the property received, as determined by the City. This charge shall be set by
Council resolution.
   (B)   The FDF is derived from a frontage rate multiplied by the number of
front feet. The minimum frontage assessment will be for 75 lineal feet.
   (C)   Frontage of large tracts (unplatted residential, commercial, and
industrial) shall be measured as the amount of developed portion along the
actual sewer line in cases where the sewer line crosses through the tract and
measured as street frontage of the developed portion where the sewer service is
from a street location.
   (D)   Corner lots where street frontage dimensions do not exceed 120 feet or
one-half block shall have frontage equal to one-half the sum of the street
frontages.
§ 54.07 SEWER CONSTRUCTION PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Council shall
not be obligated to permit construction or installation of sanitary sewers to
any property until the project has been approved and authorized by the City
Council, and the plans and specifications therefor have been approved by the
Public Works Superintendent.
   (B)   All sanitary sewers hereafter constructed and installed in the City
shall be under the direct supervision of the Public Works Superintendent, and
his or her services shall be considered a cost of the project, and in the event
any legal services are required, the cost of such services shall be considered
a cost of the project.
§ 54.08 UNPAID CHARGES; LIENS; COLLECTION.
   (A)   The City Finance Director is directed to enter all unpaid SDC, FDF,
and associated charges in the docket of City liens, and thereupon said
connection fees and charges shall become an assessment and lien upon individual
lots and tracts of land involved.
   (B)   On the first day of July of each year, the City Finance Director shall
prepare a list showing all the properties upon which SDC, FDF, and associated
charges, and assessments and liens are due and unpaid, and upon which no
application for satisfactory installment payments have been made, and shall
present said list to the City Council at the next regular meeting, and the City
Council shall proceed to:
      (1)   Cause the liens to be collected as soon as convenient; and
      (2)   The City Council may use such means of collection for all charges
and fees collected under this chapter as may be provided by the laws of the
state, and any delinquencies may be certified to the tax assessor of the County
for collection in the manner provided in ORS 454.225 or any other statue
subsequently enacted applicable thereto.
§ 54.09 DISPOSITION OF MONEYS.
   All fees and charges collected under this chapter shall be deposited by the
City Finance Director in the sewer operations and capital funds.
SERVICE FEES
§ 54.25 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; FINDINGS.
   Pursuant to the general laws of the state and the powers granted by the
charter of the City, the City has heretofore acquired, constructed, and now
operates and maintains within the City a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW),
sewers, equipment, and appurtenances necessary, useful, and convenient for a
complete sewer system, and the City Council declares its intention to operate
and maintain said sewer system and to acquire and construct additions and
improvements thereto, including maintenance and reconstruction, as may be
necessary, useful, and convenient for a complete wastewater collection system
and Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
§ 54.26 PURPOSE AND IMPOSITION OF CHARGES.
   There is levied and imposed upon all water users within the City using water
from the City’s water system just and equitable charges for service to such
premises by the sewer system in order to create a fund to provide adequate
maintenance and operation of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW),
wastewater collection system, and extensions and additions and improvements
thereto.
§ 54.27 BASIS FOR DETERMINATION; ANNUAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The charges to be established in a separate resolution are determined
to be just and equitable charges and are based upon the amount of water
actually discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the amount of water discharged into the sanitary
sewer system shall be determined by the water purchased by the water user from
the water system of the City.
   (B)   The City Council shall conduct an annual review of the sewer user
charges and revise them periodically by resolution to reflect the actual
operation and maintenance expenses of the sewer system, including lines, pump
stations, and the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
§ 54.28 SERVICE FEES.
   The monthly service (sewer user) charges are calculated on the basis of
water consumption and a fixed customer charge.
   (A)   The volume charge shall be established in a resolution based on water
consumption which shall be computed on the water consumption records of the
City. Customers will be charge for actual consumption except as modified in
later sections of this chapter.
   (B)   The customer service charge shall be established in a resolution
setting the rates to be charged. Each individual residence, business, or
industry shall be charged a customer charge. Multiple or mixed residences and
businesses served by an individual water service shall be each charged a
customer charge based on the total number of single-family living units and/or
commercial units that receive water service.
§ 54.29 CHARGES FOR USERS NOT CONNECTED TO THE CITY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Whenever a structure has sanitary sewer directly available to the
property, the sewer user will be charged for sewer service based on the sewer
user classification and the customer charge for said sewer as long as the
property is not connected to the sewer system. Directly available is defined as
a building within 150 feet of the public sewer system and not requiring an
easement or other access right-of-way to construct service lines to it.
   (B)   A credit on the System Development Charge will be granted for the
monthly sewer user fee paid.
§ 54.30 CHARGES FOR UNMETERED USERS.
   A residential sanitary sewer user who is not connected to the City water
system shall pay the flat fee rate charge established in the resolution adopted
by City Council. A residential user who is connected to the City water system
but whose water is not metered shall pay the flat rate charge of an amount to
be determined in relation to the water charge established by the City.
§ 54.31 CHURCHES AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS.
   Such institutional buildings shall be classified and charged the residential
user’s rate in accordance with §
54.28.
§ 54.32 ADDITIONAL SURCHARGE FOR SPECIAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   In addition to the rates above provided, there shall be an additional
surcharge for industrial users that generate wastewater discharge
concentrations in excess of:
 
250 mg/l Total Suspended Solids (TSS)
200 mg/l Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
500 mg/l Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)
5 mg/l Total Phosphorus (TP)
20 mg/l Ammonia (NH3)
 
   (B)   The surcharge shall be established within the rate resolution adopted
by the City Council.
§ 54.33 REDUCED WHEN.
   (A)   Sewer charges provided for in this chapter are based upon water
purchased from the water system of the City.
   (B)   Said charges may be reduced when a portion of the water purchased is
not discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the City and the amount
thereof is measurable as follows:
      (1)   Based upon a water flow meter located in a sanitary sewer line;
      (2)   When a portion of the water purchased by a sewer user is not
discharged into the sanitary sewer system and the amount of said water can be
accurately metered;
      (3)   When water purchased by a sewer user is used in a manufacturing
process and the amount thereof is subject to accurate measurement based upon
metering or upon such records as are approved by the Public Works
Superintendent and are kept by the sewer user in the ordinary and usual course
of business; and
      (4)   When the water has leaked onto the ground or other surface and has
not entered the sewer system. Credit for water not discharged to the sanitary
sewer system shall be computed based upon water flow records prior to and after
the leak has been fixed.
§ 54.34 SEPTIC WASTE.
   Rates for disposal of septic waste from residential sources and chemical
toilet waste shall be set in the rate resolution. Nonresidential wastes will
not be accepted.
§ 54.35 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   All charges provided in this chapter, or hereafter provided, shall be
charged, paid, and collected monthly at the rates established by resolution,
which are monthly rates, and shall be added to and shown on the regular monthly
water bill or billed directly by the City and collected accordingly.
§ 54.36 BASIS FOR DETERMINING CHARGES.
   The basis for determining charges as set forth in this chapter is adopted
for the purpose of financing the operation and maintenance of the wastewater
collection system and for the purpose of financing construction of additions,
improvements, and extensions of the City’s wastewater collection system and
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
§ 54.37 CITY’S AUTHORITY NOT RESTRICTED.
   This chapter shall in no way restrict the City’s authority to restrict waste
that is deleterious to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) and other
wastewater appurtenances.
§ 54.38 COLLECTION; PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
   The City may enforce the collection of rates and charges for use of
wastewater facilities as may be provided by the laws of the state or permitted
by the charter and ordinances of the City, and any delinquencies shall be
placed on the lien docket of the City and may be certified to the County
assessor for collection in the manner as provided by ORS 454.225. Rates and
charges for wastewater facilities as provided in this chapter shall be
collected monthly by the City, and if not paid on or before ten days from and
after the date the same is payable, said rates and charges shall be deemed to
be delinquent and subject to the same penalty as for the nonpayment of charges
for water.
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 for
each day that violation continues. Trial shall be before the court without a
jury with no right to appeal. The City reserves the right to seek such other
relief as is available from any court of competent jurisdiction to redress a
violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 55: INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
55.001   General discharge prohibitions
   
55.002   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
55.003   State pretreatment requirements
   
55.004   Local limits
   
55.005   City’s right of revision
   
55.006   Dilution
   
55.007   Disposal of oil and grease
   
55.008   Pretreatment facilities
   
55.009   Additional pretreatment measures
   
55.010   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans
   
55.011   Mobile waste hauler permits
   
55.012   Industrial user survey
   
55.013   Wastewater analysis
Individual and General Wastewater Discharge
   
55.025   Permit requirement
   
55.026   Permits for existing connections
   
55.027   Permits for new connections
   
55.028   Permit application contents
   
55.029   General permit
   
55.030   Application signatories and certifications
   
55.031   Permit decisions
   
55.032   Permit duration
   
55.033   Permit contents
   
55.034   Permit issuance process
   
55.035   Permit modification
   
55.036   Permit transfer
   
55.037   Permit revocation
   
55.038   Permit reissuance
Conditions and Regulations
   
55.050   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
   
55.051   Baseline monitoring reports
   
55.052   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
55.053   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
55.054   Periodic compliance reports
   
55.055   Reports of changed conditions
   
55.056   Reports of potential problems
   
55.057   Reports from unpermitted industrial users
   
55.058   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
   
55.059   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
55.060   Analytical requirements
   
55.061   Sample collection
   
55.062   Date of receipt of reports
   
55.063   Recordkeeping
   
55.064   Certification statements
Enforcement and Administration
   
55.075   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
55.076   Search warrants
   
55.077   Confidential information
   
55.078   Significant noncompliance
   
55.079   Notification of violation
   
55.080   Consent orders
   
55.081   Show cause hearing
   
55.082   Compliance orders
   
55.083   Cease and desist orders
   
55.084   Administrative fines
   
55.085   Emergency suspensions
   
55.086   Termination of discharge
   
55.087   Injunctive relief
   
55.088   Remedies nonexclusive
   
55.089   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties
   
55.090   Upset
   
55.091   Prohibited discharge standards
   
55.092   Bypass
   
55.093   Water supply severance
 
   
55.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.001 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No sewer user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW
any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all sewer users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state,
or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   No sewer user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW
the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 11.0 SU, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140°F (60°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the Public Works Superintendent in accordance with §
55.011;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, aldehydes, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating the City’s NPDES permit;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with the current “Oregon Regulations for the Control of Radiation”
(OAR 333-120-0520);
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Public
Works Superintendent;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Public
Works Superintendent in a City control mechanism;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test;
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which might
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through; and/or
      (18)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
10% of the lower explosive limit or any single reading over 20% of the lower
explosive limit of the meter.
   (C)   (1)   The Public Works Superintendent may develop Best Management
Practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in industrial wastewater discharge permits or
general permits to implement the requirements of §
55.001.
      (2)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW.
§ 55.002 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Categorical industrial users (CIU) must comply with the Categorical
Pretreatment Standards found at 40 C.F.R Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 401
through 471.
   (B)   Where a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Public Works Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits
in accordance with divisions (F) and (G) below.
   (C)   When the limits in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Public Works
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users.
   (D)   When wastewater subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the Public Works
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(e).
   (E)   When a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the City convert
the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert
concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Public
Works Superintendent. The City may establish equivalent mass limits only if the
industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in divisions (E)(1)(a)
through (E)(1)(e) below.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
         (a)   Employ or demonstrate that it will employ water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its industrial wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request
for equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify
the Public Works Superintendent whenever production rates are expected to vary
by more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in division (E)
(1)(c) above. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the Public Works
Superintendent will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as
necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to divisions (E)(1)(a)
above so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Public Works
Superintendent:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial
user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for
the applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
industrial wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial user’s actual
average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of
water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow
rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to §
55.006. The industrial user must also be in compliance with § 55.022 regarding
the prohibition of bypass.
   (F)   The Public Works Superintendent may convert the mass limits of the
Categorical Pretreatment Standards of 40 C.F.R. parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Public
Works Superintendent.
   (G)   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated
Categorical Standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
   (H)   Many Categorical Pretreatment Standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.
   (I)   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall
notify the Public Works Superintendent within two business days after the
industrial user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any industrial user not
notifying the Public Works Superintendent of such anticipated change will be
required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based
on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate.   
§ 55.003 STATE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Industrial users must comply with applicable state pretreatment standards
and requirements set out in Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) Chapter 340,
Division 45, § 0063 and incorporated herein.
§ 55.004 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent is authorized to establish local
limits pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), and may modify and publish revisions
from time to time appropriately.
   (B)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No significant industrial user (SIU) shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations listed in Table 1
below:
Table 1 - Local Limits
Pollutant Units Local Limit
Pollutant         Units Local Limit
Arsenic           mg/l  0.3
Cadmium           mg/l  0.2
Chromium          mg/l  5.7
Copper            mg/l  2.1
Cyanide           mg/l  0.5
Fats, oil, grease mg/l  100
Lead              mg/l  0.6
Mercury           mg/l  0.04
Molybdenum        mg/l  0.6
Nickel            mg/l  1.8
Selenium          mg/l  0.7
Silver            mg/l  0.2
Total metals      mg/l  10.5
Zinc              mg/l  2.8
 
   (C)   The local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW or where industrial process water enters a separate sampling vault
and is the designated sample point for the SIU and the City. All concentrations
for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The
Public Works Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to the
concentration-based limitations above.
§ 55.005 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial
wastewater discharge permits or in general permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this
chapter.
§ 55.006 DILUTION.
   No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Public Works Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users who
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or
in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
§ 55.007 DISPOSAL OF OIL AND GREASE.
   (A)   All new restaurants and industrial users employing a fats, oils, and/
or grease process shall install an approved oil/grease trap or interceptor
before discharging to the POTW. In the case of other uses including preexisting
restaurants and industrial users, grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent, they are
necessary for:
      (1)   The proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil or grease in
excessive amounts as to cause plugging or maintenance problems within the
collection system;
      (2)   Any flammable wastes; and
      (3)   Other harmful pollutants.
   (B)   Such interceptors shall be so located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning, inspection, and sampling, and shall be approved by the
Public Works Superintendent prior to installation.
   (C)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable cover which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
   (D)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense to provide continuously
efficient operation through periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil,
or other floating substances and solids deposited in the interceptor. All
cleaning residues shall be satisfactorily disposed of in an approved,
environmentally acceptable manner. Authorized City employees shall be allowed
access to grease traps and interceptors for the purpose of inspection and/or to
verify compliance with this section. Fat waste, oil, or grease removed from
such a facility shall not be disposed of in the sanitary or storm sewer. A
record of disposal shall be submitted to the City for review within 15 business
days.
   (E)   The use of hot water, enzymes, bacteria, chemicals, or other agents or
devices for the purpose of causing the contents of a pretreatment device to be
discharged into the sanitary system, or to avoid the installation of a
pretreatment device is prohibited.
§ 55.008 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
55.001 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Public
Works Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user’s
expense.
   (B)   Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Public Works Superintendent for review, and shall be
acceptable to the Public Works Superintendent before such facilities are
constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 55.009 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Public Works Superintendent may require
industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate, and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams
from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Public Works Superintendent may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense,
a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An
industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense
grease, oil, and sand interceptors when, in the opinion of the Public Works
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater
containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works
Superintendent, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning,
sampling, and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired by the user at his, her, or their expense.
   (D)   In the event the City, during maintenance of public sewer lines,
records situations of grease accumulation in lines sufficient to restrict the
normal flow of waste, upstream users shall be inspected. If the Public Works
Superintendent determines that an upstream user is responsible for the grease
or oil discharge, the user will be required to cease discharge of the
prohibited waste. Additionally, the user may be required to install an
interceptor, maintain the interceptor, and may be charged for the cost of
cleaning the line. When an obstruction of the public line occurs, a violation
of 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b)(3) or (6) and §
55.001(B) has occurred.
   (E)   Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
§ 55.010 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs
an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The Public Works Superintendent may require any industrial
user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such
other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges.
   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)    Description of discharge practices, including not routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Public Works
Superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
55.056; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
§ 55.011 MOBILE WASTE HAULER PERMITS.
   Mobile waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
Public Works Superintendent. The Public Works Superintendent may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The
Public Works Superintendent may require the mobile waste hauler to provide a
waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   (A)   Permit required. Any person proposing to be a mobile waste hauler and
any person the Public Works Superintendent has determined is likely to be a
mobile waste hauler shall secure a mobile waste hauler discharge permit from
the City. Any discharge by a mobile waste hauler without a permit is a
violation of this chapter. Such waste shall not violate §
55.001 or any other requirements established by the City.
   (B)   Application. Any new mobile waste hauler shall apply for a mobile
waste hauler permit at least 30 days prior to its initial discharge.
Applications shall be made to the Public Works Superintendent in writing on
forms provided by the City and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and authorized representative of
the applicant;
      (2)   NAICS or SIC number and other state or federal license numbers;
      (3)   A list of environmental control permits held by or for the
applicant;
      (4)   A description of spill prevention measures or plans which are
currently in place for use during storage or discharge of wastewater;
      (5)   A description of activities and methods of collection,
transportation, storage, and discharge of wastewater; a description of
transportation and storage facilities; and a general description of types and
quantities of all materials which are or could be discharged; and
      (6)   Proof of adequate general liability and property damage insurance.
   (C)   Application review. The Public Works Superintendent shall evaluate the
data furnished by the applicant and may determine that additional information
or sampling of wastewater characteristics is necessary. If such a determination
is made, the applicant, unless the time period is extended, will be given 30
days to provide the required information or sampling, if it is not provided
within the designated time period, the application shall be denied. After
determining that the submitted application contains all the information
required by this section, the Public Works Superintendent shall consider the
submission, any additional evidence that may have been requested, and any other
available information relevant to the application. If the Public Works
Superintendent determines that the proposed discharge meets the requirements of
this chapter and the additional septage does not otherwise overload or cause
damage to any portion of the POTW; or will not create an imminent or potential
hazard to personnel, the Public Works Superintendent shall, within 30 days
after determining that the application is complete, issue a mobile waste hauler
discharge permit subject to appropriate conditions.
   (D)   Modification of permit. Conditions included in a mobile waste hauler
discharge permit shall remain in effect for that permit until it expires,
except that they may be revised by the Public Works Superintendent whenever the
Public Works Superintendent deems a revision is necessary in order to
effectively implement the pretreatment program, as required by City, state, or
federal standards; to effectuate the objectives of
Chapter 53, this chapter, and
Chapter 55 and the policy of the City to cooperate with the state and federal
government; or to meet any emergency. The permit holder shall be informed of
any proposed change in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of the change except in the event of an emergency.
   (E)   Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed three years. The permit holder shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of its existing permit if it desires
to continue to discharge. An expired permit will continue to be in effect until
the City takes final action on the renewal application to issue or deny the
permit if:
      (1)   The permit holder has submitted a complete permit application at
least 90 days prior to the expiration of its permit; and
      (2)   The failure to take final action is not due to any act or failure
to act on the part of the permit holder.
   (F)   Conditions. Mobile waste hauler discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter. Mobile waste hauler permits shall
contain the following conditions:
      (1)   Payment of applicable fees;
      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum discharge of restricted
substances;
      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (4)   Compliance schedules;
      (5)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      (6)   Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction
of restricted substances or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater or any restricted substances being discharged;
      (7)   Requirements for insurance coverage for all activities subject to
the provisions of this chapter;
      (8)   Requirements that the permit holder retain a copy of a valid mobile
waste hauler discharge permit in each vehicle used for transportation of
wastewater, and present that permit to any employee of the City authorized to
inspect the mobile waste hauler discharge permit;
      (9)   Requirements that the permit holder present a manifest of origin of
all wastewater proposed for discharge;
      (10)   Requirements that the permit holder discharge only at the
designated discharge point and at designated times;
      (11)   Requirements that the permit holder remove or otherwise clean up
all spilled material or waste after discharge and that the permit holder agree
to pay any public agency which provides assistance in such clean up or which
performs such clean up after a failure by the permit holder to comply, an
amount representing twice the amount of the actual expenditures of the public
agency for labor, and materials necessary to clean any spilled waste;
      (12)   Requirements that the permit holder apply in writing on approved
forms for permission to discharge any wastewater containing any restricted
substances or wastewater containing any substances other than residential or
septage waste; and
      (13)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Public Works
Superintendent to achieve compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Transfer. A mobile waste hauler discharge permit shall be issued to a
specific mobile waste hauler for a specific operation. A mobile waste hauler
discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold without the
approval of the Public Works Superintendent. Any successor mobile waste hauler
shall agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit as a
condition precedent to the approval by the Public Works Superintendent of a
transfer, sale, or assignment of the permit.
   (H)   Analysis and reporting requirements.
      (1)   Permit holders shall be required to submit information,
certifications, compliance schedules, and samples of discharges or perform such
tests and report such test results to the Public Works Superintendent as
follows:
         (a)   When requested by state or local public agencies; or
         (b)   When deemed necessary by the Public Works Superintendent for the
proper treatment, analysis, or control of discharges.
      (2)   All such tests and reports shall be at the cost of the permit
holder. To the degree practicable, the Public Works Superintendent shall
provide each permit holder or applicant with information on applicable local,
state, and federal wastewater analysis and reporting requirements, provided,
however, that any failure to do so shall not excuse the permit holder from
compliance with said requirements.
§ 55.012 INDUSTRIAL USER SURVEY.
   When requested by the Public Works Superintendent, all industrial users must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by
completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The Public
Works Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete
this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 55.013 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the Public Works Superintendent, an industrial user must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within
90 days of the request. The Public Works Superintendent is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users
to update this information.
INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
§ 55.025 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit from the
Public Works Superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to §
55.026, may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
   (B)   Significant industrial users classified as a “categorical industrial
user” that does not discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer are required
to obtain a nondischarge categorical industrial user control mechanism.
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent may require other industrial users to
obtain industrial wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter.
   (D)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter and subjects
the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
55.079 through 53.093. Obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
§ 55.026 PERMITS FOR EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any industrial user required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date
of this subchapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the Public Works Superintendent
for an industrial wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
55.028, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
90 days of the effective date of this subchapter except in accordance with an
industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the Public Works
Superintendent.
§ 55.027 PERMITS FOR NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any industrial user required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must
obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this industrial wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
§
55.028 must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
§ 55.028 PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   All industrial users required to obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit must submit a permit application. Users that are eligible may
request a general permit under §
55.029. The Public Works Superintendent may require industrial users to submit
all or some of the following information as part of a permit application:
      (1)   Identifying information:
         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner; and
         (b)   Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises.
      (2)   Environmental permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations:
         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and NAICS or SIC codes of the operation(s) carried out by such
industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram,
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day); and
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow measurement: Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in §
55.002(D) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (7)   Measurement of pollutants:
         (a)   The Categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Public
Works Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process;
         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
55.060. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation as
required by the Public Works Superintendent or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard; and
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
55.061.
      (8)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on §
55.054(B) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)(2); and
      (9)   Any request to be covered by a general permit based on §
55.029; and
      (10)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Public
Works Superintendent to evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the industrial user for revision.
§ 55.029 GENERAL PERMIT.
   (A)   At the discretion of the Public Works Superintendent, the Public Works
Superintendent may use general permits to control industrial user discharges to
the POTW if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a
general permit must:
      (1)   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
      (2)   Discharge the same types of wastes;
      (3)   Require the same effluent limitations;
      (4)   Require the same or similar monitoring; and
      (5)   In the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent, are more
appropriately controlled under a general permit than under industrial
wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   To be covered by the general permit, the industrial user must file a
written request for coverage that identifies its contact information,
production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for
monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance
with §
55.054(B) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, and any other information the POTW deems
appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until
after the Public Works Superintendent has provided written notice to the
industrial user that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance with
§
55.054(B).
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent will retain a copy of the general
permit, documentation to support the POTW’s determination that a specific
industrial user meets the criteria in §
55.029(A)(1) to (A)(5) and applicable state regulations, and a copy of the
industrial user’s written request for coverage for three years after the
expiration of the general permit.
   (D)   The Public Works Superintendent may not control an industrial user
through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Categorical Pretreatment Standards
expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for industrial users whose
limits are based on the combined wastestream formula (see § 55.002(D)).
§ 55.030 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, industrial user reports,
and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of
the industrial user and contain the certification statement in §
55.064(A).
   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Public Works
Superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
§ 55.031 PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The Public Works Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of
receipt of a complete permit application, the Public Works Superintendent will
determine whether to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit. The
Public Works Superintendent may deny any application for an industrial
wastewater discharge permit.
§ 55.032 PERMIT DURATION.
   An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An
industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five years, at the discretion of the Public Works Superintendent. Each
industrial wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which
it will expire.
§ 55.033 PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Public Works
Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health
and safety, facilitate biosolids management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits and general permits must
contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date, and effective date;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City in accordance with §
55.036, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or Best Management Practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
      (5)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
§
55.054(B);
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law;
      (7)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Public
Works Superintendent to be necessary; and
      (8)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Public Works
Superintendent (see §
55.054(B)) must be included as a condition in the industrial user’s permit or
other control mechanism.
   (C)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or not routine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the industrial wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the industrial
wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Public Works
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.
§ 55.034 PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   The industrial user may petition the Public Works Superintendent to
reconsider the terms of an industrial wastewater discharge permit within ten
days of its issuance.
   (B)   Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (C)   In his or her petition, the industrial user must indicate the
industrial wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for
this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   Reconsideration of the industrial wastewater discharge permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.
   (E)   If the Public Works Superintendent fails to act within ten days, a
petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider an industrial wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
   (F)   Industrial users seeking judicial review of the final administrative
industrial wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint within 180 days in the County Court in accordance to ORS § 12.070.
§ 55.035 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The Public Works Superintendent may modify an industrial wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of the industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the City’s POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater
discharge permit;
   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment
Standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;
   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial wastewater
discharge permit; or
   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
55.036.
§ 55.036 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days’ advance notice
to the Public Works Superintendent and the Public Works Superintendent approves
the industrial wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Public
Works Superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the industrial
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
§ 55.037 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent may revoke an industrial wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the Public Works Superintendent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Public Works
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to § 53.055;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the Public Works Superintendent timely access to
the facility premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial
wastewater discharge permits issued to an industrial user are void upon the
issuance of a new industrial wastewater discharge permit to that industrial
user.
§ 55.038 PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   An industrial user with an expiring industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall apply for industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting
a complete permit application, in accordance with §
55.028, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the industrial user’s
existing industrial or general wastewater discharge permit.
CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 55.050 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality, or sewer user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Public Works
Superintendent shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement (IGA) with the
contributing municipality.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A) above,
the Public Works Superintendent shall request the following information from
the contributing municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all sewer users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Public Works Superintendent may deem
necessary.
   (C)   An intergovernmental agreement, as required by division (A) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this subchapter and local
limits, including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) which are at
least as stringent as those set out in §
55.004. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City’s subchapter or local
limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
sewer user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the Public Works
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the
contributing municipality and the Public Works Superintendent;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Public Works Superintendent with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the Public Works Superintendent access to the
facilities of sewer users located within the contributing municipality’s
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Public Works Superintendent; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intergovernmental agreement.
§ 55.051 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Public Works Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard shall submit to the Public Works Superintendent a report
which contains the information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Categorical industrial user (CIU) described above shall submit the
information set forth below:
      (1)   All information required in §
55.028(A)(1) through (A)(6);
      (2)   Measurement of pollutants:
         (a)   The CIU shall provide the information required in §
55.028(A)(7)(a) through 55.028(A)(7)(d).
         (b)   The CIU shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division
(B).
         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the CIU should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where
an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Control Authority.
         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with §
55.060.
         (e)   The Public Works Superintendent may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      (3)   Compliance certification: A statement, reviewed by the CIU’s
authorized representative as defined in §
53.04 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (4)   Compliance schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
CIU will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
55.052; and
      (5)   Signature and report certification: All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with §
55.064(A) and signed by an authorized representative as defined in §
53.04.
§ 55.052 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
55.051(B)(4):
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Public Works
Superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the
established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Public Works Superintendent.
§ 55.053 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any categorical
industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the Public Works Superintendent a report containing the information
described in §§
55.028(A)(6) through (A)(7) and 55.051(B)(2). For categorical industrial user
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in §
55.002, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the categorical
industrial user’s long-term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the industrial user’s actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
55.064(A). All sampling will be done in conformance with §
55.061.
§ 55.054 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   Except as specified in division (C) below, all significant industrial
users must, at a frequency determined by the Public Works Superintendent,
submit no less than twice per year (June and December (or on dates specified))
reports indicating the nature; concentration of pollutants in the discharge,
which are limited by pretreatment standards; and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP)
or pollution prevention alternative, the significant industrial user must
submit documentation required by the Public Works Superintendent or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the
significant industrial user.
   (B)   (1)   The City may authorize an industrial user subject to a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a Categorical Pretreatment Standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)(2).)
      (2)   This authorization is subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable
categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the industrial wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for the
waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent industrial
wastewater discharge permit. (See §
55.028(A)(8).)
         (c)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         (d)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with §
55.004(A), and include the certification statement in §
55.064(A) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
         (e)   Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 C.F.R. part
136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis;
         (f)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Public Works
Superintendent must be included as a condition in the industrial user’s permit.
The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the
industrial user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the Public
Works Superintendent for three years after expiration of the waiver;
         (g)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
industrial user’s permit by the Public Works Superintendent, the industrial
user must certify on each report with the statement in §
55.064(B), that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream
due to activities of the industrial user;
         (h)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or
is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the industrial
user’s operations, the industrial user must immediately comply with the
monitoring requirements of §
55.054(A), or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the Public
Works Superintendent, and notify the Public Works Superintendent; and
         (i)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in Categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as
otherwise specified in the Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
   (C)   (1)   The City may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance
reports §
55.036(A)(1) to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the state,
where the industrial user’s total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed
any of the following:
         (a)   POTW’s value for 0.01% of the POTWs design dry-weather hydraulic
capacity of the POTW or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as
measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial
user discharges in batches;
         (b)   POTW’s value for 0.01% of the design dry-weather organic
treatment capacity of the POTW; and
         (c)   POTWs value for 0.01% of the maximum allowable headworks loading
for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard
for which approved local limits were developed in accordance with §
55.004.
      (2)   Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in
the last two years been in Significant Noncompliance, as defined in §
55.078. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user
with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so
significantly that, in the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in
data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
   (D)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
55.064(A).
   (E)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (F)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location
more frequently than required by the Public Works Superintendent, using the
procedures prescribed in §
55.061, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
§ 55.055 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each industrial user must notify the Public Works Superintendent of
any significant changes to the industrial user’s operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater including facility
closure at least 30 days before the change.
   (B)   The Public Works Superintendent may require the industrial user to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under §
55.028.
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent may issue an industrial wastewater
discharge permit under §
55.038 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
55.035 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
§ 55.056 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges; discharges of a not routine, episodic nature; a non-
customary batch discharge; a slug discharge; or slug load that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the industrial user shall immediately
telephone and notify the Public Works Superintendent of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration, and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
industrial user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the Public Works Superintendent, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Public Works
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.
§ 55.057 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   All industrial user not required to obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Public Works
Superintendent as the Public Works Superintendent may require.
§ 55.058 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the Public Works Superintendent within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Public Works Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the City
performs sampling at the industrial user’s facility at least once a month, or
if the City performs sampling at the industrial user between the time when the
initial sampling was conducted and the time when the industrial user or the
City receives the results of this sampling, or if the City has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
§ 55.059 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   (1)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste
per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the industrial user:
         (a)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
         (b)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and
         (c)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
      (2)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division (A) need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under §
55.055. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by industrial users subject to Categorical
Pretreatment Standards under the self monitoring requirements of §§
55.051,
55.053, and
55.054.
   (B)   (1)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
      (2)   Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in
a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA being 42
U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. identifying additional characteristics of hazardous
waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial
user must notify the Public Works Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of
the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this subchapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
§ 55.060 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Public Works Superintendent or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 55.061 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
   (B)   (1)   Except as indicated in divisions (C) and (D) below, the
industrial user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the Public Works Superintendent. Where time-
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the
samples must be representative of the discharge.
      (2)   Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in
40 C.F.R. part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows:
         (a)   For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field;
         (b)   For volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory.
      (3)   Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the City, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
   (C)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (D)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
55.051 and
55.053, in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four
grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data
are available, the Public Works Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum.
For the reports required by §
55.054 in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e) and 403.12(h), the industrial
user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and
assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
§ 55.062 DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 55.063 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the industrial user independent of such requirements,
and documentation associated with Best Management Practices established under §
55.001(C).
   (B)   (1)   Records shall include:
         (a)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the
name of the person(s) taking the samples;
         (b)   The dates analyses were performed;
         (c)   Who performed the analyses;
         (d)   The analytical techniques or methods used; and
         (e)   The results of such analyses.
      (2)   These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the industrial user or the City, or where the industrial
user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Public
Works Superintendent.
§ 55.064 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Certification of permit applications, industrial user reports, and
initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to
be signed and submitted by industrial users submitting permit applications in
accordance with §
55.030; industrial users submitting baseline monitoring reports under §
55.051(B)(5) (Note: See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)); industrial users submitting
reports on compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines
under §
55.053 (Note: See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d)); industrial users submitting periodic
compliance reports required by §
55.054(A) through (D) (Note: See 40 C.F.R. 403.12(e) and (h)); and industrial
users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the
basis of §
55.054(B)(4) (Note: See 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(e)(2)(iii)). The following
certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as
defined in §
53.04:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (B)   Certification of pollutants not present. Industrial users that have an
approved monitoring waiver based on §
55.054(B) must certify on each report with the following statement that there
has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of
the industrial user (Note: See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)(2)(v).):
      “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 C.F.R. _______
(specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)), I certify that, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
______ (list pollutant(s)) in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since filing of the last periodic report under §
55.054(A).”
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 55.075 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent shall have the right to enter the
premises of any industrial user to determine whether the industrial user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any industrial wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Industrial users shall allow the
Public Works Superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, photographing, records examination, and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with security so that, upon
presentation of proper identification, the Public Works Superintendent shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
   (C)   The Public Works Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the industrial user’s
operations.
   (D)   The Public Works Superintendent may require the industrial user to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used
to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at manufacturer’s
required frequency to ensure their accuracy.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
industrial user at the written or verbal request of the Public Works
Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the industrial user.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Superintendent access
to the industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 55.076 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the Public Works Superintendent has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the Public Works
Superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant through the City Attorney.
§ 55.077 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, industrial wastewater discharge
permits, general permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Public Works
Superintendent’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests in
writing, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 2.302,
shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to
the public without restriction.
§ 55.078 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper
of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the industrial users which, at any
time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
divisions (B)(3), (B)(4), or (B)(8) below) and shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined
in §
53.04;
      (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as
defined by §
53.04, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement that
the Public Works Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Public Works
Superintendent exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an industrial wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Public Works Superintendent determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.
§ 55.079 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the Public Works Superintendent finds that an industrial user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Superintendent may serve
upon that industrial user a written notice of violation. Within five days of
the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the industrial user to the Public Works
Superintendent. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the industrial
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Public Works Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, even if a Notice of Violation has not been
issued.
§ 55.080 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The Public Works Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
industrial user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include
specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
55.082 and
55.083 and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 55.081 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The Public Works Superintendent may order an industrial user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Public Works
Superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the industrial user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally, by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested),
or by traceable carrier at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user as defined in
§
53.04 and required by §
55.030(A). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the industrial user.
§ 55.082 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the Public Works Superintendent finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial
or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Superintendent may issue
an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that
the industrial user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
industrial user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the industrial
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the industrial user.
§ 55.083 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   When the Public Works Superintendent finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the industrial user’s past
violations are likely to recur, the Public Works Superintendent may issue an
order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the industrial user to:
   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action
against the industrial user.
§ 55.084 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   When the Public Works Superintendent finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Superintendent may fine
such industrial user in an amount up to and including $1,000. Such fines shall
be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during
the period of violation.
   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar days, be
assessed an additional interest at 9% APR of the unpaid balance per month. A
lien against the industrial user’s property may be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties.
   (C)   Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the Public Works Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with
full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of receiving the fine. Where a
request has merit, the Public Works Superintendent may convene a hearing on the
matter. In the event the industrial user’s appeal is successful, the payment,
together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the
industrial user. The Public Works Superintendent may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the industrial user.
§ 55.085 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent may immediately suspend a industrial
user’s discharge, after informal notice to the industrial user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The Public Works Superintendent may also
immediately suspend an industrial user’s discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
      (1)   Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an industrial
user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Public Works Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Public
Works Superintendent may allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge
when the industrial user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in §
55.086 are initiated against the industrial user.
      (2)   An industrial user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for
any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Public Works Superintendent
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§
55.081 or
55.086.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 55.086 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions in §
55.037, any industrial user who violates the following conditions is subject to
discharge termination:
      (1)   Violation of industrial wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user’s premises for
the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
55.001.
   (B)   Such industrial user will be notified of the proposed termination of
its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
55.081 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
the Public Works Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the industrial user.
§ 55.087 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When the Public Works Superintendent finds that an industrial user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Superintendent may
petition the Circuit Court for the County through the City Attorney for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction or restraining order, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
industrial wastewater discharge permit, the general permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. The
Public Works Superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the industrial
user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief or
for a restraining order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking
any other action against an industrial user.
§ 55.088 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Public
Works Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant industrial user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
will generally be in accordance with the City’s enforcement response plan.
However, the Public Works Superintendent may take other action against any
industrial user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Public Works
Superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant industrial user.
§ 55.089 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.
   The Public Works Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an
industrial wastewater discharge permit to any industrial user who has failed to
pay any outstanding fees, fines, or penalties incurred as a result of any
provision of this chapter, a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit,
or a previous general permit, or order issued hereunder.
§ 55.090 UPSET.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with Categorical
Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements
of division (C) below are met.
   (C)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workperson-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
      (3)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
Public Works Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Industrial users shall have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   (F)   Industrial users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
§ 55.091 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement
action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
55.001(A) or the specific prohibitions in §
55.001(B)(3) through (B)(18) if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass
through or interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the industrial user’s prior discharge when the
City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and, in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable biosolids use or disposal
requirements.
§ 55.092 BYPASS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) below.
   (C)   (1)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the Public Works Superintendent, at least ten
days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the Public Works
Superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Public Works
Superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
   (D)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Public Works Superintendent may
take an enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under division
(C) above.
      (2)   The Public Works Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Public Works Superintendent
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1)
above.
§ 55.093 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, general permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water
service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user’s
expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated his or her ability
to comply.
§ 55.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   An industrial user who has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of
Chapter 53,
Chapter 54, and this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall
be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty allowed under state law but
not less than $1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during
the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Public Works Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the City.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user’s violation,
corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the
industrial user, and any other factor as justice requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against an industrial user.
   (B)   (1)   An industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of
Chapter 53,
Chapter 54, and this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not
more than one year or both.
      (2)   An industrial user who willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $1,000, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than one
year or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   An industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to
Chapter 53,
Chapter 54, and this chapter, industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
Chapter 53,
Chapter 54, and this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than
one year or both.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, an industrial user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $3,000 per violation, per day or
imprisonment for not more than three years or both.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
      
75.   PARADE AND PROCESSIONS
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Applicability of state traffic laws
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Rules of road
   
70.04   Crossing private property
   
70.05   Emerging from vehicle
   
70.06   Unlawful riding
   
70.07   Clinging to vehicles
   
70.08   Use of rollerskates and rollerblades restricted
   
70.09   Skis on streets
   
70.10   Play streets
   
70.11   Damaging sidewalks and curbs
   
70.12   Obstructing streets
   
70.13   Removing glass and debris
   
70.14   Impoundment of vehicles
   
70.15   Fire District connections
   
70.16   Scheduled construction and emergency repair of City facilities
Pedestrians
   
70.30   Use of sidewalks
   
70.31   Pedestrians must use crosswalks
   
70.32   Right angles
   
70.33   Obedience to traffic lights and bridge and railroad signals
Administration and Authority
   
70.45   Powers of the Council
   
70.46   Public danger
   
70.47   Authority of law enforcement and firefighters
   
70.48   Obedience to and alteration of control devices
   
70.49   Evidence
   
70.50   Existing control devices
Uninsured Vehicles
   
70.65   Law enforcement authority
   
70.66   Conditions of release
   
70.67   Request for hearing
   
70.68   Trial for uninsured vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 APPLICABILITY OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Violation of provisions in ORS Chapters 801 through 826, as now or hereafter
constituted, shall be an offense against this City.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A nonmotorized vehicle designed to be ridden, propelled by human
power, and having two or more wheels, the diameter of which are in excess of
ten inches, or having two or more wheels, where any one wheel has a diameter in
excess of 15 inches.
   BUS STOP. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by
buses loading or unloading passengers.
   HOLIDAY. New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the Council to be a HOLIDAY.
   LOADING ZONE. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours
of specified days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors,
fork-lift trucks, motorcycles, road-building equipment, street-cleaning
equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power,
notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor
vehicle laws of the state.
   PARK or PARKING. The condition of:
      (1)   A motor vehicle that is stopped while occupied by its operator with
the engine turned off; or
      (2)   A motor vehicle that is stopped while unoccupied by its operator
whether or not the engine is turned off.
   PEDESTRIAN. A person on the public right-of-way, except:
      (1)   The operator or passenger of a motor vehicle or bicycle; or
      (2)   A person leading, driving, or riding an animal or animal-drawn
conveyance.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
   STAND or STANDING. The stopping of a motor vehicle while occupied by its
operator with the engine running, except stopping in obedience to the
instructions of a traffic officer or traffic control device or for other
traffic.
   STOP. Complete cessation of movement.
   STREET and OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
      (1)   STREET. The terms HIGHWAY, ROAD, and STREET, when used in this
chapter or in the ORS chapters incorporated herein, shall be considered
synonymous, unless the context precludes such construction. STREET, as defined
in this section and the ORS chapters incorporated by reference herein, includes
alleys, sidewalks, and parking areas and accessways owned or maintained by the
City.
      (2)   OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. Property, whether publicly or
privately owned and whether publicly or privately maintained, upon which the
public operates motor vehicles, either by express or implied invitation, other
than streets as defined in division (1) above, and excepting public school
property, County property, or property under the jurisdiction of the state’s
Board of Higher Education. OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL shall include,
but not be limited to, parking lots, service station lots, shopping center and
supermarket parking lots, and other accessways and parking areas open to
general vehicular traffic, whether or not periodically closed to public use.
   TAXICAB STAND. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use
by taxicabs.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A device to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic
or parking, including, but not limited to, a sign, signaling mechanism,
barricade, button, or street or curb marking installed by the City or other
authority.
   TRAFFIC LANE. The area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line
of traffic.
   VEHICLE. As used in subsequent sections of this traffic code, includes
bicycles.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.03 RULES OF ROAD.
   In addition to state law, the following shall apply to the operation of
vehicles upon the streets of the City.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other
traffic, and shall yield the right-of-way to moving traffic and pedestrians.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle in the traffic lane shall have the right-of-
way over an operator of a vehicle departing from a parking space.
   (C)   No operator of a vehicle shall pull away from a curb or other parking
area without giving an appropriate turn signal when other traffic may be
affected.
   (D)   Where a stop sign is erected at or near the entrance to an
intersection, the operator of a vehicle approaching shall bring the vehicle to
a stop before crossing a stop line or crosswalk; or, if none, then before
entering the intersection. Stopping at a point which does not yield an
unobstructed view of traffic on the intersecting street shall not constitute
compliance with the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Notwithstanding an indication by a traffic control device to proceed:
      (1)   No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection unless there
is sufficient space on the opposite side of the intersection to accommodate his
or her vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles; and
      (2)   No operator of a vehicle shall enter a marked crosswalk, whether or
not at an intersection, unless there is sufficient space on the opposite side
of the crosswalk to accommodate his or her vehicle without obstructing the
passage of pedestrians.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 CROSSING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting
street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the
operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or
providing goods or services.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 EMERGING FROM VEHICLE.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle into a traffic lane without
first ascertaining that it can be done in safety.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.06 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   (A)   (1)   No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride
on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or
intended for the use of passengers.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in
space intended for merchandise.
   (B)   No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion upon a street.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon a bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, rollerskates, sled, or
other device shall attach the device or himself or herself to a moving vehicle
upon a street nor shall the operator of a vehicle upon a street knowingly allow
a person riding on any of the above vehicles or devices to attach himself or
herself, the vehicle, or the device to his or her vehicle.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 USE OF ROLLERSKATES AND ROLLERBLADES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon rollerskates, rollerblades, or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any street except a play
street or except to cross at a crosswalk.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 SKIS ON STREETS.
   No person on skis, toboggans, sleds, or similar devices shall travel on any
street except play streets.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street during the hours when it
has been designated and is being used as a play street, except drivers having
business on such street or whose residences are along such street; and then
such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving on such street.
   (B)   Nominations for play streets shall be made to the City Administrator.
These nominations may be made by any resident of the community. The City
Administrator will present a play street nomination to the City Council with
staff’s recommendation for or against. Each play streets shall be approved
through a Council resolution. Each Council resolution shall determine the
specifications and parameters for operating each play street. State Department
of Transportation rights-of-way are not eligible to be play streets.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 DAMAGING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or
roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood, or other material in
the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it
as a driveway. However, a temporary driveway may be used after first obtaining
a written permit from the Superintendent of Public Works, who may impose such
requirements as are necessary to protect the public improvements within the
street at the temporary driveway.
   (C)   No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or
device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining
authorization and posting bond, if required. A person who causes damage shall
be held responsible for the cost of repair.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall obstruct the free movement of vehicles or
pedestrians using the streets.
   (B)   No person shall park or stand a vehicle in such a manner or location
that it constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction on the street.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS.
   A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other
debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the
street.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.14 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a law
enforcement officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove
it. If the vehicle is unattended, the law enforcement officer may cause the
vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storing,
notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another or that the vehicle was
initially parked in a safe manner but subsequently became an obstruction or
hazard.
   (B)   The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this
section shall be in accordance with the provisions of §§
74.01 through
74.04 and
74.99, relating to impoundment and disposition of vehicles abandoned on the
City streets.
   (C)   The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a
citation for violation of a provision of this subchapter.
   (D)   Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and
stored at the expense of the vehicle owner.
   (E)   Whenever a law enforcement officer observes a vehicle parked in
violation of a provision of this subchapter, if the vehicle has four or more
unpaid parking violations outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition
to issuing a citation, apply a tow tag and cause the vehicle to be towed. A
vehicle so towed shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges
have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this division (E) shall
be disposed of in the same manner as provided in division (B) above.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.15 FIRE DISTRICT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of property adjacent to a street
upon which has located a fire hydrant to place or maintain within three feet of
such hydrant any brush, shrub, or tree, or other obstruction.
   (B)   In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the state
prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle within ten feet of either
side of a Fire District connection device, said zone constituting an area 20
feet in length centered on the Fire District connection.
   (C)   The area designated in division (B) above shall be identified pursuant
to law or in such a manner provided by this subchapter or the Uniform Fire Code
for a no parking zone.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 SCHEDULED CONSTRUCTION AND EMERGENCY REPAIR OF CITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   No parking shall be allowed in areas of scheduled construction or
repair of City facilities; along detours caused by such construction or
repairs; and areas where such construction, repairs, or detours cause traffic
control difficulties as deemed necessary by the engineer. Temporary “NO
PARKING” signs shall be placed at least 12 hours in advance of enforcing this
no parking regulation in areas of scheduled construction or repair of City
facilities, detours, and traffic control difficulties, caused by such
construction, repairs, or detours.
   (B)   For emergency repair of City facilities, all legally parked vehicles
and any other lawfully placed obstructions, located within the street right-of-
way, for which removal has been deemed necessary to perform the repair, may be
towed or removed and stored, and the City shall pay all costs associated with
such towing and removal. The City shall also pay all the cost of said storage
for 24 hours after the owner has received notification of such action.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, this section shall be enforced pursuant to
the provisions of ordinances relating to controlling vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
PEDESTRIANS
§ 70.30 USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   A pedestrian shall not use a roadway for travel when a sidewalk is
available.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 PEDESTRIANS MUST USE CROSSWALKS.
   No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks
with marked crosswalks or if within 50 feet of a marked crosswalk.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.32 RIGHT ANGLES.
   A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle unless crossing within a
crosswalk.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LIGHTS AND BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   At an intersection where a pedestrian control light is in operation,
no pedestrian shall start to cross the street except when the walk signal is
illuminated. Where only vehicle control lights are in operation, no pedestrian
shall start to cross the street except when the green light is illuminated.
   (B)   At an intersection where a rectangular rapid flashing beacon (RRFB) is
in operation, no pedestrian shall start to cross the street until the lights
are activated.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon a railroad grade crossing, an
openable bridge, or the approach thereto beyond a crossing gate or barrier
after an operation signal indication has been given.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under a crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
ADMINISTRATION AND AUTHORITY
§ 70.45 POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Subject to state laws, the City Council shall exercise all municipal
traffic authority for the City, except those powers specifically and expressly
delegated herein or by another ordinance.
   (B)   The powers of the Council shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Designation of through streets;
      (2)   Designation of one-way streets;
      (3)   Designation of truck routes;
      (4)   Designation of parking meter zones;
      (5)   Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of
vehicle to protect the streets from damage;
      (6)   Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles
using City streets than specified by state law;
      (7)   Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones;
      (8)   Revision of speed limits in parks;
      (9)   Establish, maintain, remove, or alter traffic control signals;
      (10)   Establish, maintain, remove, or alter loading zones and stops for
all vehicles;
      (11)   Designate certain streets as bridle paths and prohibit horses and
animals on other streets; and
      (12)   Temporarily block or close streets.
   (C)   Implement the ordinances, resolutions, and motions through the City
Staff upon City owned rights-of-way by installing traffic control devices. Such
installations shall be based on the standards contained in the state’s Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways;
   (D)   Establish, maintain, remove, or alter the following classes of traffic
controls:
      (1)   Crosswalks, safety zones, and traffic lanes;
      (2)   Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles
shall not make right, left, or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition
applies; and
      (3)   Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of
permissible parking (e. g., parallel or diagonal).
   (E)   Issue oversize or overweight vehicle permits.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.46 PUBLIC DANGER.
   Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, law enforcement,
firefighters, or City Public Works may install temporary traffic-control
devices deemed to be necessary.
§ 70.47 AUTHORITY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of law enforcement officers to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In the event of a fire or other public emergency, law enforcement and
firefighters may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.48 OBEDIENCE TO AND ALTERATION OF CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall disobey the instruction of a traffic officer or a
traffic control device.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall install, move, remove, obstruct, alter
the position of, deface, or tamper with a traffic control device.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.49 EVIDENCE.
   The existence of a traffic control device shall be prima facie evidence that
the device was lawfully authorized and installed.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 70.50 EXISTING CONTROL DEVICES.
   Traffic control devices installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance
incorporated in this subchapter are lawfully authorized.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
UNINSURED VEHICLES
§ 70.65 LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   A law enforcement officer who reasonably believes that a person is driving
an uninsured vehicle in violation of ORS 806.010, is driving without a valid
driver’s license in violation of ORS 807.010(1), or is driving while their
driver’s license is suspended in violation of ORS 811.175 and 819.180, and who
issues a citation into Municipal Court to the driver for that offense may,
without prior notice, order the vehicle impounded until a person with the right
to possession of the vehicle complies with the conditions for release or the
Municipal Judge orders that the vehicle be released. The law enforcement
officer shall give notice that the vehicle has been impounded to the same
parties, in the same manner, and within the same time limits as provided in ORS
819.180, as it has been incorporated into the City Code.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 70.66 CONDITIONS OF RELEASE.
   A vehicle impounded under this subchapter shall be released to a person
entitled to lawful possession upon proof of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirements for the vehicle, payment to the City Recorder a fee
of $350, and payment of any towing and storage changes.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 70.67 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   A person entitled to lawful possession of a vehicle impounded pursuant to
the code may request a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment. A
request must be made within five calendar days of the impoundment. The request
shall be made to the City Recorder. When a timely request for a hearing is
made, a hearing shall be held before the Municipal Court of the City. The
hearing shall be set for the next available Municipal Court date, but may be
postponed at the request of the person asking for the hearing.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 70.68 TRIAL FOR UNINSURED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The impounding law enforcement officer shall have the burden of
proving, by a preponderance of evidence, that there were reasonable grounds to
believe that the vehicle was being operated in violation of ORS 806.010.
   (B)   If the Judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was proper, the
Judge shall enter an order supporting the removal and shall find that the owner
or person in possession of the vehicle is liable for the usual and customary
towing and storage costs. The Judge may also find the owner or person in
possession of the vehicle liable for costs of the hearing. Such costs of the
hearing shall become a lien upon the vehicle.
   (C)   If the Judge finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was improper,
the Judge shall order the vehicle released to the person entitled to possession
and shall enter a finding that the owner or person entitled to possession of
the vehicle is not liable for any towing or storage costs resulting from the
impoundment; and, if there is a lien on the vehicle for towing and storage
charges, the Judge shall order it paid by the City.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Except as may be limited by City Charter, violations of ORS provisions
made offenses against this City are punishable as established under ORS
153.019.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Driver’s duties
   
71.02   Exhaust brakes
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   Careless driving; reckless driving; driving under influence of intoxicating
liquor, dangerous drugs, or narcotic drugs; and a driver’s duties at an
accident are defined under state law and shall be enforced by law enforcement
accordingly.
§ 71.02 EXHAUST BRAKES.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the City in a manner that
creates or causes excessive noise. Any manner of braking, including, but not
limited to, dynamic braking devices, exhaust braking, compression braking, or
Jake or Jacob braking shall be considered excessive noise and a violation of
this section.
(Ord. 614, passed 6-5-2008) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to this code of ordinances or
in accordance with state law.
   (B)   A violation of §
71.02 shall be a Class D traffic violation or in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 614, passed 6-5-2008)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Designation of parking and standing
   
72.02   Method of parking
   
72.03   Prohibited parking and standing
   
72.04   Prohibited parking
   
72.05   Use of loading zone
   
72.06   Leaving unattended vehicle
   
72.07   Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated
   
72.08   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands
   
72.09   Lights on parked vehicle
   
72.10   Extension of parking time
   
72.11   Exemption
   
72.12   Commercial vehicles parking in residential zone
Citations and Owner Responsibility
   
72.25   Citation on illegally parked vehicle
   
72.26   Owner responsibility
   
72.27   Registered owner presumption
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DESIGNATIONS OF PARKING AND STANDING.
   (A)   The City Council may designate the parking and standing of vehicles
by:
      (1)   Prohibitions and hours restrictions. Classifying portions of
streets and alleys upon which either parking or standing or both shall be
prohibited or prohibited during certain hours;
      (2)   Time limits. Establishing the time limit for legal parking in
limited parking areas;
      (3)   Common carrier stands. Establishing bus stops, bus stands, taxicab
stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles;
      (4)   Passenger loading zones. Designating the location of passenger
loading zones for use in front of the entrance to any hotel, auditorium,
theater, church, school, or public building; and/or
      (5)   Public parking. Designating City-owned or City-leased lots or
property on which public parking will be permitted or restricted.
   (B)   In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the state
prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle in an alley except to load
or unload persons or materials for not to exceed 30 consecutive minutes. In
addition, no person shall park so as to block access to private driveways or
any portion of a public sidewalk.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle in a public parking lot in violation of
the posted restrictions. No person shall park in a public parking lot except in
a designated parking space.
   (D)   In addition to provisions of motor vehicle laws of the state
prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle in an area that has been
designated for compact cars only, which is greater in overall length of 16 feet
and/or is greater in overall height than five feet.
   (E)   Unless otherwise provided, this section shall be enforced pursuant to
the provisions of ordinances relating to controlling vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 METHOD OF PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches
of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle
parking.
   (B)   Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and, unless the
size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, within a single
marked space.
   (C)   The operator who first begins maneuvering his or her motor vehicle
into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that
space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to deprive him or her of his
or her priority or block his or her access.
   (D)   Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his or her vehicle
is parked close to a building to which the Fire District has been summoned, he
or she shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise
directed by law enforcement and firefighters.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973; Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 PROHIBITED PARKING AND STANDING.
   In addition to the state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking, no operator
shall park and no owner shall allow his or her vehicle to be parked:
   (A)   On a street in excess of an established time limit for parking on such
street;
   (B)   Upon a bridge, viaduct, or other elevated structure used as a street
unless authorized;
   (C)   In an alley except for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons
or materials, but in no case for a period in excess of 20 consecutive minutes
in any two-hour period;
   (D)   Adjacent to any yellow or red curb painted to restrict parking;
   (E)   In any part of the street designed for the flow of traffic (a traffic
lane);
   (F)   On any sidewalk or crosswalk; or
   (G)   Blocking access or egress to or from any public or private drive or
driveway.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon
a street for the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an
emergency;
   (C)   Displaying advertising from the vehicle; and/or
   (D)   Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973; Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 USE OF LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time,
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in
a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading
zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone
are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the
time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone
shall not exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 LEAVING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   No operator or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall park it or allow it
to be parked on a street, on other property open to public travel, or on a new
or used car lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the ignition key from the vehicle, and effectively setting the brake.
If the vehicle is attended, the ignition key need not be removed.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 STANDING OR PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a
street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab
stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator
of a taxicab from temporarily stopping his or her vehicle outside a traffic
lane while loading or unloading passengers.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab
stand or a bus in a bus stop; except that the operator of a passenger vehicle
may temporarily stop for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading
or unloading passengers, when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab
waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLE.
   No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with
this subchapter upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a
person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 EXTENSION OF PARKING TIME.
   Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a
vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to a vehicle of the City, County, or state or public
utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street,
or a vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection,
transportation, or delivery of mail.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Commercial vehicle parking in residential zone.
      (1)   This section applies to the following vehicles: any truck, tractor,
trailer, tractor-trailer, bus, or combination having a height of greater than
nine feet or a length of greater than 20 feet, hereinafter referred to
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE(S). This section applies to the following zones: Low Density
Residential (R-1), Medium Density Residential (R-2), and High Density
Residential (R-3), hereinafter referred to as RESIDENTIAL ZONE(S).
      (2)   Except as provided in this section, no person shall park a
commercial vehicle, nor shall the owner of any commercial vehicle allow a
commercial vehicle to be parked, on any street or public place located
partially or wholly within a residential zone.
      (3)   Exceptions:
         (a)   Moving vans that are being actively loaded and/or unloaded; and
         (b)   Unless parking is otherwise prohibited, between sunrise and
sunset, commercial vehicles parked for the purpose of loading and/or unloading,
but for a period not to exceed two hours. The City Administrator may extend
this time on a case-by-case basis.
      (4)   Commercial vehicles may be stored on private property located
within a residential zone subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Located within a garage or carport; or
         (b)   Parked or placed in accordance with the lot coverage and yard
setback standards in accordance with the zone in which the properly is located.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
vehicle owned by a state, City, or County agency or a public utility while in
the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2012)
CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY
§ 72.25 CITATION ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a
restriction imposed by this subchapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall
take its license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle
which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a
traffic citation for the operator to answer to the charge against him or her or
pay the penalty imposed within 30 days, during the hours and at a place
specified in the citation.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 72.26 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be
responsible for the offense, except where the use of the vehicle was secured by
the operator without the owner’s consent.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 72.27 REGISTERED OWNER PRESUMPTION.
   In a prosecution of a vehicle owner, charging a violation of a restriction
on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered
to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that he or she was then the
owner in fact.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §§
72.01 through
72.12 shall be a Class 4 violation. If a parking ticket is not paid within 30
days of the violation, the fine shall increase by $10. If a parking ticket is
not paid within 60 days of the violation, the fine shall increase by $30.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2012)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Recreational Vehicles
   
73.01   Definition
   
73.02   Failure to use bicycle lane or path; exceptions
   
73.03   Improper use of lanes; exceptions
   
73.04   Failure to signal turn; exceptions
   
73.05   Unlawful passengers on bicycle
   
73.06   Failure to use bicycle seat
   
73.07   Non-motorized vehicle clinging to another vehicle
   
73.08   Failure to wear protective headgear
   
73.09   Endangering non-motorized vehicle operator or passenger
   
73.10   Violation of non-motorized vehicle equipment requirements
   
73.11   Passing stopped vehicle at crosswalk
   
73.12   Improper operation of non-motorized vehicle on sidewalk
   
73.13   Failure to stop and remain stopped for pedestrian
   
73.14   Unsafe operation of non-motorized vehicle on sidewalk
   
73.15   Failure to obey traffic control device
 
   
73.99   Penalty
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 73.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Includes any bicycle, roller skates, coaster,
rollerblades, skateboard, scooter, or any other non-motorized device designed
to be ridden.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012)
§ 73.02 FAILURE TO USE BICYCLE LANE OR PATH; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of failure to use a bicycle lane or path
if the person operates a non-motorized vehicle on any portion of a roadway that
is not a bicycle lane or bicycle path when a bicycle lane or bicycle path is
adjacent to or near the roadway.
   (B)   A person is not in violation of the offense under this section if the
person is able to safely move out of the bicycle lane or path for the purpose
of:
      (1)   Overtaking and passing another non-motorized vehicle, a vehicle or
a pedestrian that is in the bicycle lane or path, and passage cannot safely be
made in the lane or path;
      (2)   Preparing to execute a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway;
      (3)   Avoiding debris or other hazardous conditions;
      (4)   Preparing to execute a right turn where a right turn is authorized;
and/or
      (5)   Continuing straight at an intersection where the bicycle lane or
path is to the right of a lane from which a motor vehicle must turn right.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 IMPROPER USE OF LANES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of improper use of lanes by a bicycle if
the person is operating a bicycle on a roadway at less than the normal speed of
traffic and the person does not ride as close as practicable to the right curb
or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   A person is not in violation of the offense under this section if the
person is not operating a bicycle as close as practicable to the right curb or
edge of the roadway under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle that is
proceeding in the same direction;
      (2)   When preparing to execute a left turn;
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid hazardous conditions including,
but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or other conditions that make
continued operation along the right curb or edge unsafe or to avoid unsafe
operation in a lane on the roadway that is too narrow for a bicycle and vehicle
to travel safely side by side. Nothing in this division (B)(3) excuses the
operator of a bicycle from the requirements under ORS 811.425 or from the
penalties for failure to comply with those requirements;
      (4)   When operating within a city as near as practicable to the left
curb or edge of a roadway that is designated to allow traffic to move in only
one direction along the roadway. A bicycle that is operated under this division
(B)(4) is subject to the same requirements and exceptions when operating along
the left curb or edge as are applicable when a bicycle is operating along the
right curb or edge of the roadway;
      (5)   When operating a bicycle alongside not more than one other bicycle
as long as the bicycles are both being operated within a single lane and in a
manner that does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic; and
      (6)   When operating on a bicycle lane or path.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 FAILURE TO SIGNAL TURN; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of failure to signal for a bicycle turn
if the person does any of the following:
      (1)   Stops a bicycle the person is operating without giving the
appropriate hand and arm signal continuously for at least 100 feet before
executing the stop;
      (2)   Executes a turn on a bicycle the person is operating without giving
the appropriate hand and arm signal for the turn for at least 100 feet before
executing the turn; and/or
      (3)   Executes a turn on a bicycle the person is operating after having
been stopped without giving, while stopped, the appropriate hand and arm signal
for the turn.
   (B)   A person is not in violation of the offense under this section if the
person is operating a bicycle and does not give the appropriate signal
continuously for a stop or turn because circumstances require that both hands
be used to safely control or operate the bicycle.
   (C)   The appropriate hand and arm signals for indicating turns and stops
under this section are those provided for other vehicles under ORS 811.395 and
811.400.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 UNLAWFUL PASSENGERS ON BICYCLE.
   A person commits the offense of unlawful passengers on a bicycle if the
person operates a bicycle and carries more persons on the bicycle than the
number for which it is designed or safely equipped.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 FAILURE TO USE BICYCLE SEAT.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of failure to use a bicycle seat if the
person is operating a bicycle and the person rides other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle.
   (B)   A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device is
not subject to this section.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE CLINGING TO ANOTHER VEHICLE.
   A person commits the offense of non-motorized vehicle clinging to another
vehicle if the person is riding upon or operating a non-motorized vehicle and
the person clings to another vehicle upon a roadway or attaches that which the
person is riding or operating to any other vehicle upon a roadway.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 FAILURE TO WEAR PROTECTIVE HEADGEAR.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of failure of a non-motorized vehicle
operator or rider to wear protective headgear if the person is under 16 years
of age, operates or rides on a non-motorized vehicle on a highway or on
premises open to the public, and is not wearing protective headgear of a type
approved under ORS 815.052.
   (B)   Law enforcement officers may choose to provide helmets to children
without them, per the City’s policy, using the City provided helmets.
   (C)   Exemptions from this section are provided in ORS 814.487.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 ENDANGERING NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE OPERATOR OR PASSENGER.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of endangering a non-motorized vehicle
operator or passenger if:
      (1)   The person is operating a non-motorized vehicle on a highway or on
premises open to the public and the person carries another person on the
bicycle who is under 16 years of age and is not wearing protective headgear of
a type approved under ORS 815.052; or
      (2)   The person is the parent, legal guardian, or person with legal
responsibility for the safety and welfare of a child under 16 years of age, and
the child operates or rides on a non-motorized vehicle on a highway or on
premises open to the public without wearing protective headgear of a type
approved under ORS 815.052.
   (B)   Exemptions from this section are provided in ORS 814.487.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 VIOLATION OF NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of violation of non-motorized vehicle
equipment requirements if the person does any of the following:
      (1)   Operates on any highway a non-motorized vehicle in violation of the
requirements of this section; or
      (2)   Is the parent or guardian of a minor child or ward and authorizes
or knowingly permits the child or ward to operate a non-motorized vehicle on
any highway in violation of the requirements of this section.
   (B)   A non-motorized vehicle is operated in violation of the requirements
of this section if any of the following requirements are violated:
      (1)   A bicycle must be equipped with a brake that enables the operator
to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement;
      (2)   A person shall not install or use any siren or whistle upon a non-
motorized vehicle; and
      (3)   At the times described in the following, a bicycle or its rider
must be equipped with lighting equipment that meets the described requirements:
         (a)   The lighting equipment must be used during limited visibility
conditions;
         (b)   The lighting equipment must show a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front of the bicycle; and
         (c)   The lighting equipment must have a red reflector or lighting
device or material of such size or characteristic and so mounted as to be
visible from all distances up to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional parts and accessories on any non-motorized vehicle consistent
with this section.
   (D)   This section does not apply to electric personal assistive mobility
devices. Equipment requirements for electric personal assistive mobility
devices are provided in ORS 815.284.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 PASSING STOPPED VEHICLE AT CROSSWALK.
   The operator of any non-motorized vehicle commits the offense of passing a
stopped vehicle at a crosswalk if the driver:
   (A)   Approaches from the rear another vehicle that is stopped at a marked
or an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway; and
   (B)   Overtakes and passes the stopped vehicle.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 IMPROPER OPERATION OF NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   The operator of any non-motorized vehicle commits the offense of
improper operation of non-motorized vehicle if:
      (1)   The operator does not yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a
sidewalk;
      (2)   The operator parks a bicycle upon a street or sidewalk, except in a
rack. If no rack is provided, the bicycle shall be parked in such a manner as
to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic and located
outside the through pedestrian zone; and/or
      (3)   The operator rides or operates a non-motorized vehicle upon a
sidewalk in a designated design district.
   (B)   Exemptions from this section include law enforcement officers and
police reserve officers in the furtherance of their duties.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.13 FAILURE TO STOP AND REMAIN STOPPED FOR PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   The operator of any non-motorized vehicle commits the offense of
failure to stop and remain stopped for a pedestrian if the operator does not
stop and remain stopped for a pedestrian when the pedestrian is:
      (1)   Proceeding in accordance with a traffic control device as provided
under ORS 814.010 or crossing the roadway in a crosswalk, as defined in ORS
801.220; and
      (2)   In any of the following locations:
         (a)   In the lane in which the operator’s vehicle is traveling; and/or
         (b)   In the lane into which the operator’s vehicle is turning.
   (B)   This section does not require a driver to stop and remain stopped for
a pedestrian under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon a roadway with a safety island, if the operator is proceeding
along the half of the roadway on the far side of the safety island from the
pedestrian; or
      (2)   Where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing has been provided at
or near a crosswalk.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.14 UNSAFE OPERATION OF NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unsafe operation of a non-motorized
vehicle on a sidewalk if the person does any of the following:
      (1)   Operates the non-motorized vehicle so as to suddenly leave a curb
or other place of safety and move into the path of a vehicle that is so close
as to constitute an immediate hazard;
      (2)   Operates a non-motorized vehicle upon a sidewalk and does not give
an audible warning before overtaking and passing a pedestrian and does not
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on the sidewalk;
      (3)   Operates a non-motorized vehicle on a sidewalk in a careless manner
that endangers or would be likely to endanger any person or property;
      (4)   Operates the non-motorized vehicle at a speed greater than an
ordinary walk when approaching or entering a crosswalk, approaching or crossing
a driveway, or crossing a curb cut or pedestrian ramp and a motor vehicle is
approaching the crosswalk, driveway, curb cut, or pedestrian ramp. This
division (A)(4) does not require reduced speeds for bicycles at places on
sidewalks or other pedestrian ways other than places where the path for
pedestrians or bicycle traffic approaches or crosses that for motor vehicle
traffic; and/or
      (5)   Operates an electric assisted bicycle on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, a non-motorized
vehicle operator on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk has the same rights and duties
as a pedestrian on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.15 FAILURE TO OBEY TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   A non-motorized vehicle commits the offense of failure to obey traffic
control devices if the non-motorized vehicle operator does any of the
following:
   (A)   Fails to obey any traffic control device specifically applicable to:
      (1)   Vehicles, if operating on a roadway; or
      (2)   Pedestrians, if operating on a sidewalk or crosswalk.
   (B)   Fails to obey any specific traffic control device described in ORS
814.010 in the manner required by that section.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   The offenses described in §§
73.01 through
73.15 are Class D violations and are enforceable through state statutes.
(Ord. 632, passed 11-7-2012)
CHAPTER 74: ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Abandoned vehicles or other property on public property or the public
right-of-way
   
74.03   Abandoned vehicles on private property
   
74.04   Notice
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any vehicle in one or more of the following conditions:
         (a)   Inoperative;
         (b)   Wrecked;
         (c)   Dismantled or partially dismantled;
         (d)   Junked;
         (e)   Without evidence of current registration or insurance; if parked
on public streets, rights-of-way, public property, or on private property
without the owner’s permission;
         (f)   Reported as stolen, or with four or more outstanding unpaid
parking violations;
         (g)   In such condition or state that the vehicle cannot be legally
operated on the public roads and highways of the state, as established in ORS
815.100 through 815.200, and ORS Chapter 816; or
         (h)   As defined in accordance with ORS 819.100.
      (2)   Abandoned vehicles include major parts of vehicles including, but
not limited to, car bodies, engines, transmissions, axles, differentials,
fenders, wheels, tires, batteries, windows/windshields, hoods, and driveshaft.
   PROPERTY OWNER. An individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated
association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or an
interest, legal or equitable, in real property on which an abandoned vehicle is
stored.
   VEHICLE. Any device in upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public road or highway, and includes VEHICLES that
are propelled or powered by any means other than devices moved by human power.
VEHICLE does not include a manufactured structure. A further definition of a
VEHICLE, as applicable to this chapter, may be found in ORS 801.590.
   VEHICLE OPERATOR, REGISTERED OWNER, or RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An individual,
firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with a claim, either
individually or jointly, of ownership or interest, be it legal or equitable in
a vehicle, to include, but not limited to, the use or operation, storage,
maintenance or upkeep, or licensing or insuring of a vehicle.
(Ord. 665, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 74.02 ABANDONED VEHICLES OR OTHER PROPERTY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR THE PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No person may store or permit to be stored a vehicle or other personal
property believe to be disabled or abandoned in the same location on the public
right-of-way or other public property in excess of 24 hours, or as defined in
ORS 819.110, without permission of the local law enforcement entity or City
Administrator.
   (B)   Failure to operate and/or move such vehicle off of the block face, or
right-of-way along the property line, or public property within a 24-hour
period, or as defined in ORS 819.110 through 819.120, constitutes a prima facie
evidence of storage and may be abated.
   (C)   (1)   Any unattended, stored, or abandoned vehicle that is placed in a
manner or location that constitutes an obstruction, hazard, or an impediment to
traffic or to public safety shall, at the discretion of the investigating
officer, be towed immediately, without prior notice, per ORS 819.110 through
819.120.
      (2)   Any vehicle may be towed in accordance with ORS 819.110 through
819.120 after a “Notice of Intent to Tow” has been affixed to the vehicle, if
the vehicle is stored, abandoned, or parked in violation of any parking
regulation.
      (3)   In accordance with ORS 819.110 through 819.120, any vehicle may be
towed within 24 hours of a notice of towing being applied to the vehicle.
   (D)   A “Notice of Towed Vehicle” shall be mailed by certified mail to the
registered owner of record within 48 hours of the towing not including
holidays, Saturdays, and Sundays. The registered owner may repossess the
vehicle within 45 days upon payment of all towing fees, miscellaneous fees, and
a $350 fine. The owner is also responsible for all costs of removal and storage
per ORS 819.150.
   (E)   The “Notice of Intent to Tow” and “Notice of Towed Vehicle” shall
contain the information required in §
72.04.
   (F)   If, after 45 days, no one has claimed the towed vehicle, the City may
authorize the sale thereof in accordance with the provisions of any relevant
and authorized towing contract. In the absence of any such contract, the City
Administrator may authorize the public sale thereof in accordance with the
appropriate state regulations.
(Ord. 665, passed 10-7-2020) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.03 ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prohibited action. No person shall store or permit the storage of a
discarded, abandoned, or inoperative vehicle for more than seven days upon
private property within the City, except for no more than one vehicle that may
be in an inoperative state for not more than 60 days while undergoing repairs/
rehabilitation, or unless said vehicles are parked in a wholly enclosed
building or are screened from public view in accordance with Chapter 90 or
unless it is in connection with a lawfully conducted and licensed business
dealing in vehicle repair or junked vehicles.
   (B)   Entry on private property. A law enforcement officer is authorized to
enter onto private property at all reasonable times and examine a vehicle to
determine if it is an abandoned vehicle. Except when an emergency exists,
before entering onto private property, the law enforcement officer shall obtain
the consent of an occupant, or upon obtaining a warrant from the Municipal
Court authorizing entry.
   (C)   Notice. The owner of any such abandoned vehicle, or the property owner
on which the vehicle is stored if the vehicle owner is not found, shall be
provided a written notice by personal service or certified mail that the
vehicle is in violation of this chapter. The investigating officer shall place
a notice on the windshield or some other easily visible part of the vehicle and
mail or deliver a notice to the owner of the real property where the abandoned
vehicle is located.
   (D)   Appeal. The recipient of any such violation notice may file an appeal
to the City Council within five business days of receipt of said notice. The
filing of an appeal shall suspend all action until the next regularly scheduled
Municipal Court date.
(Ord. 665, passed 10-7-2020) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 NOTICE.
   (A)   Before towing. “Notice of Intent to Tow” provided to an abandoned
vehicle owner or property owner/responsible person where abandoned vehicles are
located shall consist of a posting of the “Notice of Intent to Tow” on or near
the vehicle, with all of the information required in ORS 819.170. This includes
the following information:
      (1)   The vehicle will be subject to being taken into custody and towed
by the appropriate authority if the vehicle is not removed before the time set
by the appropriate authority;
      (2)   The statute, ordinance, or rule violated by the vehicle and under
which the vehicle will be towed;
      (3)   The place where the vehicle will be held in custody or the
telephone number and address of the appropriate authority that will provide the
information;
      (4)   The vehicle, if taken into custody and towed by the appropriate
authority, will be subject to towing and storage charges and that a lien will
attach to the vehicle and its contents;
      (5)   The vehicle will be sold to satisfy the costs of towing and
storage, if the charges are not paid;
      (6)   The owner, possessor, or person having an interest in the vehicle
is entitled to a hearing, before the vehicle is impounded, to contest the
proposed custody and towing if a hearing is timely requested;
      (7)   The owner, possessor, or person having an interest in the vehicle
may also challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at the
hearing;
      (8)   The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method
for requesting a hearing; and
      (9)   Date and time of the notice and name of the law enforcement officer
posting the notice.
   (B)   After towing. Notice to vehicle owners of towed vehicle and property
owners where the towed vehicles are located shall consist of a certified
mailing with all of the information required in ORS 819.180. This includes the
following information:
      (1)   The vehicle has been taken into custody and towed; the identity of
the appropriate authority that took the vehicle into custody and towed the
vehicle; and the statute, ordinance, or rule under which the vehicle has been
taken into custody and towed;
      (2)   The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of
the appropriate authority that will provide the information;
      (3)   The vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of
charges that have accrued to the date of the notice, and the daily storage
charges;
      (4)   The vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of
the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be
sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date specified by
the appropriate authority;
      (5)   The owner, possessor, or person having an interest in the vehicle
and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of
taking the vehicle into custody and towing it and to contest the reasonableness
of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely requested;
      (6)   The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method
for requesting a hearing; and
      (7)   The vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by
presentation to the appropriate authority of satisfactory proof of ownership or
right to possession and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the
deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the appropriate
authority.
(Ord. 665, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The property owner/responsible person where the abandoned vehicle is
located shall receive an initial notice. If, after a declaration of public
nuisance and the expiration of 15 days, a “Notice of Intent to Tow” shall be
affixed to the abandoned vehicle in accordance with §
74.04. Five calendar days after providing such notice or five days after the
Municipal Judge has denied any appeal, the City will have the authority and
jurisdiction to tow the abandoned vehicle and/or remove any parts. Where there
is credible evidence that the owner/responsible person of the property on which
the vehicle is parked is out of town or otherwise unavailable, then the City
shall defer towing the vehicle until such time as the owner/responsible person
returns or is available to take action. Abatement action may be performed by
City employees or their designee. No person shall interfere with, hinder, or
refuse to allow authorized persons to enter private property for the purpose of
removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. Any person so
interfering shall be cited and subject to a $200 fine.
   (B)   After removing the vehicle, the City shall so notify the vehicle owner
of record, as well as the property owner. The vehicle owner may repossess the
vehicle upon payment of all towing fees, contractor charges, miscellaneous
fees, and a $350 fine. In addition, the owner must show possession of a current
vehicle registration and proper insurance. The owner is also responsible for
all costs of removal and storage per ORS 819.150.
   (C)   If after 45 days, or no one has claimed the towed vehicle, the City
may authorize the public sale thereof in accordance with the appropriate state
regulations.
   (D)   Should the public sale of the vehicle and the payment of a $350 fine
fail to compensate the City for all towing fees, contractor fees, miscellaneous
fees, and charges, then the City shall notify the owner of the real property
from which the abated vehicle was towed, the amount of any outstanding balance
due. The property owner shall have ten business days to appeal an assessment to
the Municipal Judge upon the payment of a $20 fee. Within 30 calendar days from
the date of the notice of assessment, or a decision by the Municipal Judge to
uphold an assessment, the property owner shall pay the assessment or a lien
shall be placed upon his or her real property which shall accrue 7% annual
compound interest until paid in full.
(Ord. 665, passed 10-7-2020)
CHAPTER 75: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Section
   
75.01   Prohibited activity
   
75.02   Parade permit
   
75.03   Appeal to Council
   
75.04   Offenses against parade
   
75.05   Permit revocable
   
75.06   Funeral procession
§ 75.01 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   No person shall organize or participate in a parade which may disrupt
or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit.
   (B)   A permit shall always be required for a procession of people utilizing
the public right-of-way and consisting of 15 or more persons or five or more
vehicles.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 75.02 PARADE PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for parade permits shall be made to the City Recorder at
least 15 days prior to the intended date of the parade unless the time is
waived by him or her.
   (B)   Parades held on Oregon Highway 99W or 153 require the requestor to
obtain a permit from the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT).
   (C)   Applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed
parade;
      (2)   The date of the proposed parade;
      (3)   The desired route, including assembling points;
      (4)   The number of persons, vehicles, and animals which will be
participating in the parade;
      (5)   The proposed starting and ending time; and
      (6)   The application shall be signed by the person designated as
chairperson.
   (D)   If the City Administrator, upon receipt of the application, determines
that the parade can be conducted without endangering public safety and without
seriously inconveniencing the general public, he or she shall approve the route
and issue the permit.
   (E)   If the City Administrator determines that the parade cannot be
conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the
general public, he or she may:
      (1)   Propose an alternate route;
      (2)   Propose an alternate date; and/or
      (3)   Refuse to issue a parade permit.
   (F)   The City Administrator shall notify the applicant of his or her
decision within five days of receipt of the application.
   (G)   If the City Administrator proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a
permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal his or her decision to the
City Council.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 75.03 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Administrator by
filing a written request of appeal with the City Recorder within five days
after the City Administrator has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a
permit.
   (B)   The Council shall schedule a hearing date which shall not be later
than the second regular session following the filing of the written appeal with
the City Recorder, and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he
or she may appear either in person or by a representative.
   (C)   An applicant must appeal permits for Oregon Highway 99W or 153 to
ODOT.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 75.04 OFFENSES AGAINST PARADE.
   (A)   No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade
participant.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between
the vehicles or persons comprising a parade.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 75.05 PERMIT REVOCABLE.
   The City Administrator may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly
show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
§ 75.06 FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (A)   A permit shall not be required to conduct a funeral procession.
   (B)   The procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most
direct route which is both legal and practicable.
   (C)   The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for
traffic control purposes.
   (D)   All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their
lights turned on.
   (E)   No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.
   (F)   No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession
between the vehicles of a funeral procession.
(Ord. 372, passed 6-4-1973)
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck regulations
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. A motor vehicle that is primarily designed or used for
carrying loads other than passengers.
      TRUCK TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and constructed so as not to carry any load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle or load or both, as drawn.
      TRUCK TRAILER. Any trailer designed and used primarily for carrying loads
other than passengers, whether designed as a balance trailer, pole trailer,
semitrailer, or self-supporting trailer.
   (B)   Traffic prohibited. Motor truck, truck tractor, or truck trailer
traffic over ten tons is prohibited on the following streets:
Street
Street
Barney Alley
Church Street
East Second Avenue
Enos Street
Jellison Avenue
Ketchum Street
Oak Street, south from Roth Street
Roth Street
Second Street from Trade Street west to railroad tracks
Thatcher Street
Third Street from Trade Street west to railroad tracks
West Second Street
West Third Street
Woodland Way
 
   (C)   Parking prohibited. Motor truck, truck tractor, or truck trailer
parking is prohibited on the following streets:
 
Street
Same as enumerated in division (B) above
Fourth Street from Trade Street west to railroad tracks
 
   (D)   Class D traffic infraction. Violation of any of the above provisions
is a Class D traffic infraction.
   (E)   Exemptions. Motor trucks used expressly for garbage collection,
delivery, or moving are exempt from the prohibitions of this schedule.
(Ord. 658, passed 10-3-2018 ; Ord. 673, passed 4-6-2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND TREES
      
93.   RECREATION FACILITIES
      
94.   LIBRARY
      
95.   CAMPING
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Nuisances affecting public health
Nuisances Affecting Public Safety
   
90.15   Prohibited hazards
   
90.16   Snow and ice removal
   
90.17   Unauthorized dumping
   
90.18   Sifting or leaking loads
   
90.19   Fences
   
90.20   Surface waters; drainage
   
90.21   Grass, shrubbery, weeds, and noxious growth
Nuisances Affecting the Public Peace and Welfare
   
90.35   Unnecessary noise
   
90.36   Radio and television interference
   
90.37   Notices, advertisements, and unauthorized markings
   
90.38   Junk
   
90.39   Abandoned or derelict vehicles
   
90.40   Excessive vehicle parking
   
90.41   Unenumerated nuisances
Enforcement
   
90.55   Cumulative remedies
   
90.56   Civil infraction assessment
   
90.57   Abatement
   
90.58   Joint responsibility
   
90.59   Abatement by City
   
90.60   Assessment of costs
   
90.61   Notice
   
90.62   Separate violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or the
supervision of any construction project.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The person responsible for abating a nuisance shall
include any or all of the following:
      (1)   The owner of the property upon which the nuisance exists;
      (2)   The person in charge of property, as defined above; and
      (3)   The person who caused to come into or continues in existence a
nuisance as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of this City.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A building, way, place, or accommodation, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the general public.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.02 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH.
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting public health on
property owned or controlled by the person.
   (B)   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting the public
health and may be abated in the manner prescribed by §§
90.41 to 90.58:
      (1)   Privies. Any open vault or privy maintained within the City, except
those privies used in connection with construction projects and constructed in
accordance with the state health regulations;
      (2)   Debris or accumulation of solid waste on private property. All
animal carcasses and accumulations of debris; rubbish, manure, and other refuse
located on privately owned real property or sidewalks abutting thereon, and
which has not been removed within 48 hours and which may affect the health of
the City. All solid waste shall be removed from private property weekly or at
other reasonable intervals so as to prevent spillage, the escape of odors, and
conditions that would attract pests. Solid waste containers shall be equipped
with covers sufficient to keep out water and to prevent disturbance by animals
or the entrance of pests;
      (3)   Stagnant water. Any pool of water that affords a breeding place for
mosquitoes and other similar insect pests;
      (4)   Water pollution. The pollution of any body of water, stream, well,
drainage ditch, storm drain, or river by sewage, industrial wastes, or other
substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful
material to pollute the water;
      (5)   Food. Decayed or unwholesome food or food products which is offered
for human consumption;
      (6)   Odor. Any premises which are in such state or condition as to cause
a noisome or offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition;
      (7)   Putrescible wastes. Putrescible wastes not removed at least every
seven days;
      (8)   Disease. Animals or birds afflicted with communicable diseases;
      (9)   Sewer system. Mastics, oil, grease, petroleum, solvents, or
industrial cleaning products allowed to be introduced into the sewer system;
      (10)   Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises;
      (11)   Unsanitary pets. Animals or birds maintained, kept, or housed in
such a number or manner as to create offensive odor, noise, or unsanitary
condition;
      (12)   Pests. Premises infested or habituated by animals or insects
detrimental to human concerns, including, but not limited to, cockroaches,
rodents, rats, or vermin; and
      (13)   Burning. Open burning of the following materials: wet garbage;
plastic; asbestos; wire insulation; automobile parts; asphalt; petroleum
treated materials; painted wood and wood treated with creosote or
pentachlorophenol; rubber products including tires; animal remains; animal or
vegetable matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or service
of food; or any other material that emits dense smoke or noxious odors.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY
§ 90.15 PROHIBITED HAZARDS.
   (A)   No person shall allow, cause, create, permit, or suffer a nuisance
affecting public safety on private or public property.
   (B)   The following are not exclusive but illustrative of nuisances
affecting public safety and may be abated as provided in this subchapter:
      (1)   Woodpiles, wood, lumber, rocks, bricks, blocks, or metal within the
streets or alleys or upon the sidewalks or planting strips for a period of time
longer than 24 hours after placement of such material without first obtaining a
permit from the City;
      (2)   A container with a compartment of more than one cubic foot capacity
with a door or lid that locks or fastens automatically when closed that cannot
be easily opened from the inside, maintained or left in a place accessible to
children;
      (3)   A well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth of
four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more uncovered, not fenced,
or without a suitable protective construction or otherwise creating an
attractive nuisance which might present harm to children;
      (4)   Unguarded machinery, equipment, or other devices appealing,
dangerous, and accessible to children unless protected by a fence, structure,
or other protective device(s) or otherwise creating an attractive nuisance
which might present harm to children;
      (5)   Lumber, logs, or other materials piled or placed or stored in a
manner to be appealing, dangerous, and accessible to children;
      (6)   Excavations remaining open and unattended without erecting proper
safeguards or barriers;
      (7)   (a)   Buildings or structures that are damaged decrepit or lack
structural integrity or pose a safety or health hazard because of damaged or
inadequate wiring or non-operational or inadequate water or wastewater
facilities and are certified as hazardous structures by the City’s Building
Inspector.
         (b)   Any structure which requires a building permit under state law
shall be presumed to be hazardous if it was built without required permit.
      (8)   Any residential structure without a street number that is displayed
in a position that is easily observable and read from the public right-of-way;
and
      (9)   (a)   Any structure or improvement to land constructed without a
building permit but for which a building permit was required under the laws of
the state, City ordinances, and codes when the non-permitted structure was
constructed (a “non-permitted structure”) is a nuisance affecting public
safety. This rule applies to all non-permitted structures regardless of when it
was constructed.
         (b)   The nuisance caused by a non-permitted structure may be abated
by the owner of the premises obtaining and by paying for the appropriate
permits and inspections, provided the nuisance will not be abated until the
structure is in compliance with all current laws of the state, City ordinances,
and codes. This remedy is not exclusive of other remedies allowed by City
ordinance for the abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.16 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   No owner or person in charge of any premises, improved or unimproved,
abutting upon any public sidewalk shall permit:
   (A)   Any snow to remain on such sidewalk for a period longer than the first
two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen; and/or
   (B)   Any such sidewalk to be covered with ice. It shall be the duty of any
such person to remove any ice accumulating on such sidewalk or to properly
cover it with sand, ashes, or other suitable material. However, no salt or
corrosive material that might damage the sidewalk may be applied.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.17 UNAUTHORIZED DUMPING.
   (A)   No person shall deposit, on public or private property, rubbish,
trash, debris, refuse, or any substance that would mar the appearance; create a
stench or fire hazard; detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property;
or would be likely to injure a person, animal, or vehicle traveling on a public
way.
   (B)   No person shall deposit trash, rubbish, debris, or refuse which was
generated from a residence or business into public trash receptacles located on
sidewalks or in City parks.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.18 SIFTING OR LEAKING LOADS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move a vehicle on any street unless it is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, or otherwise spilling therefrom.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of any person driving a vehicle from which the
contents have spilled, to remove any spilled substance or material from the
street within three hours.
   (C)   Any spilled substance or material as set forth in this section is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in §§
90.55 through
90.62.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.19 FENCES.
   (A)   No person shall construct or maintain any barbed-wire fence or allow
barbed-wire to remain as part of any fence, unless such wire is placed not less
than six inches above the top of a board or picket fence, which is not less
than six feet high.
   (B)   No person shall install, maintain, or operate a wire fence charged
with electrical current within the City.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.20 SURFACE WATERS; DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person in charge of any building or structure shall suffer or
permit rainwater, ice, or snow to fall from any such building or structure onto
a street or public sidewalk or flow across the sidewalk.
   (B)   Every such person in charge of property shall at all times keep and
maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system
so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building(s)
will not be carried across any sidewalk or street.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.21 GRASS, SHRUBBERY, WEEDS, AND NOXIOUS GROWTH.
   (A)   (1)   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit weeds or
other noxious vegetation to grow upon his or her property.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property to
cut down or to destroy grass or weeds that exceed six inches in height; to cut
down or to destroy the uncontrolled growth of noxious vegetation as often as
needed to prevent them from becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard,
or, in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from
going to seed.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, NOXIOUS VEGETATION means (the
enumeration of which shall not be construed to be exclusive):
      (1)   Vegetation that is or is likely to become:
         (a)   A health hazard;
         (b)   A fire hazard; or
         (c)   A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of the public
thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.
      (2)   Poison Oak;
      (3)   Poison Ivy;
      (4)   Wild Morning Glory; and/or
      (5)   Blackberry bushes that extend into a public way, a pathway
frequented by children, cross a property line, or that are used for a
habitation by trespassers.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
NUISANCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
§ 90.35 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   No person shall make, assist in making, or permit any loud,
disturbing, or unnecessary noise, which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety, or peace of others.
   (B)   The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not
be construed to be exclusive:
      (1)   The keeping of any bird or animal, which, by causing frequent or
long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (2)   The attaching of any bell to any animal or allowing a bell to
remain on any animal, which is disturbing to any person in the immediate
vicinity;
      (3)   The use of any vehicle or engine, either stationary or moving, so
operated as to create any loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or
other noise, including excessive roaring or revving of vehicle engines;
      (4)   The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam,
or otherwise or the excessive sound of any horn, whistle, or signaling device
on any vehicle (except as a necessary warning of danger) unless the noise
created is effectively muffled;
      (5)   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or
repair of any building in residential districts, other than between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except upon special permit granted by the City;
      (6)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police,
fire, or other emergency vehicle or the use or operation of a sound amplifying
device so loudly as to disturb persons at least five feet from the motor
vehicle;
      (7)   The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a
muffler or other device, which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises and the emission of annoying smoke; and
      (8)   (a)   The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano,
phonograph, loudspeaker, tv, stereo, home entertainment system, or sound
amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons at least five feet beyond the
property on which the sound originates, at all times.
         (b)   Sound produced in conjunction with officially organized sporting
events, parades, festivals, fairs, and other events issued a permit from the
City are exempt from the noise limitations.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.36 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical, or other
device, apparatus, instrument, or machine that causes reasonably preventable
interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television
receiver of good engineering design.
   (B)   This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved, and
operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.37 NOTICES, ADVERTISEMENTS, AND UNAUTHORIZED MARKINGS.
   (A)   No person shall, either as principal or agent, affix or cause to be
distributed any placard, bill, advertisement, poster or writing (legible or
illegible), graphic symbol or marking, upon any real or personal property,
public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or proper
public authority. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a
repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the City regulating the
use of and locations of signs and advertising.
   (B)   No person shall, either as principal, agent, or employee, scatter,
distribute, or cause to be distributed on the streets, sidewalks, or other
public places or upon any private property any placards or advertisements
whatsoever.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of
material during any parade, public gathering, or community event.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.38 JUNK.
   (A)   No person shall keep junk outdoors on a street, lot, or premises
except in a building that is wholly enclosed or the junk is completely hidden
from public view by a sight-obscuring fence.
   (B)   The term JUNK as used in this section includes all old motors and
vehicles, old motor and vehicle parts, old machinery, old machinery parts, old
appliances or their parts, miscellaneous old parts, old iron or other metal,
glass, paper, lumber, wood, or waste or discarded material.
   (C)   This section does not apply to junk kept in a licensed junkyard or
automobile wrecking house.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.39 ABANDONED OR DERELICT VEHICLES.
   No person shall park or store an abandoned or derelict vehicle on public or
private property in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 74 as may be
amended.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.40 EXCESSIVE VEHICLE PARKING.
   No person shall park any vehicle within the front yard setback area of yards
located adjacent to a street. The side yard areas may not be used for parking
of vehicles except in paved parking areas.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.41 UNENUMERATED NUISANCES.
   (A)   The acts, conditions, or objects specifically enumerated and defined
in §§
90.02,
90.15 through
90.21, and
90.35 through
90.40 are declared public nuisances and may be abated by the procedures set
forth in §§
90.55 through
90.62.
   (B)   In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated in this
subchapter, every other thing, substance, or act that is determined by the City
Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare
of the City is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.55 CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   This chapter may be enforced by:
      (1)   Prosecution for civil infraction, as provided in this chapter and
other applicable law;
      (2)   Abatement, as provided in this chapter and other applicable law;
      (3)   An action for damages for any individual damaged by the violation;
or
      (4)   An injunction from the appropriate court against continuation or
repetition of the violation.
   (B)   These remedies are cumulative and not intended as exclusive.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.56 CIVIL INFRACTION ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a Class 2
civil infraction for the first violation and a Class 1 civil infraction for any
subsequent violations within a 12-month period. All violations shall be dealt
with in accordance with the procedures as otherwise approved by §
10.99.
(Ord. 629, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.57 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   When any law enforcement officer or other City official authorized by
the City Administrator determines that a nuisance exists, such law enforcement
officer or authorized official may give written notice to the persons
responsible.
   (B)   The notice shall be given to:
      (1)   The owner of the premises on which the nuisance is alleged to
exist;
      (2)   The person in apparent possession or control of the premises; and
      (3)   The person who caused the nuisance. Failure of notice to one person
does not affect the responsibility of any other person who is notified.
   (C)   The notice shall direct the person notified to abate the nuisance
within ten days of the time the notice is sent or posted on the premises. A
longer notice period may also be given. The notice shall also inform the person
notified of his or her right to judicial review under this chapter.
   (D)   If a person is dissatisfied with the notice to abate, such person may
request judicial review by making a request to the City court for judicial
review within ten days of the time the notice to abate is sent or posted. The
request need not be in any particular form, except that it must:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Identify the place and nature of the alleged nuisance;
      (3)   Specify the name and address of the person seeking judicial review;
and
      (4)   Identify the law enforcement officer or other City official
alleging that a nuisance exists. A copy of this notice shall be delivered to
the law enforcement officer or other City official alleging that a nuisance
exists.
   (E)   The judicial review shall be held on the first court day following
after the request for judicial review is made, or on the second court day after
the request for judicial review is made if the first court day is less than
five days from the date upon which the request for judicial review is made. The
day may be postponed by:
      (1)   Agreement of the parties; or
      (2)   Order of the court for good cause.
   (F) The court shall promptly notify:
      (1)   The person requesting the review; and
      (2)   The law enforcement officer or other City official alleging the
existence of a nuisance.
   (G)   At the judicial review, the court shall determine, based on a
preponderance of the evidence, whether a nuisance exists. If a nuisance exists,
the court shall order the responsible person to abate it within 72 hours or
within such longer time as the court determines, for good cause, should be
given. If the court finds there is no nuisance, it shall dismiss the matter.
   (H)   Any person who is directed by a law enforcement officer or other
authorized City official to abate a nuisance and does not seek judicial review
within the proper time thereby waives any further hearing or judicial
determination of the issue.
   (I)   If a person is directed by a law enforcement officer or other
authorized City official to abate a nuisance and neither requests judicial
review within the proper time nor abates the nuisance, or if the person fails
to abate the nuisance within 72 hours (or such further time allowed) when
ordered to do so by the court, then the City may abate the nuisance.
   (J)   There shall be no liability to the City for the abatement unless the
City acts in bad faith or causes manifestly unreasonable and unnecessary damage
in the abatement.
   (K)   In case of an apparent emergency, abatement may be made in a summary
manner without notice. In such case, however, the person aggrieved may request
judicial review of the abatement. In such judicial review, the abatement shall
be upheld if conducted without violation of division (J) above and if there was
substantial evidence of the emergency and the nuisance at the time it was
abated.
   (L)   The City reserves the right to abate any nuisance impeding or blocking
public rights-of-way, or City infrastructure, or public/private utilities,
without notice and at the City’s expense, if said nuisance is an immediate
hazard or may cause serious injury to the public.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.58 JOINT RESPONSIBILITY.
   If more than one person is responsible, they shall be jointly and severally
liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the City in
abating the nuisance.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.59 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the
person responsible, the City Administrator, or his or her designee, may cause
the nuisance to be abated.
   (B)   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, will be responsible
for appropriate postings and notifications as required by this chapter.
   (C)   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall have the right,
at reasonable times, to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the
removal of a nuisance.
   (D)   If the nuisance is not abated within the prescribed time, the law
enforcement shall be responsible for issuing citations to appear in court, as
appropriate under the circumstances. If abatement by the City is in order, the
City Administrator, or his or her designee, will notify the Public Works
Superintendent of the nature of the abatement required. If City crews are
utilized, the City Administrator, or his or her designee, will provide the City
Recorder with information required for the appropriate assessment of fees and
recording of liens.
   (E)   The City Recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expenses
incurred by the City in physically abating the nuisance and shall include
therein a charge of $10 or 10% of those expenses, whichever is greater, for
administrative overhead.
   (F)   In addition to the remedy of abatement provided herein to the City,
the person responsible shall also be subject to citation for civil infraction,
as provided herein.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.60 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   The City Recorder by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid,
shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating:
      (1)   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead;
      (2)   That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the property, unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;
and
      (3)   That, if the person responsible objects to the costs of the
abatement as indicated, that person may file a notice of objection with the
City Recorder not more than ten days from the date of the notice.
   (B)   Upon the expiration of ten days after the date of the notice, the
court, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine any
objections to the costs assessed.
   (C)   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the
date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined by
the court, shall be made and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City
liens and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the
property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.
   (D)   The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the legal rate. The
interest shall commence to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the
lien docket.
   (E)   An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the
assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment
render the assessment void but it shall remain a valid lien against the
property. The City may also institute action for the recovery of said amount
against the author or continuer thereof or may pursue both remedies to recover
said money expended.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.61 NOTICE.
   Any notice required in this chapter shall be sufficient if the person to be
notified is substantially apprised of the substance of the notice,
notwithstanding any minor deficiencies or irregularities of form. Actual
receipt of the notice is not required as long as a good faith effort is made to
deliver it.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 90.62 SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense.
   (B)   The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this
chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of an assessment does not
relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance. However, abatement of a
nuisance within three working days of the date of notice to abate, or if a
written protest has been filed, then abatement within 72 hours of the court’s
determination that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from
the imposition of a penalty.
(Ord. 652, passed 4-4-2018)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Animal Regulations
   
91.001   Relationship to state laws
   
91.002   Definitions
   
91.003   Enforcement authority
   
91.004   Complaint procedures
   
91.005   Enforcement complaint
   
91.006   Registration requirements
   
91.007   Impoundment
   
91.008   Sick or injured animals
   
91.009   Miscellaneous violation
   
91.010   Dangerous animals
   
91.011   Wild animals
   
91.012   Exotic animals prohibited
   
91.013   Shelter requirements
   
91.014   Keeping of livestock and/or poultry within the City Limits
   
91.015   Dead animals; carcass removal
   
91.016   Summary destruction of certain animals
Dogs
   
91.030   Relationship to state and County laws
   
91.031   Definitions
   
91.032   Owner/keeper duties
   
91.033   Neglect
   
91.034   Disposition of habitual offenders
   
91.035   Running at large
County Dog Control General Provisions
   
91.050   Policy
   
91.051   Purpose
   
91.052   Title
   
91.053   Disposition of base fines collected for violations
   
91.054   Definitions
   
91.055   Intergovernmental agreements
   
91.056   Relation to other laws
County Dog Control Advisory Committee
   
91.070   Dog Control Advisory Committee
   
91.071   Powers of the Dog Control Advisory Committee
County Dog Control Enforcement and Administration
   
91.085   Powers of Sheriff
   
91.086   Officers working with dogs
   
91.087   Other enforcement officers
   
91.088   County Health Officer
County Licensing of Dogs
   
91.100   Licensing procedures
   
91.101   Reciprocal licensing procedure
   
91.102   Inoculation requirements
   
91.103   License fee and late license fee
   
91.104   License tag
   
91.105   Lost license tag
   
91.106   License tag transfer
   
91.107   License fees are not penalties
   
91.108   Authority to provide for license outlets
County Dog Facilities, Licensing, and Inspection
   
91.120   Right to revoke license
   
91.121   Coverage
   
91.122   Licensing requirement
   
91.123   Land use
   
91.124   Commercial and non-commercial kennels
   
91.125   License review procedure
   
91.126   Display of license
   
91.127   Standards for licensing of kennel facilities
   
91.128   Denial and revocation of license
   
91.129   Appeal from denial or revocation of license
   
91.130   Inspection
   
91.131   Record-keeping
Prohibited Conduct in the County
   
91.145   Owner or keeper of dogs
   
91.146   Hindering impoundment
Impoundment and Disposition of Impounded Dogs in the County
   
91.160   Dog control facilities
   
91.161   When an animal may be impounded
   
91.162   When an animal is deemed impounded
   
91.163   Disposition or destruction of an impounded animal
   
91.164   Notice of impoundment
   
91.165   Period of impoundment
   
91.166   Determination of impoundment period
   
91.167   Disposition of animals given to the County by owner
   
91.168   Disposition of impounded animals
   
91.169   Redemption
   
91.170   Right of entry onto private property
   
91.171   Transfer of title
   
91.172   Right of police officer or Sheriff’s Deputy to request impoundment
Disposition of License Fees and Fines in the County
   
91.185   Dog Control Fund
   
91.186   Disposition of Dog Control Fund
   
91.187   Rabies outbreak
Livestock Claims in the County
   
91.200   Submission of claims
   
91.201   Review of claims
   
91.202   Right of action by owner of damaged livestock
Dogs That Kill or Injure Livestock in the County
   
91.215   Immediate destruction
   
91.216   Hearing by Board of Commissioners
   
91.217   Disputable presumption
   
91.218   Alternative disposition; dog chase livestock
Enforcement Procedures in the County
   
91.230   Manner of citation
   
91.231   Uniform dog control citation
   
91.232   Amendment of uniform dog control citation
   
91.233   Time to raise errors on citation
   
91.234   Certification of uniform dog control citation
   
91.235   Service of citation
   
91.236   Appearance by defendant
   
91.237   Failure of defendant to appear
   
91.238   Continuing violation
County Dog Control Application, Fees, and Conditions of Ownership
   
91.250   Application
   
91.251   Bail and conditions of ownership
   
91.252   Fees
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL ANIMAL REGULATIONS
§ 91.001 RELATIONSHIP TO STATE LAWS.
   ORS Chapter 609, pertaining to animal control, exotic animals, and dealers,
and ORS 167.310 through 167.388, pertaining to offenses against animals, shall
apply in the City, except where expressly superseded by this subchapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any of the lower animals as distinguished from, and not including
humans, belonging to the animal kingdom of living beings, typically differing
from plants and including mammals, fowl, reptiles, and fish.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal generally thought of as “wild” and capable of
inflicting injury (such as cougars and boa constrictors, whether owned as pets
or not) and including animals, which are not dangerous under normal conditions
but could become so under abnormal conditions (for example, a rabid dog or
unconfined bull).
   KEEPER. Any person, firm, or association having the custody of or authority
to control the animal.
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, mules, jackasses, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys,
swine, and any fur-bearing or wool-producing animal bred and maintained,
commercially or otherwise, within pens, cages, and hutches.
   OWNER. Owning, keeping, or harboring an animal.
   OWNER OF PROPERTY. Any person who has legal or equitable interest in real
property or who has a possessory interest therein or who resides on the
property or is a guest of any person who owns, rents, or leases said property.
   POULTRY. Domestic fowl, such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, or other
fowl raised for meat or eggs.
   RUNNING AT LARGE.
      (1)   An animal is considered to be RUNNING AT LARGE when it is not on
the premises of the owner or keeper, and is not restrained by a rope, line,
leash, chain, or other similar means.
      (2)   An animal will be considered RUNNING AT LARGE if it is free upon a
road, street, highway, sidewalk, shared access way, common area, parking area,
parking lot, or other area open to physical access by the public.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which normally lives in a state of nature and is not
ordinarily tame or domesticated and usually not amenable to human habitats.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.003 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The enforcement authority is the Chief of Police, any other law enforcement
officer, or any other person designated or appointed by the Chief of Police
herein referred to as “Officer.”
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.004 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Filing a complaint. Any person who has cause to believe any animal
regulated by this subchapter is being maintained as a public nuisance may
complain, either orally or in writing, to an officer. The complaint shall be
considered sufficient cause for the officer to investigate the matter and
determine if the owner or keeper of the animal is in violation of a provision
of this subchapter. The officer may use discretion in referring the matter to a
County animal control officer for prosecution.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Municipal Court of the City has exclusive
jurisdiction over violations of any of the provisions of this subchapter within
the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.005 ENFORCEMENT COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Any officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter
may issue a citation to appear to any person found in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The issuing official shall cause the citation to appear to be
delivered to the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.006 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every person owning or keeping an animal requiring registration or a
license as may be defined by federal, state, County, or municipal law or
regulation shall register or license such animal in accordance with the
specific regulation or law requiring the registration or license.
   (B)   Registration tags, when required, shall be attached to the animal when
such animal is not in the immediate possession or direct supervision of the
owner or keeper, as provided by §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   Any law enforcement or animal control officer is authorized to
impound any animal found in violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter.
      (2)   Any animal which bites a person or another animal or which has
caused injury to any person or another animal may be summarily seized by any
person and, if seized, shall be promptly delivered to the law enforcement or
animal control officer.
      (3)   Any law enforcement or animal control officer may house an animal
impounded under the provisions of this subchapter at a kennel, veterinary
clinic, or other animal shelter.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   Whenever an animal is impounded pursuant to the provision of this
subchapter, if the owner or custodian of the animal is known to the law
enforcement or animal control officer and the animal has not been accused of
biting a person, the law enforcement or animal control officer shall make
reasonable attempts to deliver the animal to its owner.
      (2)   In case the owner or custodian of the animal is not known to the
law enforcement or animal control officer, the animal shall be delivered
forthwith to the City kennel, County dog control officer, or directly to a
suitable animal shelter or veterinary clinic.
   (C)   Redemption by owner or keeper.
      (1)   Fees for redemption of the animal by its owner shall be due and
payable to the facility in which the animal was housed.
      (2)   The City retains the right to collect from the animal’s owner/
keeper a fee as set by City resolution per animal per day or any part day that
the animal is in the custody of the City.
      (3)   The owner/keeper shall pay for any boarding, care, or medical
expenses incurred in addition to the daily fee.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.008 SICK OR INJURED ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall permit any animal owned or controlled by that person
to be at large within the City if such animal is afflicted with a communicable
disease.
   (B)   Any officer who has found or lawfully seized or impounded an animal
under the provisions of this subchapter and determines that the animal is in
apparent need of immediate medical attention due to illness or injury may
authorize the necessary medical attention and/or have the animal destroyed.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.009 MISCELLANEOUS VIOLATION.
   (A)   No animal shall run at large within the City Limits upon any public
street or other public place or trespass upon private property not owned or
controlled by the owner or keeper of such animal. Animals at large may be taken
into custody by the City and disposed of in accordance with the procedures
provided by ORS Chapter 609.
   (B)   No domestic or wild animal shall become a public nuisance by:
      (1)   Making excessive or unreasonable noise in such a manner as to
disturb or annoy any person or deprive any person of peace and quiet, other
than the owner or keeper of such animal;
      (2)   Causing injury to a person, animal, or property, or show a
propensity to cause injury to persons, animals, or property;
      (3)   Chasing persons, vehicles, or other wild animals;
      (4)   Injuring or killing an animal belonging to a person other than the
owner or keeper of such animal;
      (5)   Chasing, injuring, or killing any animal raised or kept for use or
profit; or
      (6)   Damage property belonging to a person other than the animal’s owner
or keeper.
   (C)   No person who keeps, possesses, or otherwise maintains any animal
shall allow the accumulation of raw or untreated animal manure, which creates
an offensive odor to occur upon any property, whether public or private.
   (D)   No person shall:
      (1)   Subject any animal to mistreatment; or
      (2)   Kill any animal under the custody or control of another without
legal privilege.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.010 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep, possess, or otherwise maintain under his or her
control any dangerous, ferocious, or biting animal.
   (B)   Dangerous, ferocious, or biting animal includes any such animal which,
with a lack of provocation, is likely to injure, attack, or otherwise threaten
the lawful presence of any person or animal.
   (C)   In addition to any fines or other penalties provided in this
subchapter, the police may order such disposition of any dangerous, ferocious,
or biting animal as it considers necessary for the safety or health of the
public.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.011 WILD ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep or possess or otherwise maintain any wild animal within
the City Limits.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.012 EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Subject to ORS 609.205, EXOTIC ANIMAL as defined in ORS 609.305, no
person shall keep or maintain one or more exotic, wild, or dangerous animals to
include bees kept in a collection of hives or colonies.
   (B)   The keeping or maintenance of an exotic, wild, or dangerous animal is
a public nuisance and shall be abated in conformity with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.013 SHELTER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any animal shall provide adequate shelter for
such animal. ADEQUATE SHELTER means that which provides protection from the
meteorological elements.
   (B)   The officer may prohibit the housing or keeping of any animal within
the City Limits when such housing or keeping may impair the public health,
welfare, safety, or create a nuisance.
   (C)   The officer shall deliver a written notice to the owner or keeper of
such animal, directing the owner or keeper to remove the animal within three
days from the service of such notice.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.014 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK AND/OR POULTRY WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Livestock. No person owning, possessing, or having control of
livestock shall keep the animals except in a fenced area and on a lot having an
area of at least 32,670 square feet (0.75 acre). Livestock are limited as
follows:
 
Livestock Category             Maximum Number of Livestock Prohibited Livestock
                               Allowed Per 0.75 Acre
Miniature Livestock. Goats,
sheep, and any fur- bearing or
wool-producing animal bred and 2                           Un-castrated males
maintained, commercially or
otherwise, within pens, cages,
and hutches
Standard Livestock. Horses,
mules, jackasses, burros,      1                           Un-castrated males
cattle, donkeys, and swine
 
      (1)   Livestock may not be bred.
      (2)   Products generated by livestock, such as eggs, wool, hides, or meat
may not be sold from residential property.
      (3)   Livestock may not be slaughtered or butchered on residential
property.
      (4)   Fencing used for the purpose of containing livestock, as required
by this section, shall not be located within 20 feet from property boundary
line and shall comply with the Development Code.
   (B)   Poultry. No person owning, possessing, or having control of poultry
shall keep the animals except in a fenced area.
      (1)   No person, property owner, and/or renter, or household may keep
more than six poultry of any kind.
      (2)   Peacocks, peahens, roosters, geese, turkeys, and any male poultry
are prohibited.
      (3)   Fencing used for the purpose of containing poultry, as required by
this section, shall not be located within ten feet from property boundary line
and shall comply with the Development Code.
   (C)   Nonconforming Use. For livestock being kept on parcels of less than
32,670 square feet (0.75 acres) per animal, this section shall not preclude any
person from continuing to keep or replace livestock which were lawfully being
kept within the City Limits on or before the adoption date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter.
   (D)   Cessation of Use. For parcels of less than 32,670 square feet (0.75
acres), if a nonconforming use for keeping of the livestock is discontinued for
a period of 90 days or more or if the property comes under different ownership,
the keeping of livestock shall cease and may not be resumed.
   (E)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant exemptions to
regulations pertaining to livestock and/or poultry as denoted in this section
on a case-by-case basis.
      (2)   All exemptions granted before the enactment of this provision shall
be allowed.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.015 DEAD ANIMALS; CARCASS REMOVAL.
   No person may permit the carcass of any animal kept, possessed, or otherwise
maintained under that person’s control to remain upon any public street or
other public place or upon any private property for over 24 hours.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.016 SUMMARY DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   Any animal, whether domestic or wild, which presents an imminent threat of
serious physical injury or death to any person or other animal, or which has
caused injury or death to any person or other animal, and which, under the
immediate circumstances, cannot be captured or impounded as provided in this
subchapter, may be summarily destroyed in as humane a manner as is practicable
under the existing circumstances.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
DOGS
§ 91.030 RELATIONSHIP TO STATE AND COUNTY LAWS.
   ORS Chapter 609, pertaining to animal control, exotic animals, and dealers,
and ORS 167.310 through 167.388, and §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252, pertaining to offenses against animals, shall apply in the City except
where expressly superseded by this subchapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
      (1)   A dog is a PUBLIC NUISANCE if it:
         (a)   Bites or nips a person or a person’s clothing or effects unless
the person is illegally assaulting the dog or the dog’s owner/keeper, or if the
person provokes the dog by trespassing on the owner’s/keeper’s premises;
         (b)   Chases vehicles, persons, or other animals of any kind on
property that does not belong to the owner/keeper of the dog;
         (c)   Causes damage or destroys property that does not belong to the
owner/keeper of the dog;
         (d)   Turns over garbage cans, tears open garbage bags, and/or
scatters garbage;
         (e)   Trespasses on private property of persons other than the owner/
keeper of the dog;
         (f)   Disturbs a resident or business by excessive barking, howling,
whining, or noise. A dog shall not be considered a PUBLIC NUISANCE under this
subchapter if it barks at a person or animal trespassing on the property of the
owner/keeper; and/or
         (g)   Impedes or disrupts the flow of traffic on a public or private
roadway or access way or causes conditions thereupon or in any way becomes a
traffic hazard for any length of time.
      (2)   No person, owner, or keeper shall allow a dog to become a PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
   RUNNING AT LARGE.
      (1)   A dog is considered to be RUNNING AT LARGE when it is not on the
premises of the owner or keeper, and is not restrained by a rope, line, leash,
chain, or other similar means.
      (2)   A dog is considered RUNNING AT LARGE if it is free upon a road,
street, highway, sidewalk, shared access way, common area, parking area,
parking lot, or other area open to physical access by the public.
      (3)   No person, owner, or keeper shall allow a dog to RUN AT LARGE.
      (4)   An officer may capture and detain any dog running at large and
confine such dog(s) in the County dog control facility until such time as the
owner/keeper can be identified. The dog(s) may be released to such owner/keeper
provided the owner/keeper provides proof of current County licenses for the dog
(s). The owner/keeper is obligated to pay a fee as set by City resolution for
each dog confined in the City kennel, for each day or part day each dog is
confined. This fee is to offset the cost for the feeding and care of the dog.
If an owner/keeper cannot be identified, the dog(s) shall be turned over to the
County dog control. When a dog is placed with County dog control, the owner or
keeper is responsible for any fees charged by them.
   VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog:
         (a)   Which bites a human being, livestock, or domestic animal;
         (b)   Which puts a human or domestic animal in apprehension of
imminent harm or risk, or exposes them to possible injury or harm, regardless
of whether it was done in a playful or hostile manner;
         (c)   Which has inflicted previous injury to a human without
provocation, or injured or killed an animal while off the property of the
owner/keeper;
         (d)   Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or training for dog fighting has caused injury, serious injury, or
possible death to a human or animal without provocation;
         (e)   Having a demeanor, fault, flaw, or defect that causes it to act
in an unreasonable aggressive manner; or
         (f)   That has been found to have bitten any living thing two or more
times in a two year period, which caused physical injury to person(s) or animal
(s), and said bites have been documented with appropriate authorities, then a
refutable presumption exists that the dog is dangerous and may not be kept.
      (2)   No person, owner, or keeper shall keep a VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.032 OWNER/KEEPER DUTIES.
   All persons owning dogs or having them under their control shall:
   (A)   Keep the dog(s) confined on owner’s/keeper’s premises, or, upon taking
such dog(s) upon the streets, sidewalks, or other such public property or
buildings in the City, shall keep such dog(s) on a leash and in the control of
the person then having said dog(s) in his, her, or their possession;
   (B)   Not own, board, have custody of, or provide for the accommodation of
more than a total of five dogs, being a maximum of three fertile or five
spayed/neutered dogs of licensable age, as provisioned in §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252. or any combination thereof, where such dogs are kept for household
pets, rescue, or seeing-eye training, boarding, propagation, other training,
sale or trade, consumption, or other purposes;
   (C)   Provide adequate relief from extreme heat and/or cold and safe shelter
for such dog(s). ADEQUATE SHELTER means that which provides protection from the
meteorological elements. SAFE SHELTER means that which is sound and maintained
in good repair to protect dog(s) from injury, to confine them safely, and to
prevent entry of other animals;
   (D)   Provide proper nutrition and hydration by feeding dog(s) at least once
daily with a diet of nutritionally adequate and uncontaminated food and
maintain a continuous potable water supply unless otherwise recommended by a
veterinarian;
   (E)   Remove and properly dispose of excrement from primary enclosures and
owner’s/keeper’s property as often as necessary to prevent contamination,
reduce disease hazards, and minimize odors; and
   (F)   Provide proper and adequate care to insure dog(s) are healthy, without
untreated illnesses, injuries, infestations, or communicable diseases.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.033 NEGLECT.
   When any law enforcement officer determines that an animal(s) owner/keeper
has neglected the animals(s) health or well-being, such law enforcement officer
or other authorized City official may notify the animal owner/keeper.
   (A)   The notice shall be given to the owner/keeper of the animal(s) in
writing.
   (B)   The notice shall direct the owner/keeper of the animal(s) to abate the
specified neglect within 24 hours if the animal(s) well-being is considered to
be in immediate danger and up to three days for all other infractions of
neglect.
   (C)   Failure of the owner/keeper to abate the specified neglect within the
allotted time period may result with the animals(s) immediate seizure by a law
enforcement or animal control officer who may confine such animal(s) in the
City or other facility as deemed necessary by the law enforcement or animal
control officer with regards to the most immediate needs of the animal(s). The
owner/keeper is obligated to pay a fee as set by City resolution for each
animal confined for each day or part day each animal is confined. This fee is
to offset the cost for the feeding and care of the animal(s). The owner/keeper
shall be held responsible for all veterinary/medical and additional boarding
costs incurred for the duration of the confinement of the animal(s).
   (D)   Neglect is a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.034 DISPOSITION OF HABITUAL OFFENDERS.
   Any animal owner/keeper having been found or pled guilty to any combination
of three or more convictions of this subchapter shall be considered a habitual
offender and may, by order of the court, lose the right to own or keep any
animal(s) while living in the City and, if so ordered, law enforcement
personnel may make inquiries or inspect and remove from the premises any animal
being found kept or owned by said person(s).
(Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 91.035 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   All persons owning dogs or having them under their control shall keep
them confined on his, her, or their premises; or, upon taking such dog or dogs
upon the streets, sidewalks, or other public property or buildings in the City,
shall keep such dog or dogs on a leash and in the control of the person then
having said dog or dogs in his, her, or their possession.
   (B)   Any dog found off the premises of its owner or off the premises of the
person having control of such animal shall be subject to being picked up and
confined at the County dog control facility.
(Ord. 307A, passed 3-2-1959)
COUNTY DOG CONTROL GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.050 POLICY.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of the County recognizes that ORS Chapter
609 grants non-home rule counties the power to regulate dogs by ordinance and
that on July 5,1929, the County was declared to be a dog control district by
vote of the electors of the County. Pursuant to the vote of the electors and to
ORS Chapter 609, the County is declared to be a dog control district.
   (B)   The Board further recognizes and finds that the regulation of dogs is
a matter of County concern, and therefore, ORS Chapter 203 provides a separate
and independent legal basis upon which to enact §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252. Pursuant to both ORS Chapter 609 and ORS Chapter 203, the Board finds
it necessary to implement a program for the licensing and regulation of dogs
and the facilities which house them; to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents and citizens of the County; to recognize the property rights
of both owners and non-owners of dogs; and to provide for the control and
protection of dogs located within the County.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.051 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted to provide a comprehensive procedure and program for
the implementation of the above described policy; to set forth all requirements
for licensing, regulation, care, and treatment of dogs; and to describe related
activities that shall be prohibited in the County. These regulations are
intended to supercede ORS Chapter 609 except as specifically provided in these
regulations, or in instances in which these regulations do not provide a
parallel rule, definition, or procedure.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.052 TITLE.
   The ordinance incorporated in §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252 may be cited as the “Yamhill County Dog Control Ordinance.”
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.053 DISPOSITION OF BASE FINES COLLECTED FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Upon receipt of base fines imposed for violations of this Dog Control
Ordinance, the Trial Court Clerk of the County shall first deduct and retain
the amount required for court fees and assessments and then remit the remaining
money to the County Treasurer who shall deposit it in a designated Dog Control
Fund accessible to dog control officers. In no case shall the money remitted to
the Treasurer be less than $30 per cited violation. Additionally, each
conviction shall be accompanied by an automatic court assessment of $25. This
revenue shall be paid to the County dog control for maintenance, upgrade, or
purchase of buildings, vehicles, equipment, medical supplies, animal food, or
personnel expenses.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.054 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any non-human mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian.
   BAIL. Money or its equivalent deposited by a defendant to secure his or her
appearance in court for a dog control offense.
   BITE. Any tearing, abrasion, puncture, contusion, hematoma, contusion, or
other damage to the skin or clothing of any person or animal by the operation
of a dog’s jaws and/or teeth.
   BOARD. The County Board of Commissioners.
   DOG. Any mammal of the domestic canine family.
      (1)   SMALL DOG. A dog of any breed for which the recognized standard
specifies a height, measured perpendicularly at the withers, of 15 inches or
less and/or a weight so specified not to exceed 30 pounds.
      (2)   MEDIUM DOG. A dog of any breed for which the recognized standard
specifies a height, measured perpendicularly at the withers, of more than 15
inches but not exceeding 25 inches and/or a weight so specified of more than 30
pounds, but not exceeding 60 pounds.
      (3)   LARGE DOG. A dog of any breed for which the recognized standard
specifies a height, measured perpendicularly at the withers, of more than 25
inches and/or a weight so specified of more than 60 pounds.
   HOLDING FACILITY (SHELTER). A facility built and maintained by a city, a
humane society, or the County for the purpose of enforcing or administering an
animal or dog control program or the care and feeding of animals without
owners.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. A domesticated animal kept for the personal use, pleasure,
and enjoyment of the owner.
   IMMEDIATE CONTROL. Under close, restrained custody in immediate physical
proximity (e.g., leashed).
   IN PUBLIC. Any space physically open to the public whether publicly or
privately owned, including roadways, sidewalks, shopping mall walking areas,
parking lots, parks, schoolyards, shared public accessways, residential complex
common areas, alleyways, walkways, or other areas.
   ISOLATION (QUARANTINE). The secure restraint of a specific animal by means
of a closed cage, secured fenced-in area, pound, or other approved building or
facility affording such security from any other animal or person.
   KENNEL. A commercial or non-commercial site, providing for the accommodation
of three or more fertile or five or more spayed/neutered dogs of licensable
age, or any combination thereof, where such dogs are kept for household pets,
rescue, or seeing-eye training, board, propagation, other training, sale or
trade, consumption, or other purposes.
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, mules, jackasses, cattle, llamas, sheep, goats, swine,
domesticated fowl, and any fur-bearing animal bred and maintained commercially
or otherwise, within pens, corrals, pasture land, cages, and/or hutches.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any person who keeps, has custody of, possesses, harbors,
or exercises control over a dog or other animal, with the exception of
veterinary hospitals as defined in this section. In a family situation, the
head of the household is presumed to be the owner or keeper.
   PERSON. An individual, a partnership, company, association, corporation, or
any other legal entity.
   SHERIFF. The County Sheriff, any Deputy Sheriff, or the Sheriff’s employee
or designee.
   VETERINARIAN. A practicing veterinarian, licensed pursuant to the laws of
the state, to perform any of the acts set forth in ORS 686.030.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any business establishment maintained and operated by a
veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries to
animals.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.055 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   The Board of Commissioners may enter into intergovernmental agreements with
any or all of the cities in the County to further the purposes of this Dog
Control Ordinance. Any such agreements shall require the city to enact a dog
control ordinance to subject all dogs within the city to the licensing
requirements of this Dog Control Ordinance and provide for substantially the
same violations and penalties as provided in this Dog Control Ordinance. The
governing body of the city may consent to the application of this Dog Control
Ordinance within its boundaries. An agreement may also provide for the sharing
of revenues from the Dog Control Fund for the purpose of effective dog control
within the County.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.056 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
   Except as expressly provided herein, this Dog Control Ordinance shall not be
a substitute for or eliminate the necessity of conforming with all state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations, and any other ordinances which are now,
or may in the future, be in effect relating to the requirements of this Dog
Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
COUNTY DOG CONTROL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 91.070 DOG CONTROL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   There shall be a Dog Control Advisory Committee which shall consist of five
residents of the County. At least one member of the Committee shall reside
within a city in the County; at least one member shall be directly connected
with dogs; at least one member shall be selected from the unincorporated areas
of the County; and at least one member shall be directly connected with the
livestock industry. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Commissioners, without pay. Members of the Committee shall serve for two years
or until replaced by the Board. No person shall serve more than two consecutive
terms as a member of the Committee. Members of the Committee shall select from
their number a Chairperson who shall preside at all meetings and a Secretary
who shall keep the minutes of the meetings and other proceedings. A quorum for
the transaction of business shall consist of three members. The Committee shall
meet upon the call of the Chairperson or upon the call of any three members.
Regularly scheduled meetings may be established in the discretion of the
Committee.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.071 POWERS OF THE DOG CONTROL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The Dog Control Advisory Committee may review all claims against the Dog
Control Fund for livestock killed by a dog, and may make general policy
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners concerning the amounts to be paid
upon such claims. The Committee may, as it deems necessary, advise the Board on
matters related to dog control.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
COUNTY DOG CONTROL ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 91.085 POWERS OF SHERIFF.
   (A)   The Sheriff shall have authority under this Dog Control Ordinance:
      (1)   To make arrests and issue citations for violations of this Dog
Control Ordinance;
      (2)   To collect all fees and base fines specified by this Dog Control
Ordinance;
      (3)   To otherwise enforce and administer the provisions of this Dog
Control Ordinance;
      (4)   To take other action necessary to reduce the damage inflicted by
dogs upon livestock and other domestic animals;
      (5)   To investigate claims against the Dog Control Fund; and
      (6)   To subpoena persons to testify in the hearing of claims against the
Dog Control Fund.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall maintain a holding facility or place of impoundment
where all dogs subject to impoundment shall be safely held and provided with
proper and sufficient food, water, and shelter.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.086 OFFICERS WORKING WITH DOGS.
   In designating personnel to work with dogs, the Sheriff shall consider the
following criteria:
   (A)   Physical ability to do the work required;
   (B)   Previous experience working with dogs;
   (C)   Experience or training in the fields of law, business, or public
relations; and
   (D)   Other relevant experience and/or training.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.087 OTHER ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   In addition to any power otherwise conferred by state law, a peace officer
shall have the power to arrest and cite violators of this Dog Control Ordinance
and to impound dogs which have committed acts subjecting its owner or keeper to
a penalty under this Dog Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.088 COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER.
   The County Health Officer shall administer the rules and regulations of the
state relating to rabid animals and rabies control.
(Division 17 of OAR 333-017-0000 et seq.) (County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
COUNTY LICENSING OF DOGS
§ 91.100 LICENSING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of a dog that has permanent canine teeth or that
is more than six months of age shall obtain a license for the dog for a one-
year period commencing at the time the dog:
      (1)   Acquires permanent canine teeth;
      (2)   Reaches six months of age; or
      (3)   Is present in the County for more than 30 days, whether consecutive
or not.
   (B)   When required, a license shall be purchased from the County dog
control office or a sales outlet authorized under §
91.108.
   (C)   The first day of the month in which a dog is first licensed in the
County shall be the dog’s licensing anniversary date. The owner or keeper of
the dog shall relicense the dog each year thereafter, on or within 30 days of
its anniversary date.
   (D)   The dog control office shall keep a numbered record of all licenses
issued, including information on the sex and breed of dog, and name and address
of owner or keeper.
   (E)   A license under this section is not required for a dog kept in this
County if the owner or the dog resides outside of the County and if the dog is
validly licensed in the jurisdiction where the owner resides.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.101 RECIPROCAL LICENSING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Reciprocal licensing procedures shall apply:
      (1)   If the owner or keeper of a dog changes residence to the County
while the dog is validly licensed in another state jurisdiction; or
      (2)   If ownership or possession of a dog is transferred to a resident of
the County while the dog is validly licensed in another state jurisdiction.
   (B)   Upon payment of an administrative fee established by Board order, a
person eligible for reciprocal licensing shall relinquish the valid license
from the other state jurisdiction and be issued a County dog license.
   (C)   A license issued under this section shall be valid for the remainder
of the original license period, but shall not be valid for more than one year
even if the original license period extends for more than one year.
   (D)   The licensing anniversary date of a dog receiving a reciprocal license
under this section shall be the first day of the month in which the dog was
licensed in a state jurisdiction other than the County.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.102 INOCULATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The owner or keeper of any dog with permanent canine teeth or that is more
than six months of age shall have that dog inoculated against rabies in
accordance with current compendium recommendations. No license shall be issued
for any dog unless the applicant exhibits a certificate of such inoculation by
a veterinarian.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.103 LICENSE FEE AND LATE LICENSE FEE.
   (A) The license fee charged for the yearly license shall be established by
order of the Board of Commissioners, and shall include separate fees in the
following categories:
      (1)   For each spayed female or neutered male dog for which a
veterinarian’s certificate of operation for the spaying or neutering of the dog
is presented to the County;
      (2)   For each spayed female or neutered male dog for which a
veterinarian’s certificate of operation for the spaying or neutering of the dog
is presented to the County and the dog is owned by a person who is 65 years of
age to 75 years of age;
      (3)   For each spayed female or neutered male dog for which a
veterinarian’s certificate of operation for the spaying or neutering of the dog
is presented to the County and the dog is owned by a person who is 75 years of
age or older; the person may be eligible for a super senior discount;
      (4)   For each dog kept in a kennel; and
      (5)   For all other dogs.
   (B)   A fee shall be charged for each license, as established by Board
Order. This fee is due and payable on application for a dog license. If a dog
owner or keeper pays the license fee but fails to supply the required proof of
rabies inoculation within 30 days of such payment, the amount shall be
forfeited by the owner and retained by dog control. A license may be issued
immediately upon a dog being purchased or adopted from dog control, whereupon
the buyer or adopter has 30 days to return proof of the rabies inoculation
certificate.
   (C)   Any dog owned by a blind or deaf person and used as a guide dog shall
be licensed as required in this Dog Control Ordinance but shall not be required
to pay a license fee upon proffer of a letter or certificate or other
sufficient evidence from a reputable training facility or vendor attesting to
the dog’s status as a helper animal for the handicapped.
   (D)   A late license fee shall be assessed against any owner or keeper of a
dog who in any year fails to obtain a license within 30 days of the date
specified in §
91.100. All late fees shall be paid in addition to the original license fee at
the time of issuance of the license.
      (1)   For a person or the owner who has not been cited for owning or
keeping an unlicenced dog, the late fee shall be the amount established by
Board order.
      (2)   For a person who is cited for owning or keeping an unlicenced dog
and who thereafter obtains a license, the late fee shall be in an amount as
specified by Board order.
      (3)   For the owner of a licensed kennel who is cited for owning or
keeping an unlicenced dog and who thereafter obtains licenses, the late fee
shall be as specified by Board order.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.104 LICENSE TAG.
   Upon payment of the fees required by this Dog Control Ordinance, the County
shall issue to the owner of the dog a license tag suitable for attachment to
the dog’s collar. The owner of the dog shall attach the license tag to a collar
on the dog and keep it on the dog at all times. If the dog is kept at all times
in an enclosure or pen, the license tag may, at the option of the owner or
keeper, be affixed to the enclosure or pen rather than to the collar of the
dog.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.105 LOST LICENSE TAG.
   If a license tag is lost, the owner may obtain a duplicate license tag from
the County upon satisfactory proof of loss and payment of a fee as specified by
Board order.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.106 LICENSE TAG TRANSFER.
   If the ownership of a dog which is currently licensed under this Dog Control
Ordinance changes, the new owner shall, within 30 days, obtain from the County
a transfer of the license tag upon payment of the required fee, as specified by
Board order.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.107 LICENSE FEES ARE NOT PENALTIES.
   The fees required under this section are in addition to any penalties
established by this Dog Control Ordinance for owning or keeping a dog without a
license.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.108 AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE FOR LICENSE OUTLETS.
   The Board or Sheriff may, by order, establish licensing outlets at any
business within the territorial limits of the County for the purpose of selling
dog licenses. The Board may promulgate rules for the administration of such a
program. Any business participating in the program shall be entitled to retain
an amount from the fee received for each license issued by the outlet to cover
administrative costs. The amount that may be retained by a business
participating in the program shall be established by Board order.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
COUNTY DOG FACILITIES, LICENSING, AND INSPECTION
§ 91.120 RIGHT TO REVOKE LICENSE.
   Any license may be summarily revoked if it was obtained by using false
information and/or fees were paid with an uncollectible, forged, insufficiently
funded, or other unacceptable check or commercial paper.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.121 COVERAGE.
   This section applies to all dog facilities maintained in the County whether
such facilities are denominated as kennels, holding facilities, shelters, or
otherwise in this Dog Control Ordinance, and whether privately or publicly
owned, if the facility houses three or more fertile dogs or five or more spayed
or neutered dogs, or any combination thereof. However, this section does not
apply to municipal holding facilities owned and operated by municipal
corporations in the County unless the municipality consents to the application
of this Dog Control Ordinance by the execution of an intergovernmental
agreement as provided for in §
91.055.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.122 LICENSING REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall operate a commercial or noncommercial dog kennel, as
specified in §
91.121, without first obtaining an annual license from the County for each
kennel operated. Fees required for commercial and noncommercial kennels shall
be established by Board order. A temporary six-month permit issued at 50% of
the cost for regular license fees may be available for facilities provided
rabies certificates for all animals are produced for inspection by the Sheriff.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.123 LAND USE.
   The issuance of a license for a dog facility shall not constitute approval
of the land use nor be evidence of compliance with land use restrictions or
regulations which may apply to operation or location of the proposed facility.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.124 COMMERCIAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL KENNELS.
   (A)   A non-commercial kennel is a facility in or adjacent to a private
residence where a minimum of three and a maximum of ten small or medium dogs of
licensable age, or a maximum of five large dogs of licensable age are kept for
the hobby of the householder, used for hunting, herding, exhibition in shows,
field or obedience trials, or for the guarding and protection of property. The
sale to individuals of no more than 15 dogs per calendar year which were born
and raised on the premises, or the occasional housing of adult dogs for
propagation purposes shall not in itself make a kennel “commercial.”
   (B)   A COMMERCIAL KENNEL is a facility intended to be operated as a
business, where boarding, grooming, or training services for dogs are performed
to realize a profit, or where dogs are bred or kept for the purpose of sale or
resale to dealers, brokers, pet shops, kennels, or individuals.
   (C)   The Sheriff shall determine whether a kennel is commercial or non-
commercial and assess fees accordingly. Appeal from the Sheriff’s determination
shall be to the Board of Commissioners as provided in §
91.129.
   (D)   The County’s Department of Planning shall forward copies of any kennel
or dog training facility land use applications to the Sheriff’s office dog
control unit for review.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.125 LICENSE REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of an application for a dog kennel license or land use
application from the Planning Department, the Sheriff shall inspect the
facility and, upon determination that the facility and its operation complies
with all applicable provisions of this Dog Control Ordinance and other
applicable state and federal laws, shall issue a license. The Sheriff shall
approve or deny an application made under this Dog Control Ordinance within 120
days of its receipt and the payment of the applicable fees, or the application
shall be deemed approved for the current year, subject only to revocation as
provided in this Dog Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.126 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   A license granted under this section shall be conspicuously displayed on the
dog kennel facility premises. A holder of the license shall keep available for
inspection by the Sheriff:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of each dog kept
at the facility;
   (B)   The date the dog was received;
   (C)   A description of each dog including age, sex, breed, and color;
   (D)   The animal’s veterinarian, if known; and
   (E)   A record of the inoculation by a veterinarian of each animal kept in
the kennel for rabies, using a modified live virus vaccine as required by state
law.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.127 STANDARDS FOR LICENSING OF KENNEL FACILITIES.
   After payment of fees and inspection, the Sheriff shall issue a kennel
license to a facility that meets the following criteria:
   (A)   Housing structure shall be sound and maintained in good repair to
protect dogs from injury, to confine them safely, and to prevent entry of other
animals;
   (B)   Reliable and adequate electrical service and a potable water supply
shall serve the facility;
   (C)   Storage of food supplies and bedding materials shall be designed to
prevent vermin infestation and infection;
   (D)   Refrigeration shall be furnished for perishable foods;
   (E)   Safe and sanitary disposal facilities shall be available to eliminate
animal and food waste, used bedding, dead animals and debris, and to minimize
vermin infestation, odors, and disease hazards;
   (F)   Cleanliness facilities shall be available to animal caretakers and
handlers;
   (G)   In enclosed structures, the interior ambient temperatures shall be
maintained above 50°F for dogs not acclimatized to lower temperatures;
   (H)   In enclosed structures, adequate ventilation shall be maintained to
assure animal comfort by such means as will provide sufficient fresh air and
will minimize drafts, odors, and moisture condensation. Mechanical ventilation
must be available when ambient temperatures exceed 85°F;
   (I)   Interior areas shall have adequate natural or artificial lighting and
primary enclosures for dogs shall be protected from excessive illumination;
   (J)   Interior building surfaces shall be constructed and maintained to
prevent moisture penetration;
   (K)   Drainage facilities shall be available to assure rapid elimination of
excess water from indoor housing facilities. The design shall assure
obstruction-free flow and traps to prevent sewage backflow;
   (L)   Outdoor facilities shall provide protective shading and an adequate
shelter area designed to minimize harmful exposure to weather conditions for
those animals not acclimatized to the environment;
   (M)   The primary enclosure shall be of sufficient size to permit each dog
housed in the facility to stand freely, sit, turn about, and lie in a
comfortable, normal position. No more than 12 dogs may be housed in the same
primary enclosure. Each dog housed in a primary enclosure shall be provided a
minimum floor space equal to the mathematical square of the dog’s length, as
measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, plus six inches. An
exercise area or means to provide each dog with exercise shall be provided on
the premises;
   (N)   When restraining devices are used in connection with a primary
enclosure intended to permit movement outside the enclosure, such devices shall
be installed so as to prevent entanglement with the devices of other dogs or
objects and shall be fitted to the dog by a harness or well-fitted collar,
other than a choke-type collar, and shall not be shorter than three times the
length of the dog as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail;
   (O)   Dogs shall be fed at least once daily with a diet of nutritionally
adequate and uncontaminated food;
   (P)   Potable water shall be continuously available unless otherwise
recommended by a veterinarian in a particular situation;
   (Q)   Cages, rooms, hard surface pens, runs, and food and water in
receptacles shall be sanitized to prevent disease, not less than once every two
weeks, by washing with hot water and soap or detergent; by washing with a
combination disinfectant and cleanser; by washing with a safe detergent
followed by a safe, effective disinfectant; or by cleaning with steam. Prior to
the introduction of dogs into empty enclosures previously occupied, the
enclosures shall be sanitized. Dogs shall be removed from the enclosure during
the cleaning process and adequate care shall be taken to protect the animals in
other enclosures; and
   (R)   Excrement shall be removed from primary enclosures as often as
necessary to prevent contamination, reduce disease hazards, and minimize odors.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.128 DENIAL AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   A dog kennel license required under this section may be denied or revoked
for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure to comply substantially with any provision of this Dog Control
Ordinance;
   (B)   Conviction of the owner or any person subject to his or her direction
or control for the violation of any provision of this Dog Control Ordinance or
other applicable state or federal law, rule, order, or regulation pertaining to
any activity relating to animals; or
   (C)   Furnishing false information on the application for a license under
this Dog Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.129 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   If an application for a dog kennel license is denied or approved subject to
conditions or revoked, the applicant may appeal denial, conditional approval,
or revocation to the Board of Commissioners no later than 15 days after the
date of the decision by the Sheriff. The Board shall provide a hearing for the
applicant within 30 days of notice of appeal. Notice of hearing by the Board
shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail no later than ten days prior
to the hearing. A decision by the Board resulting from an appeal under this
section shall be reviewable only as provided in ORS Chapter 34.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.130 INSPECTION.
   A dog kennel licensed under these regulations shall be subject to inspection
by the Sheriff at any time for the purpose of determining compliance with this
Dog Control Ordinance. The Sheriff shall have the right to inspect the facility
itself, as well as all records and other documents required to be kept by this
Dog Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.131 RECORD-KEEPING.
   The owner or operator of any dog kennel licensed under this Dog Control
Ordinance shall keep records of all dogs of licensable age sold and make these
records available to the Sheriff upon request. Records of such sales shall be
preserved by the owner or operator of any facility for at least 18 months
following the sale.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.145 OWNER OR KEEPER OF DOGS.
   It shall be a violation of this Dog Control Ordinance for the owner or
keeper of a dog to:
   (A)   Permit a dog to run at large. A dog is considered to be RUNNING AT
LARGE when it is not on the premises of the owner or keeper, and is not
restrained by a rope, line, leash, chain, or other similar means, or is not
under the immediate physical control and command of its owner or keeper. A dog
will be considered RUNNING AT LARGE if it is free upon a shared accessway,
common area, walking area, parking lot, or other area open to physical access
by the public. A dog that is being used under the supervision of a person in
order to legally hunt, chase, or tree wildlife; is being used to control or
protect livestock; or in related agricultural activities shall not be deemed to
be RUNNING AT LARGE. No dog in police or military service shall be considered
running at large.
   (B)   Allow a dog to become a public nuisance. A dog is a PUBLIC NUISANCE if
it:
      (1)   Bites or nips a person’s person, clothing, or effects, unless the
person is illegally assaulting the dog or the dog’s owner, or if the person
provokes the dog and is illegally trespassing on premises legally occupied by
the dog’s owner;
      (2)   Chases vehicles, persons, or other animals of any kind on property
that does not belong to the owner or keeper of the dog;
      (3)   Damages or destroys property (including livestock or a domestic
pet) that does not belong to the owner or keeper of the dog;
      (4)   Scatters garbage;
      (5)   Trespasses on private property of persons other than the owner or
keeper of the dog;
      (6)   Disturbs a resident from each of three or more households within
sight or sound of the complainant’s residence or business by excessive noise. A
dog shall not be considered a public nuisance under this Dog Control Ordinance
if it barks at a person or animal trespassing on property belonging to the
dog’s owner;
      (7)   Is a female in heat and running at large; and
      (8)   Impedes or disrupts the normal flow of traffic on a public or
private roadway or access way, or causes dangerous conditions thereupon, or in
any way becomes a traffic hazard for any length of time.
   (C)   No person shall keep a menacing, vicious, or dangerous dog. For the
purpose of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   A MENACING DOG means a dog which acts in a threatening manner
causing a human, a domestic animal, or livestock to fear for its safety or well
being, regardless of whether it was done in a playful or hostile manner;
      (2)   A VICIOUS or DANGEROUS DOG means:
         (a)   Any dog which bites a human being, livestock, or domestic animal
without serious provocation;
         (b)   Any dog which puts a human or a domestic animal in apprehension
of imminent harm or risk, or exposes them to possible injury or harm,
regardless of whether it was done in a playful or hostile manner;
         (c)   Any dog, which according to the records of law enforcement, has
inflicted previous injury to a human without provocation, or has according to
law enforcement records injured or killed a domestic animal while off the
property of owner or keeper of said dog;
         (d)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting;
         (e)   Any dog acting in a menacing manner and is out of immediate
control of its owner or keeper, and which has caused serious injury or possible
death to a human or domestic animal without provocation;
         (f)   Any dog having a demeanor, fault, flaw, or defect that causes it
to act in an unreasonably aggressive manner; or
         (g)   Any dog that has been found to have bitten any living thing two
or more times in a two year period, which causes physical injury to person(s)
or animal(s), and said bites have been documented with appropriate authorities,
then a rebuttable presumption exists that the dog is dangerous, and may not be
kept.
      (3)   Being a HABITUAL OFFENDER means:
         (a)   Any dog that has been found/pled guilty to the same or similar
offenses more than three times may be considered a habitual offender; and
         (b)   Any owner or keeper that has been found/pled guilty to more than
three dogs to the same or similar offenses in two or more years (but shall not
exceed ten years) may be considered a habitual offender.
      (4)   Dog running at large after written warning of being suspected of
menacing or dangerous:
         (a)   1.   Any dog that has been served written notice of being
suspected of falling under the County ordinance for menacing or dangerous shall
not be allowed to leave its owner or keeper’s property unless on a leash and
under immediate control of a reasonable person as described in those
ordinances.
            2.   A dog trained for law enforcement purposes, on duty, or under
the control of a law enforcement officer shall not be found to be menacing,
dangerous, or vicious when it exhibits such behavior in the course of the
duties for which it is trained.
         (b)   No person shall keep a dog having been notified by the Sheriff
that it has injured, chased, wounded, or killed livestock.
         (c)   No person shall keep a dog without a license attached to its
collar as required by this Dog Control Ordinance unless the dog is kept at all
times in an enclosure or pen and the license tag is affixed to the enclosure or
pen.
         (d)   No person shall keep an unlicenced dog when that dog is subject
to the licensing provisions of this Dog Control Ordinance.
         (e)   No person shall keep a dog which has not received its rabies
inoculation as required by ORS 433.365 and this Dog Control Ordinance. The
charge may be dismissed upon the presentation to the trial court of a
certificate of inoculation signed by a veterinarian.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.146 HINDERING IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this Dog Control Ordinance for any person
to hinder or otherwise interfere with the apprehension or impoundment of any
dog by the Sheriff or any other peace officer.
   (B)   It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the Sheriff
or the peace officer lacked legal authority to impound or apprehend the dog,
provided the Sheriff or peace officer was acting under color of official
authority.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001) Penalty, see §
91.999
IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF
IMPOUNDED DOGS IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.160 DOG CONTROL FACILITIES.
   The Sheriff shall establish and maintain adequate and humane facilities to
store and keep animals. This facility shall be open to the public at reasonable
posted hours.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.161 WHEN AN ANIMAL MAY BE IMPOUNDED.
   (A)   A dog shall be impounded by the Sheriff, Sheriff’s Deputy, or other
peace officer as follows:
      (1)   For allegedly injuring, chasing, menacing, wounding, or killing
livestock; or
      (2)   If it is ordered impounded by the court.
   (B)   A dog or other animal may be impounded by the Sheriff or a peace
officer when the following occurs.
      (1)   It is the subject of a violation of this Dog Control Ordinance.
      (2)   It requires protective custody and care.
      (3)   The officer has probable cause to believe it has bitten a person or
animal.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.162 WHEN AN ANIMAL IS DEEMED IMPOUNDED.
   An animal is deemed to be impounded when the Sheriff or any peace officer
takes custody of the animal.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.163 DISPOSITION OR DESTRUCTION OF AN IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.
   Any animal which has been impounded under this Dog Control Ordinance which,
by reason of injury, disease, or other cause, is suffering great pain or is
dangerous to keep impounded may be destroyed immediately. The Sheriff may
request a veterinarian to certify this fact in writing before such immediate
destruction is undertaken. Any other animal may be disposed of by adoption,
relocation, euthanasia, or other method after 15 days impoundment.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.164 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever any dog is impounded which bears an identification of ownership,
the Sheriff shall make a reasonable effort within 24 hours of impoundment, by
telephone, to give notice of the impoundment of the animal to its owner and, if
unsuccessful, shall mail written notice by certified mail within 48 hours of
impoundment to the last known address of record of the owner, advising of the
impoundment, the date by which redemption must be made, and the fees to be paid
prior to redemption and release.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.165 PERIOD OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   An impounded dog whose owner cannot be determined by license or other
identification may be sold or destroyed in a manner consistent with this Dog
Control Ordinance, if not redeemed within three working days of impoundment.
   (B)   An impounded dog whose owner can be determined by license or other
identification may be sold or destroyed in a manner consistent with this Dog
Control Ordinance, if not redeemed within ten days after notice of impoundment
is mailed to the suspected owner or keeper.
   (C)   An animal that is impounded because it has bitten a person and it
cannot be demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the animal has a
valid and effective rabies inoculation as required by state law or because it
is suspected of having rabies shall be quarantined in a suitable holding
facility for so long as is necessary to observe the dog for the required ten-
day period to determine whether the animal is infected with or a carrier of
rabies.
   (D)   A dog that is impounded because it has bitten a person and is
suspected of being vicious or dangerous may be held until trial or other
disposition of the charges, or until the court orders otherwise.
   (E)   If the Sheriff, veterinarian, or County Health Officer determines that
an impounded animal is not rabid, the animal may be released to its lawful
owner, if known, without charge, provided no citation has been issued
warranting continue impoundment of the animal. The rules regarding the release
of an animal from quarantine are found in the OAR 333-017-0000 et seq. An
animal found to be rabid shall be destroyed in a manner consistent with state
law.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.166 DETERMINATION OF IMPOUNDMENT PERIOD.
   Any period of time specified in this Dog Control Ordinance for the keeping
of an impounded dog shall not include:
   (A)   Sundays;
   (B)   Legal holidays;
   (C)   Days on which the facilities at which the animal is being held are not
open for business;
   (D)   The day the animal is impounded; or
   (E)   The day on which the animal is released or euthanized.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.167 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS GIVEN TO THE COUNTY BY OWNER.
   If the owner of an animal or the owner’s authorized representative releases
the animal to the Sheriff, in writing, the Sheriff may sell or destroy the
animal in a manner consistent with this Dog Control Ordinance and with the
written release. The Board may by order establish a fee to be charged for
acceptance of an animal by the Sheriff under this section.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.168 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Upon the expiration of the impoundment period specified in this Dog
Control Ordinance, and unless otherwise ordered by the court, the Sheriff may
have the animal destroyed, given, traded, or sold to another party.
   (B)   If the owner of an impounded animal is unknown or if the owner has
executed a release as specified in §
91.167, the Sheriff shall determine proper disposition of the animal. In
determining proper disposition of the impounded animal, the Sheriff may
consider:
      (1)   The temperament, health, age, and breed of the animal;
      (2)   The ability of any person requesting custody of the animal to
provide proper care; and
      (3)   Other factors relevant to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public and the animal.
   (C)   If the animal is sold to another party, a new license must be
purchased and an inoculation certificate must be produced within 30 days after
the dog is released to the party by the Sheriff. Failure of the new owner to
license the dog or produce an inoculation certificate within 30 days shall
subject the new owner to liability under §
91.145(B)(7) or (B)(8).
   (D)   If the Sheriff determines that an animal impounded under §
91.165(C) is not rabid, the animal shall be released to its owner, if known,
without charge, provided no citation has been issued warranting continued
impoundment of the animal. An animal determined by the Sheriff or a
veterinarian to be rabid or a carrier of rabies shall be destroyed in a manner
consistent with state law.
(OAR 333-019-0050)
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.169 REDEMPTION.
   Unless otherwise required to protect the public health, safety, or welfare,
a dog impounded under this Dog Control Ordinance shall be released to its owner
upon payment of the redemption fees. Redemption fees shall include a basic
impoundment charge and any boarding charges applicable, and may include an
additional fee for a dog that is being impounded a second or subsequent time
within one year. These fees and charges shall be established by order of the
Board of Commissioners.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.170 RIGHT OF ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   When the Sheriff has probable cause to believe that a provision of
this Dog Control Ordinance has been violated, the Sheriff shall have the right
to enter onto private land without permission in order to secure evidence or
cite an owner or keeper, but shall not enter into any dwelling or building
without permission, authorization, or search warrant.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall have the right to enter upon private property for
the purpose of securing possession and impounding an animal for reasons
specified by these regulations, and shall not be subject, civilly or
criminally, for trespass.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.171 TRANSFER OF TITLE.
   If the Sheriff sells a dog, pursuant to this Dog Control Ordinance, to any
person other than the person who owned the dog when it was impounded, full and
complete title to the dog shall vest in the new owner and the prior owner or
any other third person shall be foreclosed from any right, title, or interest
in the dog.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.172 RIGHT OF POLICE OFFICER OR SHERIFF’S DEPUTY TO REQUEST IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any police officer or Sheriff’s Deputy may request an impounded animal be
held until the disposition or adjudication of any citations, civil claim, or
criminal charges.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
DISPOSITION OF LICENSE FEES AND FINES IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.185 DOG CONTROL FUND.
   All license fees, impoundment costs, late charges, base fines, and other
money collected pursuant to this Dog Control Ordinance shall be deposited in
the County Dog Control Fund unless otherwise provided by this Dog Control
Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.186 DISPOSITION OF DOG CONTROL FUND.
   The Sheriff shall administer the Dog Control Fund and pay out of the fund
all costs of administering and enforcing this Dog Control Ordinance and all
livestock claims allowed pursuant to this Dog Control Ordinance. Any surplus
funds may be set aside for necessary improvements to the County facility and/or
for control of feral, predatory, and nuisance animals.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.187 RABIES OUTBREAK.
   In the event of a rabies outbreak within the County, the Sheriff may use the
Dog Control Fund as necessary to purchase rabies vaccines for administering to
animals under the direction of state and local health officers.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
LIVESTOCK CLAIMS IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.200 SUBMISSION OF CLAIMS.
   An owner of livestock killed by a dog may submit a claim to the Dog Control
Advisory Committee or the County dog control office. Claims submitted to the
dog control office shall be forwarded to the Committee to be heard at the
Committee’s next regular session or as soon thereafter as is practicable. The
claim must be submitted within ten days of the killing or of the time the
killing becomes known to the owner. The claim shall be in writing, and shall
include:
   (A)   A full, verified account of the killing;
   (B)   The name and address of the owner or keeper of the dog, if known; and
   (C)   A detailed statement of the damages claimed.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.201 REVIEW OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   The Dog Control Advisory Committee shall review all livestock claims
submitted and shall allow or deny any portion of the claim as it deems just,
not to exceed the market value of the livestock. It shall be within the
discretion of the Committee to award less than fair market value to the owner
of livestock killed by a dog. The livestock owner shall be notified of the
Committee’s decision by mail within 30 days after the Committee discusses the
claim. If the Committee allows all or part of a claim, the claim shall be paid
out of the Dog Control Fund in return for a subrogation agreement allowing the
office of the County District Attorney or the County Counsel to seek damages
against the owner of the dog for the amount paid out of the Dog Control Fund.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall prepare forms for the submission of livestock claims
and make those forms available to the public. Any funds collected by the
District Attorney or County Counsel, pursuant to this section, shall, after
deduction for the costs of prosecution, be paid into the Dog Control Fund. The
District Attorney or County Counsel shall have full discretion to prosecute,
not prosecute, compromise, or settle any action arising out of this section.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.202 RIGHT OF ACTION BY OWNER OF DAMAGED LIVESTOCK.
   Nothing in this Dog Control Ordinance is intended to affect the right of an
owner of livestock injured, chased, wounded, or killed by a dog to a claim
against the owner of the dog for double the damages suffered, as specified in
ORS 609.140.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
DOGS THAT KILL OR INJURE LIVESTOCK IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.215 IMMEDIATE DESTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this Dog Control Ordinance is intended to affect the right of an
owner of livestock killed or wounded by a dog to summarily kill that dog under
circumstances specified in ORS 609.150.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.216 HEARING BY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The procedure for hearing by the Board of Commissioners of a claim that a
dog has been engaged in killing, wounding, injuring, or chasing livestock shall
be as specified in ORS 609.155. Clear and convincing evidence shall be
necessary to sustain a claim that a dog has been engaged in killing, wounding,
injuring, or chasing livestock.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.217 DISPUTABLE PRESUMPTION.
   Nothing in this Dog Control Ordinance is intended to affect the disputable
presumption that a dog has been engaged in killing, wounding, injuring, or
chasing livestock contained in ORS 609.157, or the prohibition on harboring a
dog with knowledge that it has killed or injured livestock contained in ORS
609.160.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.218 ALTERNATIVE DISPOSITION; DOG CHASE LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   A dog that has been found by the Board to have engaged in chasing
livestock may be disposed of in a manner other than the destruction of the dog
if the Board finds as follows:
      (1)   No physical injury to the livestock has occurred due to the
chasing;
      (2)   The dog has not been involved in the chasing of livestock on an
earlier occasion;
      (3)   Reasonable assurances have been given by a responsible party
willing to take custody of the dog that the dog will be properly restrained on
a permanent basis in a manner to prevent the dog from chasing or harming
livestock in the future; and
      (4)   The owner of livestock chased by a dog agrees to the proposed
disposition of the dog.
   (B)   Except as specified above, disposition of dogs engaged in killing,
wounding, injuring, or chasing of livestock shall be as specified in ORS
Chapter 609.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES IN THE COUNTY
§ 91.230 MANNER OF CITATION.
   A uniform dog control citation, conforming to the requirements of this
section, shall be used for all dog control violations committed in the presence
of the complainant and which occur within the areas of the County covered by
this Dog Control Ordinance.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.231 UNIFORM DOG CONTROL CITATION.
   (A)   The uniform dog control citation shall consist of three parts and any
additional parts inserted for administrative use. The required parts are as
follows:
      (1)   A complaint stating the name of the court and the name the County;
a statement of the violation; the date, time, and place of the violation; and a
certificate in which the enforcing officer or deputy signs and certifies, under
the penalties contained in ORS 153.990, that the officer or deputy has
reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person named in the
complaint committed the violation specified;
      (2)   The County Sheriff’s record of the violation; and
      (3)   The summons specifying the date, time, court, and place the cited
person must appear.
   (B)   The citation shall contain the following information or blanks in
which the information shall be entered:
      (1)   Name of the court;
      (2)   Name of the person cited;
      (3)   Section of this Dog Control Ordinance violated;
      (4)   Designation of the violation with which the person is charged; the
date, the time, and the place at which the violation occurred; the date on
which the citation was issued; and
      (5)   The time and place set for the person cited to appear in court.
   (C)   Each of the parts may also contain any identifying and additional
information necessary for the Sheriff to administer this Dog Control Ordinance,
such as whether the violation is a continuing violation or whether the dog or
owner is a repeat offender.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.232 AMENDMENT OF UNIFORM DOG CONTROL CITATION.
   Any error in transcribing on the uniform dog control citation form, when
determined by the court to be nonprejudicial to the defendant, may be corrected
at the time of trial or prior to trial, with notice being given to the
defendant.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.233 TIME TO RAISE ERRORS ON CITATION.
   Except as provided in §
91.232 above, the complaint shall be set aside by the court for failure to
conform to this section, only upon the proper written motion of the defendant,
before plea.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.234 CERTIFICATION OF UNIFORM DOG CONTROL CITATION.
   The citation shall contain a certificate by the complainant or by the
Sheriff to the effect that the complainant or Sheriff has reasonable grounds to
believe and does believe that the person cited committed the offense contrary
to law. If the certification is made by the Sheriff or any peace officer, it
need not be made before a magistrate or any other person. A private person
shall certify before a magistrate, clerk, or deputy clerk of the court, and
this action will be entered in the court record. A certificate conforming to
this section shall be deemed equivalent to a sworn complaint.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.235 SERVICE OF CITATION.
   The Sheriff or peace officer issuing the citation shall deliver the summons
to the person cited and shall deliver the complaint to the court. When the
complaint is certified by a private person, the court shall deliver the summons
to the defendant.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.236 APPEARANCE BY DEFENDANT.
   (A)   The defendant shall appear in court at the time mentioned in the
summons if the citation is for:
      (1)   Owning a vicious or dangerous dog;
      (2)   Owning a dog not vaccinated for rabies;
      (3)   An offense for which an owner or keeper of a dog has been convicted
at least twice during the previous 12 months if the offenses involve the dog
which is subject to the present citation; or
      (4)   Being a habitual offender.
   (B)   In other cases, the defendant shall either appear in court at the time
indicated in the summons, or prior to such time shall deliver the summons to
the court, together with a check or money order in the amount of bail set forth
in the summons, and either:
      (1)   A request for a hearing;
      (2)   A statement of explanation or mitigation of the offense charged; or
      (3)   The executed appearance, waiver of hearing, and plea of guilty
appearing on the summons. A statement in explanation or mitigation also may be
enclosed with a guilty plea.
   (C)   If a defendant submits a written statement to the court as provided in
this section, it operates as a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment by the
court. Bail shall be forfeited on the basis of such statement and any testimony
or written statement of the arresting officer or other witnesses which may be
presented to the court. A judgment by the court declaring a forfeiture of bail,
pursuant to this section, shall be deemed a conviction of the offense charged
in the citation.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.237 FAILURE OF DEFENDANT TO APPEAR.
   (A)   If the defendant fails to comply with §
91.236 or fails to appear at any time fixed by the court, the defendant may be
charged with “Failure to Appear,” a Class A misdemeanor, and a warrant for
arrest may be issued.
   (B)   If the defendant fails to appear at any time fixed by the court and
has posted bail, the court may order a forfeiture of that bail. Unless a
warrant has been issued the order of forfeiture shall be deemed the final
disposition of the case and shall be deemed a conviction of the offense charged
in the citation.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.238 CONTINUING VIOLATION.
   A continuing violation of this Dog Control Ordinance shall constitute a
nuisance and, at the option of the Sheriff, may be abated pursuant to law. In
the alternative, a continuing violation may result in an additional base fine
not to exceed $1,000 per day of violation as well as the fines imposed under §
91.999.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
DOG CONTROL APPLICATION, FEES, AND CONDITIONS OF OWNERSHIP
§ 91.250 APPLICATION.
   This Dog Control Ordinance shall apply to all of the County except those
incorporated areas within the County which have established their own dog
licensing and dog control programs.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.251 BAIL AND CONDITIONS OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Menacing: bail $300.
      (1)   A dog found guilty of menacing must henceforth, when outside the
owner or keeper’s house, be restrained by a physical device or structure in
good repair that would present the dog from reaching any public walkway or
adjoining properties and not interfere with the legal access to the owner or
keeper’s property.
      (2)   When off the property of owner of keeper, the dog must be on a
leash and under the immediate control of a person who could reasonably be
expected to be able to keep the dog under control.
      (3)   The owner or keeper must post their property with two or more
clearly visible signs declaring “Beware of Dog” or other such recognized signs
for the safety of others.
   (B)   Dangerous: bail $500.
      (1)   A dog found guilty of being dangerous must henceforth when on the
owner or keeper’s property:
         (a)   Be kept securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure in good repair. That pen or structure must have minimum
dimensions of five feet by ten feet and have a cement floor, and a secure
covering over the structure or pen that could reasonably keep that particular
dog in its confined area and young children out. The owner or keeper mut also
provide the dog with proper shelter for the health and welfare of the dog that
would meet standards year round in this area;
         (b)   That structure or pen must be enclosed behind a securely locked
fence in good repair which totally surrounds said structure or pen, and is of
proper height for that particular dog, to act as a secondary source of
confinement to guarantee the safety of humans or other domestic animals should
the dog escape the primary confinement area;
         (c)   Said dog may not be confined within ten feet of a property line
unless behind a solid six feet wood fence in good repair to protect both the
confined animal and outside humans or domestic animals, and still must meet the
requirements in division (B)(1) above; and
         (d)   The property must be posted with enough signs (as described in
division (A) above) to assure that anyone entering on the property or near
where the dog is kept can be duly warned.
      (2)   When off the property of the owner or keeper, the dog must be on a
leash that could reasonably hold that particular dog and may not exceed six
feet in length, and under the immediate control of an adult who could guarantee
control of said dog, and in some cases may be required to wear a recognized
muzzle.
      (3)   When in a vehicle, the dog must be confined inside an enclosed
portion of the vehicle or in a canopy that is in good repair and could
reasonably hold that particular animal. The dog may also be kept inside a crate
of proper size and strength that is in good repair that could reasonably hold
that particular dog.
      (4)   When being transported in a vehicle, the animal should not have any
opening large enough to stick its head outside of its confinement outside the
immediate custody of an adult human who can control the dog.
      (5)   Law enforcement personnel may make inquiries or inspect any portion
of confinement listed in either division (A) or (B) above, at any time, to
assure that the owner or keeper of a menacing or dangerous dog(s) is keeping up
the requirements as ordered in these sections.
      (6)   Any dog having been deemed a dangerous dog by this County may not
be sold or given away to anyone but a recognized law enforcement dog control
facility and all rights to the dog will be forfeited upon receipt of said dog.
      (7)   The owner or keeper may be required to obtain and maintain a
separate insurance policy on any dog found to be dangerous, as long as the dog
lives, of not less than $25,000 and not more than $50,000. This may be ordered
by the court or Dog Board.
      (8)   Any dog designated as dangerous may be destroyed if so ordered by
the court or Dog Board, or if the owner or keeper is unwilling or unable to
comply with the regulations, or if the owner or keeper of said dog releases all
rights to dog control.
      (9)   Any dog cited as dangerous may be picked up and lodged at a holding
facility until such time as the case has a disposition and/or confinement
conditions listed under this division (B) are met to the satisfaction of law
enforcement personnel. The owner or keeper may be held liable for the dog’s
room and Board during this period.
      (10)   Any dog allowed or encouraged to act in a menacing or dangerous
manner outside of confinement as listed in division (A) or (B) above, may be
removed by law enforcement personnel and kept at a holding facility until such
time as a judge or the dog board decides the disposition of said dog.
   (C)   Vicious: bail $1,000.
      (1)   Any dog found guilty of being vicious shall be destroyed.
      (2)   (a)   Any dog cited for being vicious shall be lodged in protective
custody at a holding facility until such time as the owner or keeper releases
all rights to the animal to dog control or a judge declares a verdict. The
owner or keeper may be held liable for dog’s room and board.
         (b)   Any owner or keeper who has been given written notice that their
dog may be considered menacing, dangerous, or possibly vicious shall not allow
their dog to go off their property unless on a leash, and under immediate
control of a reasonable person. Failure to do so may result in the dog being
impounded and detained in a holding facility until such time as a disposition
can be decided by a judge, the Dog Board, or until law enforcement personnel
feel that the owner or keeper can and will meet all requirements of the offense
they were notified of.
   (D)   Habitual offender: bail $300.
      (1)   Any dog having been found/pled guilty of habitual offender status
and subsequently re-offends shall be permanently removed from said owner or
keeper and shall become the immediate property of dog control.
      (2)   Any person(s) found/pled guilty of being a habitual offender may,
by order of the court, lose the right to own any dog(s) while living in the
County. And if so ordered, law enforcement personnel may make inquiries or
inspect and remove from the premises any dog being found kept or owned by said
person(s). Any County in the state may request a copy of that court order and
continue enforcement in their County.
   (E)   Habitual offender confinement restriction. Same as menacing (division
(A) above).
   (F)   Dog running at large after warning of dog suspected of being menacing
or dangerous or vicious or habitual offender: bail $500. Any dog going off the
owner or keeper’s property that is not on a leash and under immediate control
of a reasonable person, as described in the Dog Control Ordinance, and has been
given written notice of being suspected of menacing or dangerous, as stipulated
under this section, may be picked up and lodged at a holding facility until
property conditions are met as stated in those ordinances to the satisfaction
of dog control personnel, a rule by the Board is made, or until a judge makes a
ruling in the case.
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.252 FEES.
 
Yearly License Fee
Spayed or neutered dog with veterinarian certificate                       $20
Spayed or neutered dog with veterinarian certificate owned by a person 65-
75 years of age                                                            $10
(First dog at $10; any additional dogs at $20 each)
Spayed or neutered dog with veterinarian certificate owned by a person 75
or older                                                                   $4
(First dog at $4; first additional at $10; all other additional, $20 each)
Each dog kept in a licensed kennel                                         $10
Guide dog, hearing ear dog, or recognized trained dog for the handicapped  $0
All other dogs (fertile)                                                   $30
 
Late License Fee
If no citation has been 1/2 license fee (regular late fee)
issued, all dogs
If a citation has been  Double license fee plus the appropriate license fee
issued, all dogs        as listed above under “Yearly License Fee.”
 
Lost license tag            $2
License transfer            $2
Reciprocal license transfer $2
 
Authorized Sales Outlet
Amount that may be retained by outlet to cover $1 plus $1 late fee
administrative cost
 
Kennel License (Annual)
Commercial            $500
Noncommercial (hobby) $150
Animal Released to Sheriff
Animal Released to Sheriff
Basic release of a dog                                       $10
Release of a litter of pups (first 2 pups)                   $10
For each additional pup                                      $1
Release of a dog for euthanasia only (price is size-related) $10 to $25
Release of an adult cat                                      $5
Release of a teenage kitten                                  $3
Release of a kitten                                          $1
Pick-up of owned by dog by officer                           $25
 
Redemption Fees
Basic owned dog impoundment fee                   $35
Second or subsequent impoundment within 12 months $70
Room and board fees (per day)                     $10
Minimum (per day, per dog)                        $15
Redemption of owned cat
 
Adoption Fees
Dogs (depending on desirability) $35 to $100
Cats (depending on age of cat)   $10 to $25
 
Miscellaneous Fees
Copy of Dog Control Ordinance                                            $15
Copy of complaints or files other than licenses or rabies certificate    $10
Weekly rental of live trap (cat trap), including $15 refundable deposit  $25
(including 1st cat)
Bail Amounts for Ordinance Offenses
Bail Amounts for Ordinance Offenses
Dogs at large                                                         $94
2nd offense in 12-month period                                        $150
Dog bite                                                              $150
Chased vehicle or person                                              $94
2nd offense in 12-month period                                        $150
Damaged or destroyed property (plus damage as described in §         $150
91.999
Damaged or destroyed domestic animal or poultry                       $150
Trespass                                                              $94
2nd offense in 12-month period                                        $150
Barking                                                               $94
2nd offense in 12-month period                                        $150
Traffic hazard                                                        $150
2nd offense in 12-month period                                        $300
Female in heat                                                        $94
Not licensed                                                          $94
Dog at large after notice of suspected of being menacing or dangerous $150
Habitual offender                                                     $300
Menacing                                                              $500
Dangerous                                                             $1,000
Vicious                                                               $1,000
Chasing livestock                                                     $300
Injuring or killing livestock                                         $500
Failure to obtain rabies inoculation                                  $150
Hindering impoundment of a dog                                        $500
Failure to surrender a dog suspected of having rabies                 $1,000
Each conviction shall be accompanied by an automatic court assessment of $25.
This revenue shall be paid to the County dog control for maintenance, upgrade,
or purchase of buildings, vehicles, equipment, or personnel expenses.
 
(County Ord. 692, passed 7-12-2001)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The owner, keeper, or person in charge of an animal found to
have committed a violation of §§
91.001 through
91.016 may be issued a citation to appear in the Municipal Court for such
violation. A conviction for having committed a violation of this §§
91.001 through
91.016 shall be punishable as a Class 2 infraction for a first offense and a
Class 1 infraction for each subsequent offense.
      (2)   In addition to any fines or other penalties provided herein, the
officer may order such disposition of the animal as it considers necessary for
the safety or health of the public.
   (C)   (1)   The owner or person in control of such dog so picked up and /or
confined may reclaim said animal upon paying to the County any and all assessed
fines and fees.
      (2)   The Municipal Judge, in his or her discretion, may impose a fine of
not less than $5 or more than $25 in addition to the said charge imposed for
the picking up or confinement of a dog.
      (3)   After a dog has been in confinement for a period of five days, such
animal may be disposed of or destroyed upon the written order of the Municipal
Judge or in accordance with County policy or ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   A violation of any provision in §§
91.050 through
91.055,
91.070,
91.071,
91.085 through
91.088,
91.100 through
91.108,
91.120 through
91.131,
91.145,
91.146,
91.160 through
91.172,
91.185 through
91.187,
91.200 through
91.202,
91.215 through
91.218,
91.230 through
91.238, and
91.250 through
91.252 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000, pursuant to ORS 153.018(2)
(e) and ORS 153.025(2).
      (2)   Minimum fine amount: under no circumstances shall any base fine
levied by the court result in less than $30 going to the Dog Control Fund after
assessments and costs have been subtracted. Thus the minimum fine for any
offense must be $30 plus the standard assessments and costs.
      (3)   In addition to any fines, if the dog has been found to be menacing,
vicious, or dangerous, or has been found to be a habitual offender or public
nuisance as defined in this Dog Control Ordinance, the court may order whatever
disposition of the dog that the court considers advisable or necessary for the
safety, health, or protection of the public, including euthanasia of the dog.
      (4)   The penalties described in this section shall be in addition to any
charges assessed against the owner or the keeper of any animal under this Dog
Control Ordinance for the licensing, impoundment, and maintenance of the
animal.
      (5)   The imposition of a penalty under this Dog Control Ordinance shall
not preclude the use of any other remedy allowed by law to halt or prevent a
violation of this Dog Control Ordinance.
   (E)   (1)   A violation of §
91.122 is a continuing violation punishable by a base fine not to exceed $100
per day or a maximum of $1,000.
      (2)   A violation of §
91.126 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
(Ord. 307A, passed 3-2-1959; Ord. 418, passed 8-1-1977; County Ord. 692, passed
7-12-2001; Ord. 653, passed 4-4-2018)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Applicability to property open to public travel
   
92.03   Trees and bushes
   
92.04   Curbs, sidewalks, and driveways
   
92.05   Public and private improvement standards
   
92.06   Fees
Constructing or Placing in Rights-of-Way
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Jurisdiction and scope of regulatory control
   
92.21   City permission requirement
   
92.23   Obligations of City
   
92.24   Permits and restrictions
   
92.25   Driveway restrictions
   
92.26   Other structures in the public right-of-way
   
92.27   Merchandise sale or display
Excavations
   
92.40   Permit required
   
92.41   Notification requirements
   
92.42   Safeguards
   
92.43   Inherent responsibilities
   
92.44   Refilling trenches
   
92.45   Notice of completion
   
92.46   Moratorium against cuts on newly improved streets
   
92.47   Restoration guidelines for streets subject to a moratorium
Street Maintenance Program
   
92.60   Definitions
   
92.61   Administrative officers
   
92.62   Dedication of revenues
   
92.63   Street maintenance fee
   
92.64   Determination of street maintenance fee
   
92.65   Administration of street maintenance fee
   
92.66   Waiver of street maintenance fee in case of vacancy
   
92.67   Street maintenance fee appeal procedure
   
92.68   Exceptions to street maintenance fee
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A narrow street through the middle of the block.
   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride,
having two or more tandem wheels, either of which is six inches or more in
diameter.
   BUS STAND or BUS STOP. A space adjacent to the curb designated by sign to be
occupied exclusively by buses loading or unloading passengers.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator for the City.
   CURB. The extreme edge of the roadway.
   DESIGN DISTRICT. An area subject to separate design standards adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual or entity constructing, demolishing, or repairing
a public capital improvement within the City.
   DEVELOPMENT. A building, property use, or mining operation making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creation or
termination of a right of access.
   DRIVEWAY. A structure used for vehicular access from the public right-of-way
to abutting private property located normally between the curbing or lateral
lines of the roadway surface and the adjacent property line.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any private structure installed within the right-of-way.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or Public Works Director or his or her
authorized representative.
   FRONTAGE ZONE. The area of the sidewalk corridor between the Through
Pedestrian Zone and the property line as defined by resolution of the City
Council.
   FURNISHING ZONE. The area of the sidewalk corridor between the curb and the
Through Pedestrian Zone as defined by resolution of the City Council.
   LAND AREA. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the
parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of
the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude
for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
   LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to the curb designated by sign reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers,
material, or freight.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle that is self propelled, including tractors,
fork lift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning
equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power,
notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor
vehicle laws of the state.
   OWNER. A natural person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity holding
the deed, record title, or the purchaser under a recorded sales agreement and
other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.
   PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is
occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that
includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning,
subdivision, and other development ordinances.
   PARK or PARKING. A motor vehicle that is stopped while occupied by its
operator with the engine turned off or a motor vehicle that is stopped while
unoccupied by its operator whether or not the engine is turned off.
   PARKWAY. The portion of a street not used as a roadway or a sidewalk.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. A loading zone reserved only for the loading or
unloading of passengers and their luggage.
   PEDESTRIAN. A natural person afoot.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation,
whether or not they are acting for themselves or as a clerk, servant, employee,
or agent of another.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, or person other than the owner having possession or control of the
property.
   ROLLER SKATES or ROLLER BLADES. A shoe or boot with a set of wheels attached
for skating over a flat surface. These terms also include a metal frame with
wheels attached that can be fitted to the sole of a shoe or boot.
   SIDEWALK. The part of a street right-of-way between the curb line or the
lateral line of the paved portion of the roadway and the adjacent property line
that is intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIDEWALK CORNER OBSTRUCTION FREE AREA. The area between the curb and the
lines created by extending the adjacent property lines to the curb face.
   SKATEBOARD. A board or similar platform made from any substance mounted on
wheels.
   SCOOTER. A foot-operated vehicle, consisting of a narrow board mounted
between two wheels tandem with an upright steering handle attached to the front
wheel.
   STAND or STANDING. The stopping of a motor vehicle, while occupied by its
operator, with the engine running, except stopping in obedience to the
instructions of a traffic officer or traffic control device or for other
traffic.
   STOP. The complete cessation of movement.
   STREET. Alleys, sidewalks, parking areas, and accessways owned or maintained
by the City and includes the terms HIGHWAY, ROAD, and STREET. In addition, it
includes property, whether publicly or privately owned, and, whether publicly
or privately maintained, upon which the public operates vehicles, either by
express or implied invitation and includes, but is not limited to, parking
lots, service station lots, shopping center and supermarket parking lots, and
other accessways and parking lots open to general vehicular traffic, whether or
not periodically closed to public use.
   STREET TREE. Any tree or part of a tree, existing or new planting, including
the canopy and root system, that lies on or has grown onto or over public
property, or in public right-of-way owned by the City.
   TAXI STAND. A space adjacent to the curb designated by sign reserved for
taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
   THROUGH PEDESTRIAN ZONE. The area of sidewalk between the Furnishing Zone
and the Frontage Zone in which no obstructions, openings, or other impediments
would prevent or discourage movement by pedestrians, including, but not limited
to, utility poles, signs, benches, merchandise, trash receptacles, plants, and
the like.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A device used to direct vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic or parking, including, but not limited to, a sign, signaling
mechanism, barricade, button, street marking, or curb marking installed by the
City or other authority.
   TRAFFIC LANE. That portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single
lane of vehicles.
   VEHICLE. Any type of vehicle, including bicycles.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.02 APPLICABILITY TO PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply upon property open to public
travel. Any conduct or status that would constitute a violation of the statutes
if it occurred on a public street will, if it occurs on other property open to
public travel, constitute a municipal traffic infraction under the provision of
the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.03 TREES AND BUSHES.
   (A)   (1)   Bushes and shrubbery not properly maintained may be declared
noxious vegetation in accordance with §
90.21.
      (2)   No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon any street
or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on the person’s property to
interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It is the duty of an owner or person
in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all
trees and bushes on the person’s premises, including the adjoining parking
strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the street surface
or 14 feet above the street surface on property adjacent to designated truck
routes.
   (B)   No person or person in charge of property shall allow to stand any
dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property
on or near the property.
   (C)   All street trees that were required to be installed under a street
tree plan or similar requirement shall be maintained in a healthy condition by
the adjoining property owner or replaced with a tree consistent with the
approved street tree plan for that location.
   (D)   No person shall remove any tree greater than one and one-half inches
in diameter from the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from
the City to do so, except as noted below.
   (E)   Because mature, healthy trees contribute significantly to the beauty
and character of the community, City Staff will generally not issue a permit to
remove a street tree greater than six inches in diameter unless the tree is
diseased, rotten, dead or dying, significantly misshapen, an obstruction, or
other hazard. A certified arborist may be required to verify the tree’s
condition before removal is permitted.
   (F)   No person shall top or severely prune a tree greater than two inches
in diameter in the right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City
to do so, except where such pruning is required by City ordinances or requested
by the City, such as to maintain clearances from sidewalks, street signs,
streets, or alleys. SEVERE PRUNING is defined as severing the trunk or cutting
back to the trunk or cutting a limb larger than four inches in diameter to a
stub. A permit may be issued to prune a tree to remove a tree, limbs, or roots
which are dead; to remove trees, limbs, or roots which have been severely
damaged by storms or other causes; or which otherwise pose a danger to the
public health and overall attractive shape of the tree. The permit may require
that pruning be done under the supervision of a certified arborist.
   (G)   The City may require that a tree removed be replaced with a tree in
accordance with a tree approved by the Public Works Superintendent and City
Administrator.
   (H)   The above requirements do not apply to free pruning or removal by City
Staff or agents. They also do not apply to public utility agencies or their
agents pruning or removing trees as necessary to comply with applicable utility
clearance standards. They do not apply in emergency circumstances.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 CURBS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   All sidewalks and driveways installed within the City right-of-way
shall be designed, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
accordance with the latest version of the Public Works Design Standards.
   (B)   It is the duty of an owner of land adjacent to a public right-of-way
in the City to construct, reconstruct, repair, and keep clear of leaves, ice,
snow, and all other obstructions or hazards to the public which are reasonably
removable on all sidewalks and driveways adjacent to said land. The Engineer
shall notify the property owner of the need to repair sidewalks and driveways
after determining that the existing sidewalk is in such a state of disrepair
that the condition or defect is such that it would create a danger to
pedestrians. Such notice to the property owner shall be in writing.
   (C)   No person in charge of any building or structure shall suffer or
permit rainwater, ice, or snow to fall from such building or structure onto a
street or public sidewalk or to flow across such sidewalk.
   (D)   The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain
in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that
any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such will not be carried
across or upon any sidewalk.
   (E)   The owner responsible for maintenance of the adjacent sidewalk and
driveway shall be liable to any third person who sustains any injury or damage
as a result of inadequate maintenance, repair, construction, or failure to
adequately remove snow, ice, leaves, or any other hazard or obstruction from
that portion of sidewalk or driveway abutting his or her property.
Additionally, any person who fails to perform or comply with the duties imposed
by this division (E) shall be liable to any third person for injuries or
damages suffered as a result of such failure.
   (F)   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a cellar door or
grate located in or upon a sidewalk or public pathway to remain open except
when such entrance is being used and, when being used, there are adequate
safeguards for pedestrians using the sidewalk.
   (G)   No person, except as otherwise permitted by chapter, shall obstruct,
cause to be obstructed, or assist in obstructing vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street or public sidewalk.
   (H)   Concurrent with the issuance of a building permit for the construction
of a building for residential use or business structures or an addition or
alteration to a dwelling or business structure, the value of which is $5,000 or
more.
      (1)   The owner, builder, or contractor to whom the building permit is
issued shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Construct a sidewalk within the dedicated right-of-way for the
full frontage in which a sidewalk in good repair does not exist. The sidewalk
construction shall be completed within the building construction period or
prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, whichever is the lesser; and
         (b)   Dedicate right-of-way in accordance with an approved City plan.
      (2)   The Engineer may issue a permit and certificate allowing
noncompliance with the provisions of this section to the owner, builder, or
contractor when, in his or her opinion, the construction of a sidewalk is
impractical for one or more of the following reasons.
         (a)   Sidewalk grades have not and cannot be established for the
property in question within a reasonable period of time.
         (b)   Future installation of public utilities or street paving would,
of necessity, cause severe damage to existing sidewalks.
         (c)   Topography or contours make the construction of a sidewalk
impractical.
         (d)   The noncompliance provided in divisions (H)(2)(a) and (H)(2)(b)
above shall be temporary and shall cease to exist when grades are established
for sidewalks by the Public Works Department or when public utilities or street
paving have been constructed.
      (3)   If the owner, builder, or contractor considers any of the
requirements impractical for any reason, they may appeal the decision to the
Public Works Superintendent.
      (4)   If sidewalk is not constructed within the time required by this
section, then the City may construct it for the full street frontage in front
of the property and proceed with the construction, assessment, and collections
of costs as provided for in this division (F) above.
   (I)   It is the duty of every property owner whose vacant or undeveloped
property abuts upon any street, which has been improved with a hard-surface
pavement, to construct a concrete curb and sidewalk conforming to City
ordinances when 50% of the lineal distance of the sidewalk of said block has
already been installed. Said construction shall be completed within two years
after notice by the Engineer.
   (J)   It is the duty of every property owner of developed property whose
property abuts upon a street, which has been improved with a hard-surface
pavement, to construct a concrete curb, sidewalk, and driveway conforming to
City ordinances when 50% of the lineal distance of the sidewalk of said block
has already been installed. Said construction shall be completed within one
year after notice by the Engineer.
   (K)   It is the duty of every property owner whose property abut upon a
street designated as a “high pedestrian use street” to construct a concrete
curb and sidewalk conforming to City ordinances within one year after notice by
the Engineer. The Engineer shall identify “high pedestrian use streets” by
determining whether a certain street is a primary walking route to schools,
community buildings, or commercial areas and whether the absence of sidewalks
along those walking routes is a potential danger to pedestrians. The Engineer
may also apply other factors such as pedestrian counts, projects under
construction, or sites designed for development when identifying “high
pedestrian use streets.”
   (L)   The City Council may, when it deems it reasonable, necessary, and
expedient, order the construction, reconstruction, or repair of a sidewalk or
driveway by the owner or owners of land adjoining any public right-of-way in
the City.
      (1)   The order shall be by written resolution and shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the land adjacent to the ordered work and the
same may be by street address only;
         (b)   The names or names of the owners of the affected property;
         (c)   The time within which the work is to be completed;
         (d)   The order of the Council requiring the work to be accomplished;
and
         (e)   An order directing the Engineer to notify the owners of the City
Council action.
      (2)   The Engineer shall be responsible to assure that the following
requirements are fulfilled when the powers of City Council are to be used to
accomplish the construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalks or
driveways.
         (a)   Notices shall be sent out ten days in advance of any Council
action to the affected owners, or his, her, or their agents, that consideration
will be given to the construction, reconstruction, or repair of the sidewalks
or driveways adjacent to his, her, or their property.
         (b)   It shall be deemed sufficient that the notice is served by one
or more of the following methods:
            1.   Registered mail;
            2.   Posted on the property;
            3.   Served personally; and/or
            4.   Publication in a local paper.
         (c)   A mistake in the name of the owner shall not render void such
notice.
      (3)   In the event the order of the Council for the construction,
reconstruction, or repair of a sidewalk or driveway is not complied with within
the time designated or is not complied with according to the Engineer’s
specifications or directions, the Engineer shall cause the order to be
performed either by contract or force account and shall keep an accurate cost
record of the expense as it applies to each parcel of land.
      (4)   Upon receipt of the record of costs specified in the above, the
Council shall by ordinance assess the cost of all work against the adjacent
property. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be
collected in the same manner as is provided by law for the collection of
unbonded liens for local improvements.
      (5)   The provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act being ORS 223.205 et
seq. of the state shall not be applicable to assessments made under this
chapter unless the Council directs otherwise in the resolution ordering
alternative forms of financing by or under the direction of the City upon such
terms and provisions as the Council may deem appropriate.
   (M)   Any person who may desire to construct or is required to construct,
reconstruct, or repair any sidewalk, curb, or driveway shall obtain a permit
before commencing work; and such application shall specify the property along
which such walk, curb, or driveway is to be laid; the name of the person for
whom same is to be performed; and the time within which same is to be
completed. It is hereby the duty of the Engineer to issue permits and upon the
request of any person to whom a permit has been issued as herein provided and
within a reasonable time thereafter, to set the grade and line stakes for the
construction of any sidewalk, curb, or driveway in the City. No person shall
construct or cause to be constructed any sidewalk, curb, or driveway in the
City until such grade and line stakes have been set.
   (N)   The Engineer may authorize the installation of a meandering sidewalk
for aesthetic purposes provide that said walk does not substantially
inconvenience the general public nor create an apparent traffic or pedestrian
hazard.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.05 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by written contracts with the City or by
supplemental specifications and plans authorized and maintained by the
Engineer, all public improvements, all private improvements located or
affecting City-owned utilities shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired,
and maintained in accordance with the most current version of the Oregon
Standard Specifications for Construction manual published jointly by the
A.P.W.A. Oregon Chapter and the state’s Department of Transportation.
   (B)   For the purpose of administration of the provisions of the manual, the
term OWNER shall refer to the City and the term CONTRACTOR shall refer to the
person responsible for the construction, reconstruction, and repair of the
improvements.
   (C)   Exceptions and additions to the plans and specifications contained in
the manual may be authorized or required by the Engineer. With regard to a
particular project or class of project, the Engineer may disapprove any
specification or material otherwise permitted if, in the Engineer’s opinion,
the use of the specification material would not be suitable or would not
conform with the highest standards of safety, engineering, and construction
practices.
   (D)   All official elevations established in the City shall be with
reference to their elevation as compared with the official base, NGS NAD 83, in
feet and decimal parts of a foot. No grade or official elevation shall be
established other than by ordinance and in the manner approved by the Engineer.
The official City base or plane or reference for coordinates and elevations is
County GPS station 53, located at the centerline intersection of Third Avenue
and Getchell Avenue.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.06 FEES.
   The City Council may establish fees by resolution for permits issued
pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
CONSTRUCTING OR PLACING IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Individual, corporation, association firm, partnership, joint stock
company, and similar entities.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Include, but are not limited to, streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all
other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these
areas.
   WITHIN THE CITY. Territory over which the City now has or acquires
jurisdiction for the exercise of its powers.
§ 92.21 JURISDICTION AND SCOPE OF REGULATORY CONTROL.
   (A)   The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all
public rights-of-way within the City under the authority of the city charter
and state laws.
   (B)   The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over public
right-of-way whether the City has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in
the right-of-way. The City has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each
right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by
grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation,
foreclosure, or other means.
§ 92.22 CITY PERMISSION REQUIREMENT.
   No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the
express permission of the City received in writing.
   (A)   Permission to use rights-of-way shall be obtained solely through the
City Administrator’s office.
   (B)   The City Administrator may impose such standards as are necessary to
maintain the condition of City rights-of-way as are necessary in the
circumstances.
   (C)   Franchises granted to the purveyors of electrical energy, telephone,
solid waste recovery, natural gas, television, or other telecommunications
system shall be negotiated by the City Administrator, approved by the City
Council, and maintained on file in the City Administrator’s office.
§ 92.23 OBLIGATIONS OF CITY.
   The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over public right-of-way
by the City is not official acceptance of the right-of-way and does not
obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.
§ 92.24 PERMITS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Permits required.
      (1)   No person shall remove, alter, or construct any curb, driveway,
sidewalk, or gutter on or in any street, alley, right-of-way, or other property
owned by or dedicated to or used by the City and over which it has jurisdiction
to regulate the matters covered hereby without first obtaining a permit from
the City.
      (2)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the City on a form
prescribed by the city and shall contain such information and data as required
by it.
      (3)   Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a
permit fee as set by resolution of the City Council.
      (4)   All work done under a permit issued in compliance with this section
shall be done under the direction of the Engineer or Public Works
Superintendent. The Engineer or Public Works Superintendent may revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this section at any time he or she is satisfied
that the work is not being performed according to the provision thereof. The
acceptance of a permit constitutes an agreement by the applicant to save the
City, it’s officers, employees, and agents harmless from any and all costs,
damages, and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of
any work performed under the permit.
   (B)   Sidewalk or parkway restrictions.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within a sidewalk
or parkway area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
      (2)   In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the state
prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle upon any parkway or
sidewalk except where specifically authorized, nor park in any location that
necessitates the mounting, crossing, or straddling of any curb in excess of two
and one-half inches in height.
      (3)   Unless otherwise provided, this division (B) shall be enforced
pursuant to the provisions of ordinances relating to controlling vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 DRIVEWAY RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall place dirt, wood, or other material in the gutter or space
next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 OTHER STRUCTURES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No person shall, except as permitted by ordinance, place any post,
sign, or obstruction in any public street or public sidewalk area.
   (B)   Proposal for other less typical private structures in the public
right-of-way will be considered on a case-by-case basis. All approved
encroachments shall be located:
      (1)   Outside of the Through Pedestrian Zone;
      (2)   Outside of the sidewalk corner obstruction free area;
      (3)   Outside of any bus stop area;
      (4)   Minimum of two feet from the curb face;
      (5)   Minimum of three feet from a fire hydrant; and
      (6)   Minimum of five feet from any driveway.
   (C)   Approved encroachments shall not compromise safety (sight distance,
visibility, object hazard) or interfere with City maintenance functions.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 MERCHANDISE SALE OR DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person, except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, shall use any
street or public sidewalk for selling, storing, or displaying merchandise or
equipment unless permission is granted to such person or group of persons by
the City Council during specified hours of specified days for a specified
duration.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the delivery of
merchandise or equipment provided that the owner or person in charge of the
merchandise or equipment or the property abutting on the street or public
sidewalk upon which the merchandise or equipment is located removes the
merchandise or equipment within a reasonable time and that the merchandise or
equipment is outside of the Through Pedestrian Zone.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 92.40 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall make an excavation in or dig up any street,
alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public place within the City Limits for any
purpose without having obtained a permit in writing for such purpose from the
City.
   (B)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the City on a form
prescribed by the City and shall contain such information and data as required
by it.
   (C)   Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a
permit fee as set by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   All work done under a permit issued in compliance with this section
shall be done under the direction of the Engineer or Public Works
Superintendent. The Engineer or Public Works Superintedent may revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this section at any time he or she is satisfied
that the work is not being performed according to the provision thereof.
   (E)   The acceptance of a permit constitutes an agreement by the applicant
to save the City, its officers, employees, and agents harmless from any and all
costs, damages, and liabilities, which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by
reason of any work performed under the permit.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.41 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Permit holders shall notify the City at least 12 hours but not more than 72
hours prior to the commencement of any excavation or fill work other than
emergencies. The City may inspect at any time throughout the project.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.42 SAFEGUARDS.
   Whenever any person under the authority of this section places any
obstruction in the public right-of-way or makes any excavation or alteration
thereto for any purpose, it shall be the duty of such person or persons to keep
the obstruction, excavation, or alteration properly safeguarded by substantial
signs, barricades, and flagperson necessary and to make use of lighting,
lighted lanterns, flashing lanterns, or other lights or flares from dusk to
daylight in conformity with such regulations as may be specified by the
Engineer. Whenever, in the opinion of the Engineer, the public safety is so
endangered by such obstructions, excavations, or alterations as to require
constant supervision to ensure that warning and traffic control devices are
functional and that traffic is safely and properly routed around such
barricades, the person or persons to whom a permit has been issued shall be
responsible for furnishing a night watchperson for that purpose. Twenty-four
hour notice shall be given before partial or complete closure of any travel
lane in any street or alley. Should an emergency situation arise where a 24-
hour notice is not feasible, every reasonable effort shall be made to notify
the Engineer in advance of occupation of the right-of-way.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.43 INHERENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   All drainage ways and structures shall be left open for the free flow
of water during operations and after completion. No drainage system shall be
altered without prior approval of the Engineer.
   (B)   No mud, gravel, or debris shall be allowed to remain on the traveled
portion of the improved right-of-way. Provisions must be made to prevent the
migration of such material into the City storm drainage system.
   (C)   At the close of each work day, all waste material shall be removed
from the site. Traveled portions of the right-of-way shall be restored to a
condition acceptable to the Engineer. On hard-surfaced rights-of-way, this
restoration shall include permanent resurfacing, the placement of temporary
asphalt concrete, or an alternative approved by the Engineer.
   (D)   Any damage cause to existing utility lines shall be reported to the
applicable utility or the City, if City facilities are involved.
   (E)   Upon completion of the authorized activity, all surplus earth, rock,
paving material, and other rubbish shall be removed immediately and become the
property of the permit holder. Any and all areas disturbed as a result of the
activity within the right-of-way shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
Engineer.
   (F)   It is the position of the City that it should not, at any time, assume
responsibility and costs involved in maintenance of failing street patches and
other such repairs made by any person or persons in connection with utility,
storm drain, water, and sanitary sewer installation and maintenance. Such
person or persons, therefore, shall be held responsible for the maintenance of
such repairs in a condition acceptable to the Engineer and for all present and
future cost incurred as a result of the permitted work and resultant repairs.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.44 REFILLING TRENCHES.
   Any person or persons making or causing to be made an excavation in any
street, alley, highways, sidewalk, or public place within the City Limits shall
in every case refill any and all trenches or holes made by the person or
persons making the excavations; and it shall be required that the surface of
the street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or public place where such holes or
excavations have been made and refilled shall be left at the same grade and
restored to a condition meeting the current City standard for the area as it
existed before such excavations were made. Every effort shall be made to effect
permanent repairs immediately following project completion. “Time settling” of
trenches and holes is not an approved method and any time spent by City Staff
locating and alerting responsible persons to failing trench patches will be
charged to those persons.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.45 NOTICE OF COMPLETION.
   Within 48 hours of the completion of work authorized by permit issued in
accordance with this subchapter, the person or persons to whom the permit was
issued shall report to the Engineer that such work has been completed and shall
give such other information as he or she may require. The Engineer shall
thereupon examine the work and if he or she finds it to be fully and properly
restored he or she shall endorse his or her approval on the permit and arrange
the timely release of any related bond or deposit.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.46 MORATORIUM AGAINST CUTS ON NEWLY IMPROVED STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or open the surface of a
public street, sidewalk, or driveway that has been newly constructed,
reconstructed, slurry sealed, overlaid, or improved within the previous 60
months, commencing from the date of acceptance of the improvements.
   (B)   No permits shall be issued to excavate or cut in the street, sidewalk,
or driveway that has been improved within the last 60 months except in the case
of emergencies or when the Engineer grants an exemption. An emergency shall be
deemed to exist if the work is necessary for the presentation of life or
property or an urgency affecting the health and welfare of the City’s residents
or businesses occurs or in the case of failed pipelines or utility services
that affect public security or public safety.
   (C)   The Engineer may grant exemptions to the moratorium for emergency
repairs as provided in division (B) above or for the installation of needed
critical infrastructure or facilities where no other alternatives to cutting a
street, sidewalk, or driveway subject to the moratorium exist. When granting
exemptions, the Engineer may impose reasonable conditions to ensure the rapid
and complete restoration of the street, sidewalk, or driveway surface.
   (D)   If a street, sidewalk, or driveway subject to a moratorium is cut for
any reason, the Engineer shall determine the extent of the required repairs for
the damages caused by such a cut. If the Engineer determines that restoration
of the street, sidewalk, or driveway is not appropriate at a particular time
for reasons relating to weather or other short-term complications, the Engineer
may order a delay and/or the posting of bonds to insure completion of the work
when proper conditions allow for the restoration work.
   (E)   (1)   No person or persons shall make an excavation in or dig up any
street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or driveway subject to a moratorium without
having obtained a permit in writing for such purpose from the Engineer.
      (2)   An application for a permit shall be tried with the City on a form
prescribed by the City and shall contain such information and data as required
by it.
      (3)   Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a
permit fee as set by resolution of the City Council.
      (4)   All work done under a permit issued in compliance with this section
shall be done under the direction of the Engineer or Public Works
Superintendent. The Engineer or Public Works Superintendent may revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this section at any time he or she is satisfied
that the work is not being performed according to the provision thereof. The
acceptance of a permit constitutes an agreement by the applicant to save the
City, its’ officers, employees, and agents harmless from any and all costs,
damages, and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of
any work performed under the permit.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 92.47 RESTORATION GUIDELINES FOR STREETS SUBJECT TO A MORATORIUM.
   (A)   Street restoration for streets subject to a moratorium may include
repaving, surface grinding, base and sub-base repairs, or other related work as
needed, and may include partial to full-width surface restoration of the
street.
   (B)   The Engineer may require direct boring instead of street cuts to
minimize the restoration requirements and/or impacts to the street, sidewalk,
or driveway.
   (C)   The following guidelines are established for restoration work of
streets, sidewalks, and driveways.
      (1)   Recently improved, paved, or overlaid streets. Final resurfacing
shall include the grinding of existing surrounding pavement and repaving at a
minimum depth of two inches. For trenches perpendicular to traffic lanes, the
permittee shall grind ten feet on either side of the trench line for the full
width of any traffic lanes that have been cut. For trenches parallel to the
traffic lanes, the permittee shall grind the entire width of the traffic lane
for the full length of the trench with a minimum of ten feet on each end or as
directed by the Engineer. For trenches other than those perpendicular or
parallel to traffic lanes, the Engineer shall establish appropriate limits of
paving. At the discretion of the Engineer, a full-width slurry seal for the
entire block may be substituted for the required overlays in residential areas.
Transverse paving joints shall be perpendicular to the traffic lanes and
longitudinal paving joints shall not be allowed in vehicle wheel paths. The
placement of the surface course of the repaving shall be by self-propelled,
automatic leveling, multiple-width paving machine. Work shall meet all
applicable construction standards. The Engineer may modify the scope of work
stated above, including increasing the restoration requirements as he or she
shall deem reasonable to restore the street to a condition acceptable for the
volume of traffic served by the street cut.
      (2)   Recently slurry-sealed streets. Slurry seal shall be applied to the
patched area no sooner than 30 days and no later than 90 days after completion
of the pavement repair. The area of slurry seal shall be as described above for
recently unproved, paved, or overlaid streets.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
STREET MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
§ 92.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator for the City.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. A parcel or portion of real property on which an
improvement exists or has been constructed. IMPROVEMENT OR DEVELOPED PROPERTY
includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping, and
outside storage.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family and
not having more than one cooking facility.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or Public Works Director or his or her
authorized representative.
   GROSS SQUARE FOOTAGE. The area of all structures, located on a developed
property, measured along the exterior walls of the structures, and including,
but not limited to, enclosed courtyards and stairwells, but not including
fences and parking areas which are not enclosed within a building.
   MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Residential property consisting of two or
more dwelling units. For the purpose of this subchapter, condominiums, attached
single-family residences, and individual mobile home units are also classified
as MULTI-UNIT PROPERTIES.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property that is not residential property.
   PERSON. A natural PERSON, firm, partnership, association, or corporation,
whether or not they are acting for themselves or as a clerk, servant, employee,
or agent of another.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the
property.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person or persons who, by occupancy or contractual
arrangement, are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to
an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy
of the writing is filed with the City, the person(s) paying the sewer bill for
an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied
unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a sewer bill,
RESPONSIBLE PARTY shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to
occupancy of the occupied unit unless another responsible party has agreed in
writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the City. Any person who
has agreed in writing to pay is considered the RESPONSIBLE PARTY if a copy of
the writing is filed with the City.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A property that is primary for personal domestic
accommodation, including single single-family, multi-unit residential property,
and group homes, but not including hotels and motels.
   SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. Residential property that has only detached
dwelling units.
   STREET. Alleys, sidewalks, parking areas, and access ways owned or
maintained by the City and includes the terms HIGHWAY, ROAD, and STREET. In
addition, it includes property, whether publicly or privately owned, and,
whether publicly or privately maintained, upon which the public operates
vehicles, either by express or implied invitation and includes, but is not
limited to, parking lots, service station lots, shopping center and supermarket
parking lots, and other access ways and parking lots open to general vehicular
traffic, whether or not periodically closed to public use.
   STREET MAINTENANCE PROGRAM. The program established by this subchapter to
maintain, repair, and reconstruct streets, including storm drainage,
pedestrian, and bicycle elements required as part of the street. Activities
include the administration and collection of the street maintenance fee;
preventive maintenance, rehabilitation, and reconstruction projects; design and
inspection of street repairs; and staff training and consultant services in
support of the above activities.
   TRIP GENERATION. The average number of vehicle trips, as determined by
reference to the manual entitled, Trip Generation, published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) (ITE Manual), approved by the Engineer.
   USE CATEGORY OR CATEGORY OF USE. The code number and resulting trip
generation estimate determined with reference to the ITE Manual and applicable
to a particular developed property.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.61 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Except as provided below, the Engineer shall be responsible for the
administration of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Engineer shall develop and update a Street Maintenance Program
project schedule. This schedule shall be properly integrated with other City
Capital Improvement Programs to ensure that it is coordinated with other City
capital projects and projects of other agencies.
   (C)   The Engineer or Public Works Superintendent shall provide an annual
report on the Street Maintenance Program to the City Council and Budget
Committee.
   (D)   The Engineer or Public Works Superintendent shall be responsible for
implementation and enforcement of steps to minimize utility cut damage to
streets.
   (E)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration and
collection of fees under this subchapter.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.62 DEDICATION OF REVENUES.
   All funds and all proceeds from funds collected pursuant to this subchapter
shall be used for the Street Maintenance Program.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.63 STREET MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A street maintenance fee is imposed and levied upon the responsible
party for all developed property within the City. The fee shall be based on the
direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from the use of public streets
generated by the developed property to be calculated as described in §
92.64.
   (B)   The street maintenance fee is also imposed and levied on the person in
charge of property in the event of non-payment by the responsible party.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.64 DETERMINATION OF STREET MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   Responsibility. Each responsible person shall pay a street maintenance
fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Residential fees.
      (1)   Detached single family residences shall be considered one
equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) (ITE code 210).
      (2)   Multi-family residences shall be considered one EDU per each
dwelling unit (ITE codes 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 230, 231, 232, 233, and 240).
      (3)   Senior adult housing and congregate care facilities shall be
considered one-half EDU per dwelling unit (ITE codes 250, 251, 252, 253, and
255).
      (4)   Assisted living facilities shall be considered one-half EDU per bed
(ITE code 254).
   (C)   Non-residential fees.
      (1)   Each non-residential developed property in the City shall be
assigned to a category of use according to the land use type listed in division
(E) below.
      (2)   Upon request of the responsible person, the Engineer shall review
the category of use assignment. The Engineer shall consider evidence provided
by the responsible person that relates to the actual trip generation patterns
of the property in question. The determination of category of use shall not be
considered a land use decision, as that term is defined in ORS 197.015.
   (D)   Fee calculation. The street maintenance fee shall be calculated by
multiplying the number of EDUs by the trip rate per EDU for that properties
assigned category of use (listed in division (E) below) and then by the charge
per unit as established by resolution of the City Council to determine the
monthly fee to be billed.
   (E)   Category of use.
      (1)   Category 1 shall be established at one trip per EDU. Land uses
include all residential, wholesale market, furniture store, general heavy
industrial, mini warehouse, high cube warehouse, and utilities (ITE codes 120,
151, 152, 170, all 200s, 860, and 890).
      (2)   Category 2 shall be established at two trips per EDU. Land uses
include nursing homes and discount clubs (ITE codes 620 and 861).
      (3)   Category 3 shall be established at four trips per EDU. Land uses
include general light industrial, industrial park, manufacturing, warehouses,
hotel, motel, general office, single tenant office, office park, auto care
center, self-service car wash, tire store, supermarket, and superstores (ITE
codes 110, 130, 140, 150, all 300s, 710, 714, 715, 750, 760, 840, 848, 849,
850, 854, 864, 866, 867, and 947).
      (4)   Category 4 shall be established at eight trips per EDU. Land uses
include truck terminals, health clubs, elementary school, middle/junior high
school, high school, church, hospital, business park, building materials/
lumber, specialty retail, nursery retail (garden center), nursery wholesale,
shopping centers, restaurants, quick lubrication, auto parts sales, gasoline
service stations with and without convenience markets and car wash, convenience
market, home improvement superstore, and video rental (ITE codes 30, 473, 491,
492, 520, 522, 530, 536, 560, 610, 770, 812, 814, 817, 818, 820, 823, 837, 843,
851, 852, 853, 862, 896, 925, 931, 932, 944, 945, and 946).
      (5)   Category 5 shall be established at 16 trips per EDU. Land uses
include day care center/pre school, clinics, medical/dental office, hardware/
paint store, freestanding discount, fast food restaurant with drive through,
car sales, and bank/savings (ITE codes 565, 630, 720, 813, 815, 816, 841, 863,
870, 911, 912, 933, 934, 935, 936, 937, 938, and 940).
      (6)   Category 6 shall be established at 32 trips per EDU. Land uses are
pharmacy/drug store, government office building, fire and police stations, and
U.S. post office (ITE 880, 881, 730, 732, and 733).
      (7)   Category 7 shall be established at 64 trips per EDU. Land uses are
parking lots and park and ride facilities (ITE code 90).
   (F)   Equivalent dwelling units.
      (1)   The units used in calculating the street maintenance fee shall be
the greater of the number of units assigned per the meter size or the number of
individually occupied spaces (i.e., three commercial spaces sharing a one-inch
meter would be three units instead of the two and one-half units assigned to
the one-inch meter).
      (2)   When no water meter exists, the unit used in calculating the street
maintenance fee shall be 1,000 gross square feet of building area with the
following exceptions:
         (a)   The unit for parking and outside storage facilities shall be one
acre;
         (b)   The unit for tennis courts or racquet courts shall be one court;
and
         (c)   The unit for quick lubrication vehicle stops or gas stations
shall be one fueling or service position.
   (G)   Unlisted uses. In the event that a property is occupied by a use that
is not expressly listed in any of the above categories, the Engineer shall
determine which category the property should be placed in, based on similarity
in expected trip generation. If no category is appropriate, the Engineer shall
determine the trips per unit shall be based on a transportation study, the trip
generation manual, or any other method for determining trips. Any determination
by the Engineer under this section may be reviewed under the procedure
described in §
92.67(B). The result of the review may be appealed to the City Council by
filing a notice of appeal and paying the appropriate fee within ten days of the
date notice of the result of the review is mailed to the property owner.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.65 ADMINISTRATION OF STREET MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   The street maintenance fee shall be billed and collected with and part
of the monthly sewer bill for those lots or parcels utilizing City sewer and
billed and collected separately for those developed properties not utilizing
City sewer. In the event of nonpayment, the City may bill the property owner or
take other action as authorized by law to collect from the responsible party.
   (B)   In the event funds received from City utility billings are inadequate
to satisfy in full all of the sanitary sewer and street maintenance fees,
credit shall be given first to the street maintenance fee and second to the
sanitary sewer service charges.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the City may
institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and collection
charges owing. The City’s enforcement rights shall be cumulative.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.66 WAIVER OF STREET MAINTENANCE FEE IN CASE OF VACANCY.
   (A)   When any property within the City becomes vacant and utility services
are discontinued (if applicable), a waiver of the street maintenance fee may be
granted by the City Administrator upon written application of the person in
charge of property, including a signed statement affirming, under penalty of
perjury, that the property is vacant and upon payment of all outstanding
sanitary sewer and street maintenance charges.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, VACANT shall mean that an entire
building or utility billing unit has become vacant or continuously unoccupied
for at least 30 days. VACANT shall not mean that only a portion of a property
without a separate water meter has become vacant or unoccupied.
   (C)   Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the
property remains vacant. The person responsible shall notify the City within
five days of the premises being occupied, partially occupied, or used,
regardless of whether utility service is restored.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.67 STREET MAINTENANCE FEE APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any owner who disputes any interpretation given by the City as to the
category of use assigned to such owners property pursuant to this subchapter
may request a review and appeal such interpretation but only in accordance with
this section. The dispute must first be presented to the Engineer for review
and thereafter may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with this
section. Failure to appeal an interpretation made under this subchapter within
the time and in the manner provided shall be sufficient cause to deny the
relief requested. Except in cases of hardship as determined by the City
Council, disputes which result in changes in the street maintenance fee charged
under this subchapter shall become effective with the next billing cycle.
   (B)   A utility customer may request a review of the category of use
assigned. The Engineer shall conduct the review considering all relevant
evidence presented by the responsible person related to his, her, or their
actual trip generation patterns. Such evidence may include business records,
parking lot usage, or traffic studies. The Engineer shall make a determination
based on the evidence provided and provide notice to the customer.
   (C)   A responsible person who wishes to dispute an interpretation made by
the Engineer as to the assigned category of use under this subchapter shall
submit a written appeal to the City Administrator within ten days from the date
of notice of the Engineer’s determination, under division (B) above, together
with a filing fee in the amount of $300. The application for appeal shall
specify the reasons therefor and include an engineering study prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in conformance with the methodology outlined in
the ITE manual. Appeals shall be limited to the issue of whether the
appropriate category of use has been assigned to the property.
   (D)   The City Administrator shall schedule the matter for City Council
review and notify the appellant not less than ten days prior to the date of
such Council review. The Council shall conduct a hearing during a public
meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to
support the interpretation given by the Engineer. The Council may continue the
hearing for purposes of gathering additional information bearing on the issue.
The Council shall make a tentative oral decision and shall adopt a final
written decision together with appropriate findings in support. The decision of
Council with respects to the category of use shall be limited to whether the
appellant has been assigned to the appropriate category of use. If the Council
should determine that a different category of use should be assigned, it shall
so order, provide no refund of prior street maintenance fees shall be given.
The filing fee on the appeal is non-refundable. The Council decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.68 EXCEPTIONS TO STREET MAINTENANCE FEE.
   The following shall not be subject to the street maintenance fee:
   (A)   City public parking lots;
   (B)   Publicly owned park land, open spaces, and greenways unless off-street
parking designated to accommodate the use of such is provided; and
   (C)   Areas encompassed by railroad and public rights-of-way, except for
developed railroad property such as maintenance areas, non-rolling storage
areas, and areas used for the transfer of rail-transported goods to non-rail
transport, which areas shall be subject to street maintenance fees.
(Ord. 624, passed 2-2-2011)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Failure to comply. Failure to comply with any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47; with the standards and specifications set forth by the Engineer; or with
sound and accepted safety, health, or engineering practices shall be just cause
for the Engineer to direct City forces or an independent contractor to make any
temporary or permanent repairs deemed necessary to bring the subject work into
compliance with the above standards and practices. Cost of this work shall be
charged to the permit holder at a rate of one and one-half times the cost to
the City plus 15% overhead and administration. The Engineer may revoke the
prequalification of any party with delinquent payments and may take other steps
necessary to collect such costs including, but not limited to, the filing of a
lien on the property for which the work was performed.
      (2)   City liability. Nothing contained in §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47 shall be implied to require the City, or its officials, agents, or
employees, to monitor or inspect any project to determine whether the
provisions of §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47 have been or are being complied with.
      (3)   Violation.
         (a)   Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed the penalty prescribed
by the state statute.
         (b)   Violation of any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47, not otherwise provided for, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
         (c)   Any act or condition prohibited by §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47 may be declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the
procedures, including summary abatement procedures, set forth in other
ordinances relating to nuisances.
         (d)   The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating §§
92.01 through
92.06,
92.20 through
92.27, and
92.40 through
92.47 but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve
a person of the duty to abate a nuisance.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-3-2010)
CHAPTER 93: RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Section
   
93.01   Definition
   
93.02   Park hours
   
93.03   Use of tobacco products
   
93.04   Vehicles within parking areas
   
93.05   Pets and other animals
   
93.06   Vandalism and litter
   
93.07   Camping
   
93.08   Hunting, firearms, and weapons
   
93.09   Fires
   
93.10   General prohibitions
   
93.11   Park exclusion
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED CITY STAFF. Employees or volunteers of the City authorized by the
City Administrator and/or Chief to grant relief from the prohibitions of this
chapter where the prohibition specifically bestows that authority on the
person.
   CITY. The City of Amity.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The person immediately responsible for administering and
overseeing all functions of City government.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014)
§ 93.02 PARK HOURS.
   Park hours are established as “Dawn to Dusk” with exception of a campsite as
allowed under
Chapter 95 of this Code. No person may enter or remain in a City park outside
of park hours. The City may permit exceptions to the park hours for special
events and must do so in writing.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014; Ord. 681, passed 6-28-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   Persons are prohibited from the use of any tobacco products in City parks at
all times in the following areas:
   (A)   Within the border surrounding the children’s playground equipment or
within 20 feet of the border;
   (B)   Within any portion of the skate park or within 20 feet surrounding the
skate park; and
   (C)   In any of the restrooms.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 VEHICLES WITHIN PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   In contravention of the state’s Motor Vehicle Code.
   (B)   Off roads or outside parking areas constructed or designated for motor
vehicle use unless otherwise directed by authorized City Staff.
   (C)   No person shall allow a vehicle to remain in a park area during the
time the park is closed unless granted permission by authorized City Staff.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 PETS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall bring any dog, cat, or other domestic pet into a park
area unless the animal is safely contained in a vehicle or on a leash and kept
under physical control at all times. To avoid annoyance to other park users,
leashes may not exceed six feet in length when the animal is within 100 feet of
other park visitors.
   (B)   No person shall fail to immediately and thoroughly remove all solid
animal waste deposited in the parks by his or her animal.
   (C)   No person shall allow his or her animal to go within any playground or
play structure area (certified service dogs excepted).
   (D)   No person shall tie up any animal in his or her custody or control and
leave such animal unattended.
   (E)   Except where specifically authorized by the City, no person shall
bring a horse or other livestock into a park area.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 VANDALISM AND LITTER.
   (A)   No person shall pick, cut, mutilate, remove, or uproot plant life or
natural resources of any type from any park area without written consent from
the authorized City Staff.
   (B)   No person shall place or leave garbage, materials for recycling,
sewage, refuse, or waste within a park area except in containers provided for
that purpose.
   (C)   No person shall deposit waste not generated by park use, including
household, commercial, or industrial waste or refuse, within any park area,
including waste containers within a park area.
   (D)   No person shall mutilate, etch, paint, write upon, burn, or otherwise
deface, vandalize, or cause damage to any park property, facility, or
structure. No person shall move or remove any property, structure, or facility
of any kind within a park area.
   (E)   No unauthorized person within a City park shall have in his or her
possession, cans of spray paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of paint or
similar substances, or other paint or ink related tools, applicators, and
materials.
   (F)   No person shall dig up, deface, or remove any soil, stones, rock, or
other substance; make any excavation, quarry any stone, lay or set off any
blast; or cause or assist in doing any of these things within a park area,
except by special permit from the City.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 CAMPING.
   Except as specifically authorized in writing by the City or by
Chapter 95, no person shall camp overnight within a park area.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 HUNTING, FIREARMS, AND WEAPONS.
   (A)   Other than law enforcement officers in performance of their duties, no
person shall carry or display any weapon of any kind within the City park.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall hunt, pursue, trap, kill, injure, harass, or
molest any wildlife within a park area.
      (2)   Exception: Fishing in accordance with state sport fishing
regulations.
   (C)   No person shall damage, remove, or purposefully disturb any wildlife
habitat within a park area.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall remove any wildlife animal from a park area.
      (2)   Exception: Fish and crawdads legally taken in accordance to the
state sport fishing regulations.
   (E)   No person within a park area shall discharge or fire any firearm, BB
or pellet gun, bow and arrow (including fishing), slingshot, paintball gun, or
other weapon capable of injuring any person or wildlife.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 FIRES.
   (A)   Unless permitted by the City, no person shall start or operate a fire
within a park area except within park fireplaces provided for such purposes or
within portable stoves or barbeques in established park picnic areas.
   (B)   No person shall leave a fire unattended within a park area.
   (C)   No person shall allow a fire to cause damage to park facilities or
areas.
   (D)   No person who starts a fire shall leave the park area without first
extinguishing the fire.
   (E)   No person shall start or operate a fire within a park area in
contravention of an order of the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, law enforcement, or
authorized City Staff.
   (F)   No person within a park area shall possess, discharge, or cause to be
discharged any firecrackers, explosives, torpedoes, rockets, fireworks, or
other substances within a park area without the written permission of the City.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.10 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by authorized City Staff, no person within a
park area shall use or operate any noise producing machine, device, or
instrument in a manner that can be heard beyond 50 feet and/or substantially
diminishes the ability of other park area visitors to enjoy the park or
subjects persons occupying residences adjacent to or near the park to
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm.
   (B)   Except as authorized by authorized City Staff, no person within a park
area shall use a public address system or other device to mechanically or
electronically amplify sound.
   (C)   No person within a park shall commit an act of disorderly conduct.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT is defined as follows: A person commits disorderly conduct
when, with the intent to cause public alarm, nuisance, jeopardy, or violence;
or knowingly or recklessly creating a risk thereof, such person commits any of
the following prohibited acts;
      (1)   Engages in fighting or threatening or in violent behavior;
      (2)   Uses language, an utterance, or gesture, or engages in a display or
act which is physically threatening or menacing or done in a manner that is
likely to inflict injury or incite an immediate breach of the peace;
      (3)   Makes noise that is unreasonable or unnecessary, considering the
nature and purpose of the actor’s conduct, location, time of day or night, and
other factors that would govern the conduct of a reasonably prudent person
under the circumstances; and/or
      (4)   Creates or maintains a hazardous or physically offensive condition.
   (D)   No person shall use alcohol or possess an open container of alcohol in
any City Park without approval from the City Council (§
133.61).
   (E)   Except as approved by authorized City Staff, no person shall display,
sell, offer for sale, peddle, hawk, or vend any goods, wares, merchandise,
food, liquids, or services within any park area.
   (F)   No person within a City Park shall hit golf balls in areas not
designated for such use.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.11 PARK EXCLUSION.
   (A)   Trespassing upon City property and may be prosecuted for said offense.
   (B)   Any person within a City Park found to be in violation of any park
ordinance or rules is subject to trespass violations. In addition to other
measures provided for violation of this chapter or any of the laws of the
state, the following provisions apply.
      (1)   The City or the Chief may exclude from the City Park any person who
violates any provision of this subchapter, the laws of the state, or any rule
or regulation issued by the City pertaining to City Parks.
      (2)   Exclusion under this section may be for a period of up to 90 days.
      (3)   Any person who knowingly violates an order of exclusion from City
Parks and facilities commits the crime of criminal trespass (Class A
misdemeanor).
      (4)   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any City
Park or facility. The notice shall specify the dates of exclusion. It shall be
signed by the issuing party. Warning of consequences for failure to comply
shall be prominently displayed on the notice.
      (5)   If good cause exists, the City may, at any time, alter or
temporarily waive the effects of the notice of exclusion. Additionally, if the
City finds that the person excluded did not violate any provision of this
subchapter; any laws of the state; or any policy, rule, or regulation of the
City, the City shall rescind the exclusion.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this any part of this chapter shall be a Class 4 violation for
the first offense, a Class 3 violation for a second offense within one year,
and a Class 2 violation for any subsequent violations within a one-year period
of the first violation.
(Ord. 642, passed 11-5-2014)
CHAPTER 94: LIBRARY
Section
   
94.01   Establishment and funding
§ 94.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNDING.
   (A)   A public library is hereby established pursuant to ORS 357.405 through
357.621.
   (B)   Funding for the operation of the public library is to be financed by
the General Fund of the City.
(Ord. 489, passed 4-13-1987)
CHAPTER 95: CAMPING
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Temporary camping program
   
95.03   Prohibited camping
   
95.04   Trespass
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To pitch, erect, create, use, or occupy camp facilities for
the purposes of habitation, as evidenced by the use of camp paraphernalia.
   CAMP FACILITIES. Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary
shelters, or vehicles.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds,
sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking
facilities and similar equipment.
   CAMPSITE. Any place where one or more persons have established temporary
sleeping accommodations by use of camp facilities and/or camp paraphernalia.
   CITY PROPERTY. Any real property or structures owned, leased, or managed by
the city, including public rights-of-way.
   DESIGNATED TEMPORARY CAMPSITE. A campsite that is authorized by §§
95.02 through
95.04 herein.
   FAMILY. Two or more individuals committed to cohabitation.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. For the purposes of this chapter, includes the definitions of
VEHICLE as defined in §
70.02 and means every vehicle that is designed to be self-propelled (whether
functioning or not), including automobiles, trucks, vans, tractors, fork-lift
trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and
any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that
vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of the state.
The term also includes RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, as defined below, herein, for the
purposes of this chapter.
   PARKING LOT. A developed location that is designated for parking motor
vehicles, whether developed with asphalt, concrete, gravel, or other material.
   PROHIBITED CAMPSITE. Any campsite not authorized under §§
92.02 through
92.04 herein or elsewhere in a City ordinance.
   PUBLIC PARK, MUNICIPAL PARK, and CITY PARK. Any property in the city that is
designated, established, dedicated, set aside, under the direction, control,
operated, or supervised by the City’s Public Works Department, pursuant to
authority granted by the City Council, City Charter, or City ordinances or
resolutions, made available for the purposes of recreational use, including,
but not limited to, sports fields, pavilions, picnic areas, playgrounds,
parkettes, open spaces, tennis court, parking lots, driveways, pathways, and
such other recreational uses as may be established. City Public Parks are
regulated by §§
93.01 through 93.013.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For the purposes of this chapter, means a vehicular-
type unit that:
      (1)   Contains sleeping facilities;
      (2)   Is designed or used:
         (a)   For human occupancy; and
         (b)   As temporary living quarters for recreational, seasonal, or
emergency use.
      (3)   Has its own motive power or is designed to be mounted on or towed
by another vehicle.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, trash, debris, yard waste, food waste, or other
discarded materials.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SERVICES. Contracted solid waste collection service for
a campsite with the City’s exclusive franchisee for the collection of solid
waste.
   STORE or STORAGE. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
   STREET. For the purposes of this chapter, means any highway, lane, road,
street, right-of-way, alley, and every way or place in the City that is
publicly owned or maintained for public vehicular travel.
(Ord. 668, passed 4-7-2021)
§ 95.02 TEMPORARY CAMPING PROGRAM.
   Sections
93.01 through
93.11,
Chapter 151, and
Chapter 90 shall be, upon enactment of this chapter, amended to incorporate the
provisions set forth herein, for the purposes of, or when applied to, allowing
temporary camping. If a conflict exists between the terms of this chapter and
either §§
93.01 through
93.11,
Chapter 151, and
Chapter 90, the terms of this chapter shall prevail and are effective. The
City’s temporary camping policy shall be set forth as follows:
   (A)   Upon submission to the City Administrator of written authorization of
the property owner of the property:
      (1)   Up to two total motor vehicles or tents, in any combination, may be
used for temporary camping in any parking lot on the following types of
property:
         (a)   Real property developed and owned by a religious institution,
place of worship, or public agency, regardless of the zoning designation of the
property; and
         (b)   Real property developed with one or more buildings occupied and
used by any organization or business primarily for nonprofit, commercial, or
industrial purposes.
      (2)   Up to one family may use a residentially zoned property developed
with an occupied residential dwelling, with further authorization from all
lessees of the property, for temporary camping by either:
         (a)   Using a tent to camp in the back yard of the residence; or
         (b)   Using a single motor vehicle parked in the driveway of the
dwelling.
   (B)   A property owner who authorizes any person to temporarily camp on a
property pursuant to division (A) above must:
      (1)   Provide or make available sanitary facilities;
      (2)   Provide garbage disposal services so that there is no accumulation
of solid waste on the site;
      (3)   Provide a storage area for campers to store any personal items so
the items are not visible from any public street;
      (4)   Require a tent or camping shelter in a residential backyard to be
not less than five feet away from any property line; and
      (5)   Not require or accept the payment of any monetary charge nor
performance of any valuable service in exchange for providing the authorization
to camp on the property, provided, however, that nothing in this section will
prohibit the property owner from requiring campers to perform services
necessary to maintain safe, sanitary, and habitable conditions at the campsite.
   (C)   A property owner who permits temporary camping pursuant to division
(A) above may revoke that permission at any time and for any reason.
   (D)   An individual or family authorized to temporarily camp under this
section may remain for an initial term of up to six months unless the
authorization is revoked by the property owner or lessee. If the individual or
family authorized to temporarily camp provides satisfactory proof of actively
pursuing housing opportunities, including low-income housing, the six-month
term may be renewed for up to two additional six-month terms. Written
authorization extending the term(s) shall be filed with and subject to the
approval of the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall approve an
extension if the authorization is accompanied by the documentation of pursuit
of housing opportunities required by this division (D).
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City
Administrator or his or her designee may:
      (1)   Revoke the right of any person to authorize temporary camping on
property described in division (A) above upon finding that any activity
occurring on that property by the campers is incompatible with the uses of
adjacent properties or constitutes a nuisance or other threat to the public
welfare; or
      (2)   Revoke permission for a person or family to sleep overnight on
city-owned property upon finding that the person or family member has violated
any applicable law, ordinance, rule, guideline, or agreement, or that any
activity occurring on that property by a camper is incompatible with the use of
the property or adjacent properties.
   (F)   Any person whose authorization to temporarily camp on property has
been revoked pursuant to divisions (C) and (D) above must vacate and remove all
belongings from the property within four hours of receiving such notice.
   (G)   All persons participating in the temporary camping program described
in this section do so at their own risk, and nothing in this code creates or
establishes any duty or liability for the city or its officers, employees, or
agents, with respect to any loss related to bodily injury (including death) or
property damage (including destruction).
(Ord. 668, passed 4-7-2021; Ord. 681, passed 6-28-2023) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 PROHIBITED CAMPING.
   The enforcement and abatement of §
93.07,
Chapter 151, and
Chapter 90 shall be, upon enactment of this chapter, amended to include the
provisions set forth herein, for the purposes of, or when applied to, camping.
It is the intent of this chapter that it takes precedent over any conflicting
language in the ordinances and sections listed in this section.
   (A)   Camping is permitted on City property with the exception of those
properties listed in this section. It is unlawful at all times for any persons
to establish or occupy a campsite on the following City property:
      (1)   All public parks except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
for campsites that are not located within 100 feet of a pavilion, playground,
or pathway; and
      (2)   All publicly owned or maintained parking lots; and
      (3)   All public property located within an area zoned for residential
use under the City’s Development Code; and
      (4)   Within the interior of buildings and on property where access is
restricted within a fenced area.
   (B)   Except as expressly authorized by a City ordinance, it shall be
unlawful for any person to camp or maintain a campsite on any city property
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. with the exception of a City park
where camping during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. is permitted.
   (C)   Except as expressly authorized by a City ordinance, it shall be
unlawful for any person or family to store more than 120 cubic feet of personal
property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, on any City
property. A campsite may not be placed within ten feet of any building entrance
or another campsite. Individuals at a campsite may not connect to electrical or
other utilities and may not violate any building, fire or City code and
standards.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Administrator
or designee may temporarily authorize camping or storage of personal property
on City property by written order that specifies the period of time and
location:
      (1)   In the event of emergency circumstances;
      (2)   In conjunction with a special event permit; or
      (3)   Upon finding it to be in the public interest and consistent with
Council goals and policies.
   (E)   It is unlawful at all times for any persons to establish or occupy a
campsite on any railroad right-of-way.
   (F)   No person shall use any vehicle or trailer for lodging purposes upon
private or public parking lots except as provided by ordinance of the City or
by obtaining permission by official action of the City Council.
   (G)   The City Administrator may adopt administrative rules to implement any
of the provisions of this chapter and the specific ordinances that are amended
by this chapter.
(Ord. 668, passed 4-7-2021; Ord. 681, passed 6-28-2023) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 TRESPASS.
   In addition to the other measures provided for violation of this chapter, or
any of the laws of the state, any peace officer, as defined by ORS 133.005(3),
as amended, or any City employee may exclude any person who violates any
provision of this chapter, any other City ordinance, or any of the laws of the
state from any City Park for a period of not more than 30 days.
   (A)   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any City
Park. Such notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be
signed by the issuing party. Warning consequences shall be prominently
displayed on the notice.
   (B)   A person receiving such notice may appeal to the City Council to have
the written notice rescinded or the period shortened. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the appeal shall be filed within 5 days of receipt
of the exclusion notice, unless extended by the City Council for good cause
shown.
   (C)   An appeal properly filed under division (B) above automatically stays
the exclusion period until the City Council issues a decision on the appeal.
   (D)   At any time within 30 days, a person receiving such notice may apply
in writing to the City Administrator for a temporary waiver from the effects of
the notice for good reason.
(Ord. 668, passed 4-7-2021)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The application, enforcement, and abatement of §§
93.01 through 93.13,
Chapter 151, and
Chapter 90, shall be, upon enactment of this chapter, amended to include the
provisions set forth herein, for the purposes of, or when applied to, temporary
camping.
      (1)   Violation of any provisions in this ordinance is a Class 3 ($100)
violation. Each day that a violation occurs will be considered a separate
offense.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, any
campsite used for overnight sleeping in a manner not authorized by this section
or other provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may
be abated as such in accordance with
Chapter 90.
      (3)   The City shall have the authority to abate illegal camping located
in private railroad right-of-way provided that the City has been given such
authority and requested to abate such camping by the owner of the railroad
right-of-way.
   (B)   The application and enforcement of this ordinance is not intended to
either impact or restrict the ability of the City to enforce §§
72.01 through
72.04 regarding parking and towing.
(Ord. 668, passed 4-7-2021)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   SOLICITING
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   MARIJUANA AND OTHER DRUG-RELATED BUSINESSES
      
114.   LIQUOR
      
115.   TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Purpose
   
110.03   Non-profit organizations
   
110.04   Agents of non-resident proprietors
   
110.05   License required
   
110.06   Duration of license
   
110.07   License fees
   
110.08   License application
   
110.09   Unlawful acts
   
110.10   Delinquent license fees
   
110.11   Fee amounts
   
110.12   Violations
   
110.13   Revocation of license
   
110.14   Suspension of license
   
110.15   Appeal
Rental of City-Owned Facilities
   
110.30   Definitions
   
110.31   Permit required
   
110.32   Alcoholic beverages
   
110.33   Unreasonable use of sound amplification devices prohibited
   
110.34   Possession of fireworks prohibited
   
110.35   False information
   
110.36   Violations
   
110.37   Revocation of permit
   
110.38   Termination of facility use permit
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any game, device, or machine, kept, operated, or played in
any place of business or other place where the public is invited or permitted
to attend and which may be played by the insertion of money.
   APPLICATION. A new application, renewal of an application, or a transfer of
a license application.
   BUSINESS. Professions, trades, occupations, shops, and every kind of calling
carried on for profit, livelihood, or to generate income, including those
conducted from the home or other location whether or not zoned for business,
commercial, or industrial activities.
   EXHIBITION. The display of goods or materials for which an admission fee is
charged.
   FLEA MARKET. All general sales, open to the public and conducted in any
commercial zone within the City, for the purpose of disposing of personal
property. These general sales include, but are not limited to, sales entitled
“flea markets,” “bazaars,” “rummage sales,” and “auctions.” FLEA MARKET also
includes situations where booths, tables, or spaces are sold or rented for the
purpose of conducting sales of personal property. For the purpose of the
definition of FLEA MARKET, PERSONAL PROPERTY means property which is owned by
the individual conducting the sale, is purchased for resale, or is obtained on
consignment.
   GARAGE SALE. Any public sale of new or used goods within the City Limits by
an individual or group on individual’s private property, when the individual or
group of individuals is not licensed as secondhand or junk dealer, and when the
property from which the sale is to be conducted is not within a zone permitting
commercial business or otherwise permitted under the provision of this
subchapter.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. Any person who undertakes or offers to undertake, for
consideration, to furnish all of the material or labor or both that are
considered necessary to construct, alter, repair, or add to any building or
structure, including commercial, residential, or heavy construction work. State
license requirement verification must be supplied with application.
   NON-PROFIT. Any business or organization which holds a certificate of
exemption from taxes from the Internal Revenue Service.
   NON-RESIDENT PROPRIETORS. A business located outside the City, but
conducting business transactions within the City.
   PERSONS. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
partnerships of every land, joint ventures, societies, and individuals
transacting and carrying on any business in the City.
   REAL ESTATE BUSINESS. An enterprise or undertaking of any nature that deals,
whether directly or indirectly, with leaseholds or any interest or estate in
land or both, whether the land is situated in this state or elsewhere.
   SELF-EMPLOYED. A person who serves as his or her own employer, who is not a
general, residential building or subcontractor, and who employs no other
persons.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. A person who contracts on predetermined terms to be
responsible for the performance of all or part of a job of construction in
accordance with established specifications or plans.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, or corporation that is a nonresident
proprietor, that sells or offers to sell, other than at auction, any
merchandise in any building store, room, or place of business occupied by the
person, firm, or corporation within the City with the intention of doing so for
a short period of time and without the intention of permanently doing so in the
regular course of business.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any machine from which foods, drinks, cigarettes, or other
merchandise are received in return for the insertion of money.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is enacted to provide revenue to pay for the expenses
required to issue licenses, to provide revenue to pay for municipal services to
business, and to regulate business.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
§ 110.03 NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to any non-profit
business or organization, including instances where the non-profit business or
organization serves as sponsor of an event (except that refundable deposits may
be required), but proof of a business’s or organization’s non-profit status may
be required.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
§ 110.04 AGENTS OF NON-RESIDENT PROPRIETORS.
   The agent or agents of a non-resident proprietor, engaged in any business
for which a license is required by this subchapter, shall be liable for the
payment of fees as established by the Council, and for the penalties for
failure to pay the fees or to comply with the provisions of this subchapter as
if the agent or agents were themselves proprietors.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transact or cause to be transacted
any business without having first obtained a license therefore from the City
Administrator or designee for the current year.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   All business licenses under this subchapter are annual and shall expire on
June 30. The required application and license fee are due on July 1 of each
year for the fiscal year commencing with that date and are delinquent on August
1.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   All trades, shops, businesses, corporations, and professions carried
on in the City and not licensed and taxed by other provisions of this
subchapter or other ordinances of the City shall be licensed, and the amount to
be paid as a license fee shall be established by resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Garage sales may not be conducted without obtaining a business permit.
However, no household may conduct more than three garage sales in a one-year
period, and no sale may last longer than five consecutive days, and all signs
are to be removed at the end of the five days.
   (C)   A license fee is not delinquent until five business days after the
applicant has commenced business within the City during the calendar year,
without first paying the required license fee.
   (D)   Where the applicant for a business license is operating more than one
trade, shop, business occupation, or profession (or type of business) from the
same location, each trade, shop, business, occupation, or profession must be
licensed, but the applicant need pay only the single highest license fee.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   All business licenses required under this subchapter or any other
ordinance shall be issued by the City Administrator or designee. The
application for any license shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The description of the businesses earned on within the City;
      (2)   The name of the applicant, with a statement of all persons having
an interest in the business, either as proprietors or owners of the business;
      (3)   The location(s) in which the business is conducted;
      (4)   Proof of the applicant’s possession of any licenses, certificates,
or registrations that are required by state or federal laws to conduct the type
of business listed on the application;
      (5)   The date of the application;
      (6)   The amount of money tendered with the application; and
      (7)   Any other information necessary to enable the City to review the
application under division (A)(2) above and to determine the appropriate fee as
established by resolution of the Council.
   (B)   The City Administrator or designee shall refer each application to the
appropriate departments of the City for review. City review shall take no
longer than 30 days. Approval or denial of the applications shall be based on
consideration of all available evidence as to whether the proposed business
will meet the requirements of the City charter and ordinances. The license may
not be granted if:
      (1)   The activity or device to be licensed would not comply with city
ordinances or state or federal laws;
      (2)   The licensed activity or device would endanger property or the
public’s health or safety, or pose a threat, or unduly burden the City’s water
or wastewater systems;
      (3)   The applicant’s violation of law or ordinance represents a
reasonable doubt about the applicant’s ability to perform the licensed activity
without endangering property or the public’s health or safety;
      (4)   The applicant fails to supply the information required, or submits
misleading or false information, or submitted misleading or false information
on a previous application; and
      (5)   The premises to be used by the business do not fully comply with
all City ordinances and requirements, including all applicable local, state,
and federal Building, Safety, Electrical, Plumbing, and Safe Building Codes.
   (C)   Upon a favorable recommendation from each department, the City
Administrator or designee shall issue the license. If any department determines
that the application should be denied, the City Administrator or designee shall
notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons for denial.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully make false or misleading
statements to the City Administrator or designee for the purpose of determining
the amount of a license fee, or to fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this subchapter, or to fail to pay any required license fee or penalty.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 DELINQUENT LICENSE FEES.
   In the event that any person required to obtain the license fails to obtain
the license or pay the required fee before it becomes delinquent, the City
Administrator or designee shall collect the fee payment with a penalty of 10%
of the fee payment for each calendar month or fraction of a month, that the fee
payment is delinquent.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 FEE AMOUNTS.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this subchapter may be construed as vesting any
right in a license or a contract obligation on the part of the City as to the
amount of the fee.
   (B)   Other taxes or fees and the fees provided by Council resolution may be
increased, decreased, or created by the City.
   (C)   Any business may be reclassified at any time and other fees or taxes
may be levied. No person who has received a license and has paid the fee
required under this subchapter shall be entitled to any refund.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 VIOLATIONS.
   The conviction of a person for violation of any provision of this subchapter
may not serve to relieve the person from paying the fee or penalty for which
the person is liable. The payment of any fee may not bar or prevent legal
prosecution of a complaint for the violation of any provision of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Upon determination that a licensed business, activity, or device within the
City violates City ordinances or state or federal laws, or that the application
contains false or misleading information, the City Administrator or designee
may revoke the license upon 30 days’ in writing to the licensee, with the
notice delivered to the licensee’s establishment or the licensee’s business
address. The notice shall state the reasons for the revocation.
(Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
§ 110.14 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon determining that a licensed business, activity, or device
presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the City Administrator may
suspend the license. The suspension takes effect upon the licensee’s receipt of
the suspension notice or upon delivery of the notice to the establishment or
the licensee’s business address. The notice shall state the reason for the
suspension.
   (B)   The City Administrator or designee may continue a suspension as long
as the reason for the suspension exists or until a determination on an appeal
regarding the suspension is made.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -2000;
Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
§ 110.15 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person whose application for a license has been denied, or a
licensee whose license has been denied renewal, has been suspended, or has been
revoked, may within 30 days after the notice of denial, suspension, or
revocation is mailed, appeal in writing to the Council. The appeal shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the appellant;
      (2)   The nature of the determination being appealed;
      (3)   The reason the determination is incorrect; and
      (4)   What the correct determination of the appeal should be.
   (B)   An appellant who fails to file a statement within the time permitted
waives all objections and relinquishes all rights to appeal. If a notice of
revocation is appealed, the revocation does not take effect until final
determination of the appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may present
testimony and oral argument. The decision of the Council is final.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -2000;
Ord. O-567, passed 10-10-2000)
RENTAL OF CITY-OWNED FACILITIES
§ 110.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY-OWNED FACILITY. Any building, structure, or land owned by the City and
made available for public use by the granting of a permit for temporary rental
of the building, structure, or land.
   FACILITY USE PERMIT. A submitted document completed by an applicant
requesting use of a City-owned facility, following the current procedures
established, and corresponding fees and conditions.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018)
§ 110.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group, or organization to utilize
any City-owned facility for any event without first obtaining a facility use
permit from the City for use of such facility. No facility use permit shall be
issued until all associated fees have been paid and all requirements have been
met.
   (B)   Policies regarding use, application process, fees, and other
requirements shall be set by City Council by separate resolution or ordinance.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.32 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   Except for OLCC or City approved events, no person shall possess or consume
any intoxicating liquor upon any City-owned facility.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.33 UNREASONABLE USE OF SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The unreasonable operation or use of any device designed for sound
production, amplification, or reproduction, including, but not limited to, any
radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder,
loudspeaker, compact disc player, or other similar device is prohibited in or
upon any City-owned facility.
   (B)   Pursuant to this section, unreasonable sound amplification occurs when
a person operates, or permits the operation of, any sound amplification system
as described above which is plainly audible outside of a 50-foot radius. This
prohibition shall not apply to activities sponsored or authorized by the City.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.34 POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess or ignite fireworks, as defined in ORS 480.111, upon
any City-owned without the written permission of the City. This prohibition
shall not apply to activities sponsored or authorized by the City.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.35 FALSE INFORMATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to supply false information in connection with
any application required by this subchapter with intent to obtain a permit or
license required in this subchapter.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.36 VIOLATIONS.
   The conviction of a person for violation of any provision of this subchapter
may not serve to relieve the person from paying the fee or penalty for which
the person is liable. The payment of any fee may not bar or prevent legal
prosecution of a complaint for the violation of any provision of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.37 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Upon determination that a permitted use of any City-owned facility within
the City violates City or County ordinances or state or federal laws, or that
the application contains false or misleading information, the City
Administrator may revoke the permit in advance of the scheduled use of the
facility. In such cases, the fees paid for use of the facility are non-
refundable.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018)
§ 110.38 TERMINATION OF FACILITY USE PERMIT.
   The law enforcement may immediately terminate a facility use permit during
the event for any violation of City, County, state, or federal law, or for any
violation of the permit requirements and restrictions. Law enforcement may
issue a citation to the permit applicant for any such violation. Such citation
shall be in addition to any other charges that may be brought for separate
violations of law or ordinance. The permit applicant shall be legally
responsible for any violations occurring during the event at the facility for
which the applicant has a permit for use.
(Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of §§
110.04 through
110.12 is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (C)   Violation of or failure to comply with any part of §§
110.31 through
110.35 shall be a Class 4 violation for the first offense, a Class 3 violation
for a second offense within one year, and a Class 2 violation for any
subsequent violations within a one-year period of the first violation. Such
fine shall be in addition to forfeiture of permit fees and cleaning or damage
deposits made for the use of the facility.
(Ord. 510, passed - -1990; Ord. 564, passed - -1999; Ord. 567, passed - -; Ord.
O-567, passed 10-10-2000; Ord. 657, passed 8-1-2018; Ord. 657-1, passed 8-1-
2018)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITING
Section
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   Purpose
   
111.03   Prohibited acts
   
111.04   Consent to enter onto real property; exemptions
   
111.05   Registration statement
   
111.06   Registration fee
   
111.07   Issuance of certificate of registration; revocation
   
111.08   Form of certificate of registration; term
   
111.09   No solicitation sign
   
111.10   Evidentiary matters
   
111.11   Solicitation
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOLICIT and SOLICITATION. The entry onto real property used for residential
purposes by a person for the purpose of communicating with an occupant of the
property, whether the communication is verbal, visual, or in writing.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.02 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds it necessary and desirable to regulate solicitation
in order to provide an effective opportunity for the occupants of residential
property to protect themselves from the unwanted disruption of the peaceful and
quiet enjoyment of their property and right to privacy caused by solicitors, to
protect the rights to free speech guaranteed by the state and Federal
Constitutions for lawful solicitors, and to provide a means by which those
solicitors who choose to intrude upon and disrupt an occupant’s quiet enjoyment
of property can be held accountable for such violations. The City Council has
also been advised that based upon actual experiences in the City and in the
opinion of crime prevention specialists nationwide, there is a direct
connection between residential burglaries and unscrupulous solicitors. The
creation of a registration requirement will enable City officials and citizens
of the City to become informed concerning the individuals and organizations who
choose to solicit in the City. This chapter also provides a mechanism for
discouraging, through the civil infraction process, those solicitors who avoid
registration and provides a mechanism to identify and discourage those whom
would use solicitation as a form for criminal activity.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. when the local time is
daylight savings time or after 8:00 p.m. when the local time is standard time,
without the consent of the occupant to do so;
   (B)   Solicit without first having obtained a registration certificate,
pursuant to §
111.06, if required by that section;
   (C)   Violate the terms of a registration certificate issued, pursuant to §
111.06;
   (D)   Solicit after a registration certificate has been revoked, pursuant to
§
111.06;
   (E)   Allow, suffer, or permit any person soliciting on his, her, or their
behalf or under his, her, or their direction to commit any act prohibited by
this section;
   (F)   Provide false or fraudulent information on a registration statement;
   (G)   Leave written materials upon real property where a sign conforming to
the requirements of §
111.09 is posted;
   (H)   Solicit upon real property where a sign conforming to the requirements
of §
111.09 is posted; and/or
   (I)   Allow, suffer, or permit any person to solicit on his, her, or their
behalf after a registration certificate has been revoked, pursuant to §
111.07.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 CONSENT TO ENTER ONTO REAL PROPERTY; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of §
111.03(A), (G), or (H) that the person charged with the violation or crime had
received actual or constructive consent of the occupant prior to entering the
real property. Constructive consent to enter real property may be implied from
the circumstances of each instance, the relationship of the parties, and actual
or implied contractual relationships.
   (B)   The occupant of real property shall be considered to have given
constructive consent to enter real property for the purpose of solicitation
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., when the local time is daylight
savings time or after 8:00 p.m. when the local time is standard time, if they
have not posted a “No Solicitation” sign, pursuant to §
111.09.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the entry into
a structure located on real property. The right to enter any structure must be
otherwise provided for by law.
   (D)   Officers, employees, or agents of a governmental entity while
performing activities within the scope of their office, employment, or agency
are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   No person may be charged with a violation of any divisions of §
111.03 or §
111.11 in connection with an act committed between 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
each October 31.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 REGISTRATION STATEMENT.
   (A)   All persons desiring to solicit at five or more dwelling units in the
City during any eight-hour period shall file with the City Recorder a
registration statement on forms provided by the City Recorder containing the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit;
      (2)   Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership,
corporation, or association, and:
         (a)   If a natural person, the business or residence address and
telephone number of the person;
         (b)   If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner;
         (c)   If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it
is organized under the laws of the state or is a foreign corporation, and must
show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the
individual in charge of the Portland area office of such corporation, and the
registered agent of the corporation, and the names of all officers and
directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the
place of incorporation; or
         (d)   If an association, the registration statement shall show the
association’s principal business address and telephone number, if any, and
shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone
numbers of all members of the association, unless they exceed ten in number, in
which case the application shall so state and the person registering may
alternatively list the names and principal business or residence addresses and
telephone numbers of the officers and directories or trustees of the
association. If the association is part of a multi-state organization or
association, the mailing address and business location of its central office
shall be given, in addition to the mailing address and business location of its
Portland area office;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the organization if the person
registering is a partnership, association, or corporation and an explanation
from all persons of the intended purpose of the solicitation;
      (4)   The names, mailing address, and telephone number of all individuals
who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation and the number of
persons who will be actually involved in the solicitation activity. One of the
named individuals shall be designated to receive any notice or communication
from the City or the public concerning the solicitation activities;
      (5)   The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving
the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion;
      (6)   A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is
to be accomplished and the approximate locations and dates on which those
locations will be visited;
      (7)   The names of any other cities in which the person registering has
solicited with the past five years, but in the event that the person
registering has solicited in more than five other cities, the person
registering may list the five cities located closest to the City;
      (8)   A statement that if a certificate of registration is granted, such
certificate will not be used as or represented to be an endorsement by the City
or any of its officers or employees;
      (9)   The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, corporation,
or any current agent or employee engaging in the solicitation who has signed a
consent decree or order in the last five years or who has been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past five years,
and the nature of the offense, or consent decree or order, the state where the
conviction, or consent decree or order occurred, and the year of such
conviction, or consent decree or order;
      (10)   An explanation of the reasons. If the person registering is unable
to provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is not
available; and
      (11)   The registration statement must be signed by the applicant, if the
person registering is an individual; if the person registering is a
partnership, by a partner; if a person registering is a corporation or an
association, by an officer. The individual signing the registration statement
shall sign the statement and swear or affirm before a state notary that he or
she has carefully read the registration statement and that all the information
contained therein is true and correct.
   (B)   Registration statement and information submitted with the registration
statement are public records available for public inspection during normal City
business hours.
   (C)   Door-to-door salespersons will file a business license with the City
in lieu of registration as described in §
111.05.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 REGISTRATION FEE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) below, every registration
statement shall be accompanied by a registration fee of $150 to compensate the
City for the cost of administering this registration program, and such fee will
not be refunded if a certificate of registration is not issued.
   (B)   The City Recorder may waive the registration fee if a person is
indigent and the purpose of the solicitation is either:
      (1)   In connection with the assemblaging of people, instruction, or
their political representatives or application to the legislature as protected
by Article I, § 26 of the Oregon Constitution; or
      (2)   In connection with their freedom of religion as protected by
Article I, § 3 of the Oregon Constitution.
   (C)   Door-to-door salespersons shall pay the City’s associated business
license fees in lieu of registration fees.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.07 ISSUANCES OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   After a review of the registration statement to determine its
compliance with §
111.05, and, within ten working days of the receipt of the registration
statement, the City Recorder shall either issue a certificate of registration,
in the form provided by §
111.08, or notify the person registering that the registration statement does
not comply with the requirements of §
111.05, and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been
furnished that is required before a certificate of registration can be issued.
If the person registering is engaged in an activity for which a business
license is required by this chapter, proof of a valid business license shall be
furnished prior to the issuance of the certificate.
   (B)   (1)   A certificate of registration shall be revoked by the City
Recorder if a registered person, or one or more solicitors engaged on behalf of
that person, are convicted or plead guilty or no contest to a cumulative
minimum of three violations of §
111.03 occurring within any 30 calendar day period in connection with or on
behalf of the solicitation of the registered person. A certified copy of the
Municipal Court record of plea or conviction is conclusive proof that a
violation has occurred.
      (2)   The period of revocation shall be for 60 calendar days, during
which the person may not receive a certificate of registration. Within five
working days of receipt of notification that a registered person has been
convicted, or plead guilty or no contest to the third violation, the City
Recorder shall notify the person designated in the registration statement to
receive notice of the action to revoke, in writing, five days prior to the
effective date of the revocation.
      (3)   The person may appeal the Recorder’s decision to the City Council
by filing a notice of appeal with the City Recorder within ten days of the
effective date of the revocation. During the pendency of the appeal, the order
to revoke is stayed.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.08 FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; TERM.
   (A)   (1)   The City Recorder shall prescribe the form of the certificate of
registration. Each such certificate shall have the following printed
prominently thereon: “The issuance of this certificate of registration is not
an endorsement by the City of Amity or any of its officers or employees.”
      (2)   Each certificate or registration shall bear a registration number
which is the same as the file containing the registration statement filed by
the registrant.
   (B)   Every certificate of registration issued by the City Recorder shall
contain a termination date upon which the certificate shall expire, which date
shall be the termination of the solicitation period specified in the
registration statement or one year from the date of issuance, whichever is
less.
   (C)   The certificate of registration shall contain a list of the acts
prohibited by §
111.02.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.09 NO SOLICITATION SIGN.
   (A)   If an occupant of real property chooses to not invite solicitors onto
his, her, or their property, the occupant may post a “No Solicitation” sign
pursuant to this section. The effect of the posting of such a sign is to
express the refusal of the occupant to grant consent to any person to enter
his, her, or their real property to solicit, except to those persons exempt
from these provisions by §
111.04(D) and (E).
   (B)   Signs posted pursuant to this section shall be posted on or near the
boundaries of the property at the normal point of entry, and:
      (1)   Signs must be no smaller than six inches in height by eight inches
in width; and
      (2)   Signs must contain the words “No Solicitation” and the reference to
§
111.02 in characters no less than one-half inch in height.
   (C)   For real property possessing no apparent barriers to entry at the
boundaries of the property which limit access to the primary entrance of a
structure located on the property, placement of the sign at the primary
entrance to the structure constitutes compliance with this section.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 111.10 EVIDENTIARY MATTERS.
   (A)   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of §
111.03(G) if written material is found on real property upon which a sign
conforming to the requirements of §
111.09 has been posted. The person responsible for such written material shall
be the person identified in the written material as its proponent, sponsor,
distributor, or potential beneficiary of the communication conveyed.
   (B)   For the purposes of §
111.03(E) and (I), if a person solicits on behalf of a person registered
pursuant to §
111.05, it is presumed that the person registered allowed, suffered, or
permitted the solicitation.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person shall allow, suffer, or permit any person to solicit on his,
her, or their behalf after a registration certificate has been revoked,
pursuant to §
111.07.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A) above, the term SOLICIT is defined in §
111.01.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
111.03(A) through (G) is punishable as a civil infraction.
      (2)   Violation of §
111.03(H) is punishable as a criminal trespass in the second degree, pursuant
to §
111.07(A).
      (3)   Violation of §
111.03(I) is a Class C misdemeanor, see §
111.11.
      (4)   A violation of §
111.11 is a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 504, passed 2-13-1989)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Possession and control
   
112.03   Licensing
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any and all machines and/or devices and/or apparatus of
whatever kind, nature, or description, including card tables, played or
operated or offered or held out to be played or operated by the public for the
purpose of exercising the skill of the person playing the same or of amusing or
entertaining such person, and which requires the player to pay, either through
such device or machine or to the owner or custodian thereof, any money, check,
document, or other representative of value for the privilege of playing or
operating the same.
(Ord. 344, passed 12-6-1968)
§ 112.02 POSSESSION AND CONTROL.
   The proprietor of any place of business wherein any such device or machine
is operated or displayed shall be conclusively presumed to be the one in
possession and control thereof.
(Ord. 344, passed 12-6-1968)
§ 112.03 LICENSING.
   (A)   The licenses issued to each person, firm, or corporation for the
maintenance, operation, or location of an amusement device, except pinball and
video arcade game machine or machines, in his, her, or their places of business
shall be issued annually for each amusement device, and the license fee
therefor shall be $25 annually; the license issued to such person, firm, or
corporation for the maintenance, operation, or location of a pinball machine or
machines shall likewise be issued annually for each such machine, and the
license fee therefor shall be $50 per year, payable quarterly.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to maintain, keep, or operate any such device
that may be operated, played, or played upon, or used, unless a license has
first been issued therefor in accordance with this chapter, and unless such
device has affixed thereto, in a conspicuous place, a sticker or label
evidencing the issuance of such license.
   (C)   No license shall be issued for any amusement device, as herein
defined, which device, by reason of the playing or operation thereof, shall
violate the provisions of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the City
with reference to gambling and/or slot machines.
(Ord. 344, passed 12-6-1968) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $100, each such
violation being considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 344, passed 12-6-1968)
CHAPTER 113: MARIJUANA AND OTHER DRUG-RELATED BUSINESSES
Section
Drug Paraphernalia
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Factors to be considered
   
113.03   Offenses
   
113.04   Nuisance
Psilocybin-Related Businesses
   
113.40   Psilocybin service centers and manufacturers of psilocybin products
prohibited
 
   
113.99   Penalty
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug or its immediate precursor classified in
Schedules I through V under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C.,
§§ 811 to 812, as modified under ORS 475.035.
   DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer, other
than by administering or dispensing, from one person or another of a controlled
substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Controlled Substances Act of this state being ORS 475.005 et seq. It includes,
but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanents screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; and
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing
or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its
resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or
may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
(Ord. 507, 11-13-1989)
§ 113.02 FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any municipal, state, or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of
this subchapter or the State Uniform Controlled Substance Act being ORS 475.005
et seq.;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows
intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of municipal or state law;
the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a
violation of this law or state law shall not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use, designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. 507, 11-13-1989)
§ 113.03 OFFENSES.
   (A)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
   (B)   Manufacture of delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent
to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance.
   (C)   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates division (B) above by delivering drug paraphernalia to a
person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his or her junior is
subject to §
113.99(B)(3).
   (D)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (E)   Exemptions. The possession, manufacture, advertisement, or sale of
drugs or drug paraphernalia in accordance with ORS 475B or Oregon Measure 110
is exempt from offense and penalty.
(Ord. 507, 11-13-1989) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Drug paraphernalia are public nuisances. Any law enforcement officer
shall summarily seize any such paraphernalia and shall deliver it to law
enforcement, who shall hold it subject to the order of the Municipal Court.
   (B)   Whenever it appears to the court that drug paraphernalia has been
possessed in violation of this subchapter, the court shall order law
enforcement to destroy the paraphernalia.
(Ord. 507, 11-13-1989)
PSILOCYBIN-RELATED BUSINESSES
§ 113.40 PSILOCYBIN SERVICE CENTERS AND MANUFACTURERS OF PSILOCYBIN PRODUCTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The establishment of psilocybin product manufacturers licensed under
ORS 275A.290 and psilocybin service centers licensed under ORS 475A.305 is
prohibited in the City.
   (B)   This section was approved by the electors of the City at the statewide
general election held on November 5, 2024.
(Ord. 678, passed 8-3-2022; Ord. 683, passed 8-7-2024)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
113.03(A) is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be fined not
more than $100.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
113.03(B) is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be fined not
more than $500.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
113.03(C) is guilty of a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction, may be fined
not more than $2,500.
      (4)    Any person who violates §
113.03(D) is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, may be fined not
more than $200.
   (C)   Activities legal under state statutes ORS 475B or Oregon Measure 110
are exempt from the penalties established in §
113.99(A) and §
113.99(B).
(Ord. 507, passed 11-13-1989)
CHAPTER 114: LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Providing liquor to certain persons prohibited
   
114.03   Persons not allowed to drink alcoholic liquor on licensed premises
   
114.04   Purchase or possession of liquor by minors
   
114.05   Lawful consumption of liquor by minors
   
114.06   Loitering on licensed premises by minors
   
114.07   Possession of alcoholic liquor on premises to conform to license
   
114.08   Consumption of alcoholic liquor in public place prohibited
   
114.09   Liquor in dance hall prohibited
Licensing Requirements
   
114.20   Minors not permitted to drink or loiter on licensed premises
   
114.21   Permitting minors on licensed premises
   
114.22   Delivering or selling liquor by minor
   
114.23   Sales by unlicensed persons prohibited
   
114.24   Intoxicated persons on licensed premises
   
114.25   Consumption of liquor in beer parlor
Conditions and Regulations
   
114.40   Disposal of liquor containers
   
114.41   Lawful hours of sale
   
114.42   Misrepresentation of the true age of minor
   
114.43   Defense of written age statement
   
114.44   Bartender not to drink on duty
   
114.45   Nuisances
   
114.46   Arresting officer to seize property
   
114.47   Responsibility of licensee for employees
   
114.48   Liquor Commission to be notified
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume.
   COMMISSION. The state’s Liquor Control Commission as provided for by the
state’s Liquor Control Act being ORS Chapters 471 and 474.
   HARD LIQUOR. Any alcoholic beverage, including sweet wines and all spiritous
liquors, containing 14% or more alcohol by volume.
   LICENSEE. A person who has an alcoholic liquor license from the commission
authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The room or enclosure at the address within the corporate
limits of the City for which a license has been issued by the Commission for
the serving, mixing, handling, or selling of alcoholic liquor.
   MALT BEVERAGE. Malt beverage as defined in the state’s Liquor Control Act.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   OTHER RESPONSIBLE RELATIVE.
      (1)   An adult who is the spouse of a minor;
      (2)   An adult, related to the minor, who has taken over the parental
duties of governing the minor’s actions; or
      (3)   A duly appointed, qualified, and acting guardian who has taken over
the parental duties of governing the minor’s actions.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
club.
   SELL. Includes soliciting or receiving an order for or keeping, offering, or
exposing for sale; delivering for value; or in any way other than gratuitous
peddling, keeping with intent to sell, to traffic in, for any consideration,
promised or obtained, direct or indirect, or under any pretext or by any means
whatsoever, procuring or allowing to be procured alcoholic liquor for any other
person.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958)
§ 114.02 PROVIDING LIQUOR TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, give, furnish, or serve any alcoholic liquor to:
   (A)   Any minor, except as provided in §
114.05; and
   (B)   Any person visibly intoxicated.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958; Ord. 368, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 PERSONS NOT ALLOWED TO DRINK ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No person shall allow or permit any person who is visibly intoxicated to
drink or consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958; Ord. 368, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY MINORS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
114.05, no minor shall purchase, acquire, or have in his or her possession any
alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, possession of alcoholic liquor
includes the acceptance or consumption of a bottle of such liquor, or any
portion thereof, or a drink of such liquor. However, this section does not
prohibit the acceptance or consumption by any person of sacramental wine as
part of a religious rite or service.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958; Ord. 399, passed 1-6-1975) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 LAWFUL CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR BY MINORS.
   Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed as prohibiting a parent
or other responsible relative of a minor from giving such minor alcoholic
liquor and permitting him or her to consume the same within the home of such
parent or other responsible relative of the minor, or at such other private
place not in view of the public where the parent or other responsible relative
is present.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 LOITERING ON LICENSED PREMISES BY MINORS.
   Loitering by minors shall be handled in accordance with §
133.06.
§ 114.07 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON PREMISES TO CONFORM TO LICENSE.
   No licensee or his or her employee or agent shall have in his or her
possession on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor that is not included
within the scope of his or her license.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor in or upon any street,
alley, public grounds, or other public place unless such place has been
licensed for that purpose by the state’s Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 LIQUOR IN DANCE HALL PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess, keep, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of or
consume alcoholic liquor in any public dance hall, or in any room or building
used for public dancing, that is not licensed under the state’s Liquor Control
Act being ORS Chapters 471 and 474.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
§ 114.20 MINORS NOT PERMITTED TO DRINK OR LOITER ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   No licensee or his or her employee or agent shall permit any minor to:
      (1) Consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises, whether or
not such alcoholic liquor is given to the minor by a parent or other
responsible relative;
      (2)   Loiter on such licensed premises which have been posted by the
Commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors, except as provided in §
114.21; or
      (3)   Remain upon such premises or any portion thereof except as provided
in §
114.21.
   (B)   The fact that a parent or other responsible relative has accompanied a
minor upon any licensed premises shall not constitute a defense to any charge
brought for violation of this section, except as provided in §
114.21.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 PERMITTING MINORS ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A) The provisions of §§
114.06 and
114.20 shall not be construed to prohibit:
      (1)   Any minor from entering any licensed premises, or portion thereof,
for the transaction of any business pursuant to his or her duties in the
regular course of his or her lawful employment; or
      (2)   A minor spouse from entering and remaining on licensed premises or
any portion thereof when he or she is in the immediate company of his or her
spouse who is 21 years of age or older.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to authorize a minor spouse to
consume alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958)
§ 114.22 DELIVERING OR SELLING LIQUOR BY MINOR.
   (A)   No minor, either for himself or herself or as agent or employee of
another, shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver any alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   No person shall employ, hire, or engage any minor to sell, offer for
sale, or deliver any alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.23 SALES BY UNLICENSED PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell alcoholic liquor unless he or she has a license
from the Commission to sell alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Sales by a licensee or his or her employee shall be only such sales as
are authorized by the license issued for the premises.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.24 INTOXICATED PERSONS ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No licensee or his or her employee or agent shall permit a visibly
intoxicated person to enter or remain upon the licensed premises which the
licensee controls.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.25 CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR IN BEER PARLOR.
   No licensee or his or her employee or agent shall knowingly permit any
alcoholic liquor containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight to be brought
upon or consumed upon the premises which he or she controls, where the license
of that premises permits only the sale and consumption of malt beverages.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 114.40 DISPOSAL OF LIQUOR CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No licensee or his or her employee or agent shall permit any empty or
discarded containers of alcoholic liquor to be in the public view on the
exterior of his or her licensed premises or in parking areas maintained in
connection with such premises.
   (B)   Every licensee or his or her employee or his or her agent who is
serving hard liquor under the provisions of a dispenser’s license shall break
and destroy all hard liquor bottles as such bottles are emptied.
   (C)   No person shall discard, throw away, or dispose of any container of
alcoholic liquor, whether broken or not, upon any street, alley, public
grounds, or public place.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.41 LAWFUL HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, no person shall sell,
dispense, or allow the consumption of any alcoholic liquor on any licensed
premises, nor shall any licensee or his or her employee or agent deliver or
permit the removal of any alcoholic liquor to, on, or from any licensed
premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   A licensee in lawful possession of a club, restaurant, or dispenser’s
license may permit the privileges granted by such license between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. of the day following, and may allow, after closing
hours, any person who is not visibly intoxicated to remove from the club or
restaurant premises alcoholic liquor lawfully brought upon the licensed
premises by such person.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.42 MISREPRESENTATION OF THE TRUE AGE OF MINOR.
   (A)   No minor shall falsely represent that he or she is of any age other
than his or her true age, or produce any evidence that would falsely indicate
his or her age, for the purpose of securing any right, benefit, or privilege
denied minors by this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall falsely represent a minor to be 21 years of age or
older for the purpose of securing or assisting such minor in securing any
right, benefit, or privilege denied to minors by this chapter.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.43 DEFENSE OF WRITTEN AGE STATEMENT.
   If a licensee or his or her employee or his or her agent is prosecuted in
the Municipal Court under this chapter for selling alcoholic liquor to a minor,
or permitting a minor to consume alcoholic liquor or to enter or loiter upon
the licensed premises, the licensee or his or her employee or agent may offer
in his or her defense any written statement made by or for such minor prior to
the violation, which statement was made and taken pursuant to the laws of the
state and the rules and regulations of the Commission; and such statement shall
constitute a prima facie defense.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.44 BARTENDER NOT TO DRINK ON DUTY.
   No bartender shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor, or be under the
influence of alcoholic liquor, while on duty in a licensed premises.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.45 NUISANCES.
   Any room, house, building, boat, structure, or place of any kind where
alcoholic liquor is sold, manufactured, bartered, or given away in violation of
the law, or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking
alcoholic liquors in violation of the law; or any place where alcoholic liquors
are kept for sale, barter, or gift in violation of the law; and all alcoholic
liquor, whether purchases from or through the state’s Liquor Control Commission
or purchased or acquired from any source; and all property including bars,
glasses, mixers, lockers, chairs, tables, cash registers, music devices, and
all furniture, furnishings, and equipment, and all facilities for the mixing,
storing, serving, or drinking of alcoholic liquor kept and used in such place,
hereby are declared to be a common nuisance; and any person who maintains or
assists in maintaining such common nuisance is guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.46 ARRESTING OFFICER TO SEIZE PROPERTY.
   (A)   When an officer arrests any person for violation of this chapter, the
officer shall take into his or her possession all alcoholic liquor and other
property included under §
114.45 which the person arrested has in his or her possession or on his or her
premises, which apparently is being used or kept in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   If the person arrested is convicted and the court finds that the
alcoholic liquor and other property have been used in violation of this
chapter, such forfeiture proceedings as are authorized by ORS 471.605, 471.610,
and 471.615 may be instituted.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958)
§ 114.47 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR EMPLOYEES.
   Each licensee is responsible and liable to prosecution for any violation of
any provision of this chapter pertaining to his or her licensed premises and
for any act or omission of any servant, agent, or employee of such licensee in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958)
§ 114.48 LIQUOR COMMISSION TO BE NOTIFIED.
   When a conviction is obtained against any licensee of the Commission, or a
conviction is obtained against any person where the violation was committed on
a licensed premises, the Municipal Court shall notify the state’s Liquor
Control Commission of such conviction.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of §§
114.02 through
114.09,
114.20 through
114.25, and
114.40 through
114.45 is punishable, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, by a fine not
exceeding $150, or by imprisonment in the City jail not to exceed 90 days, or
by both such fine or imprisonment.
(Ord. 303, passed 1-6-1958; Ord. 398, passed 12-2-1974)
CHAPTER 115: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Imposition of fee
   
115.03   Exemptions
   
115.04   Disposition of revenue; adjustments
   
115.05   Collection of revenues; use of revenues
   
115.06   Administration
   
115.07   Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certification
of authority; display
   
115.08   Collection of fee by operator
   
115.09   Monthly reporting and payment; extension
   
115.10   Failure to file reports
   
115.11   Special determination and collection; operator delay
   
115.12   Operator required to keep records
   
115.13   Records exempt from disclosure
   
115.14   Refunds
   
115.15   Delinquency
   
115.16   Sanctions
   
115.17   Petition for re-determination
   
115.18   Appeals to City Council
   
115.19   Liens
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated as City Administrator (or his or her
designate).
   CITY. The City of Amity.
   FEE. Either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of tax
due from an operator during the period for which collections must be reported.
The term includes taxes imposed by §
115.02.
   HOTEL. Any structure (or portion thereof) occupied, intended, or designed
for transient occupancy for 30 consecutive calendar days or less for dwelling,
lodging, or sleeping purposes. HOTEL includes any HOTEL, inn, tourist home,
motel, rooming house, apartment house, club, bed and breakfast, Airbnb, space
in mobile home or trailer, or similar structure or portions thereof so
occupied, provided such occupancy is for 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
Note: any HOTEL (as defined) that offers “extended stay” options is subject to
the policies contained herein.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession or the right to the use or possession, for
lodging or sleeping purposes, of any room or rooms or space in a hotel.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity.
Where the operator performs functions through a managing agent of any type or
character other than an employee, the managing agent shall be deemed an
operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and
liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be
compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private
dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator,
for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor, credits,
property, or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction. RENT
excludes, however, the sale of any goods, services, and commodities, other than
the furnishing of rooms or room or space in a hotel.
   TRANSIENT. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days.
      (1)   The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included
in determining the 30-day period if the TRANSIENT is not charged rent for that
day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be
deemed to be a TRANSIENT until the 30 days has expired, unless there is an
agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a
longer period of occupancy.
      (2)   In determining whether a person is a TRANSIENT, uninterrupted
periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of
the chapter codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for
lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such months,
shall not be deemed a TRANSIENT.
(Ord. 4-18-2003, passed -; Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.02 IMPOSITION OF FEE.
   (A)   Transient room fee. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, on
and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each
transient shall pay a fee in the amount of 7% of the rent charged by the
operator.
   (B)   Payment of fee by transient.
      (1)   The fees imposed by this chapter constitute a debt owed by the
transient to the City, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator.
      (2)   The transient shall pay the fees to the operator of the hotel at
the time rent is paid.
      (3)   If rent is paid in installments, the transient shall pay a
proportionate share of the fee to the operator with each installment.
   (C)   Payment of fee by operator. The fee collected or accrued by the
operator is to be held by the operator in trust for the City and shall be
deemed to be a debt owed by the operator to the City.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   The fee imposed by this chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Any occupant who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of
the number of days in such months;
   (B)   Any occupant whose rent or cash equivalent thereof is less than $5 per
day; or
   (C)   Any occupant whose rent is paid for hospital room, medical clinic,
convalescent home, or similar care facility.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.04 DISPOSITION OF REVENUE; ADJUSTMENTS.
   Any adjustment of fees, penalties, or interest necessary to correct a
mistake or error in collection or distribution may be made by the Administrator
at a subsequent collection or disbursement or as set out in §
115.17.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.05 COLLECTION OF REVENUES; USE OF REVENUES.
   (A)   The 7% fee shall be remitted to the City consistent with §
115.09, except that the operator may retain 5% of the overall collected
transient room tax revenue to help defray costs associated with the
administration and collection of the fee. Records must adequately show that the
retained portion is accurate.
   (B)   Thirty percent of the collected taxes shall be placed in the General
Fund to be used to fund city services.
   (C)   (1)   Seventy percent of the collected taxes shall be placed in a
special revenue fund to be known as the Tourism Fund. The Tourism Fund shall be
used to fund tourism promotion, tourism activities, or tourism-related
facilities as determined and approved by the City Council. The City Council may
accept guidance, recommendations, and proposals provided by the Tourism
Committee when allocating the Tourism Fund. TOURISM PROMOTION means any of the
following activities:
         (a)   Advertising, publicizing, or distributing information for the
purpose of attracting and welcoming tourists;
         (b)   Conducting strategic planning and research necessary to
stimulate future tourism development;
         (c)   Operating tourism promotion agencies as defined by ORS 320.300
(8); and
         (d)   Marketing special events, activities, and festivals designed to
attract tourists.
      (2)   TOURISM-RELATED FACILITIES are conference centers, convention
centers, visitor information centers, and other improved real property that has
a useful life of ten or more years and has a substantial purpose of supporting
tourism or accommodating tourist activities.
      (3)   TOURISM ACTIVITIES means supporting or enabling individual or
specific projects, events, or festivals specifically designed to improve the
City’s quality of life or sense of place that may also attract tourists to the
City, as designated and approved solely by the City Council. Activities may
include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   City beautification projects;
         (b)   Activities, events, festivals, or functions hosted by the City
and provided to the community “free of charge;”
         (c)   Activities, events, festivals, or functions hosted by other
government entities that benefit the City and the local community as a whole;
and
         (d)   Activities, events, festivals, or functions hosted by non-City
entities that benefit the City and the local community as a whole.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.06 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Administrator (or his or her designee) shall administer the
provisions of this chapter and may do or cause to be done all things reasonably
necessary for its implementation, operation, and enforcement.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.07 REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR; FORM AND CONTENTS; EXECUTION; CERTIFICATION
OF AUTHORITY; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Every person engaging in, or about to engage in, business as a
transient lodging provider or operator of a hotel (as defined herein), in the
City shall register with the City Administrator on a form provided by the City.
      (1)   Operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in
this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
      (2)   Operators commencing business after the ordinance codified in this
chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing
business.
      (3)   The privilege of registering after the date of commencing business
shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of
the transient room fee from the date of commencing business regardless of the
date of registration.
   (B)   On the registration form, the operator shall set forth the name under
which he or she transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the
hotel(s) and such other information to facilitate collection of the fee as the
Administrator requires.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall, as soon as reasonably possible after
receipt of a properly completed registration form, issue a certificate of
transient occupancy registration which shall, at a minimum, contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the operator;
      (2)   The address of the hotel; and
      (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued.
   (D)   Each certificate shall be prominently displayed in the hotel (as
defined in § 115.01) to which it is applicable so as to be seen and come to the
notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.08 COLLECTION OF FEE BY OPERATOR.
   (A)   Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, every operator shall
collect the fee from the transient at the time the transient pays rent.
   (B)   Operators may not advertise or allow that any part of the fee will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that the fee will not be added to the
rent or, if added, that any part of it will be refunded, except in the manner
provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.09 MONTHLY REPORTING AND PAYMENT; EXTENSION.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, every operator shall report
the rents paid to the operator during the preceding month and pay the
appropriate amount of the fee to the City along with a return setting out the
amount of the fee collected or otherwise due for the period, show the total
rentals upon which the fee was collected or otherwise due, the gross receipts
of the operator for the period, and an explanation of any discrepancy between
those amounts and the exempt rents, if any. The return shall be signed by the
operator or an authorized agent thereof.
   (B)   The operator liable for filing the return required under this section
shall deliver the return together with the fee due to the City. Delivery must
be in person or by first class mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark
shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.
   (C)   (1)   The Administrator may, upon written request received on or
before the due date of the return or fee, for cause satisfactory to the
Administrator, extend the time for filing the return or paying the fee for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
      (2)   Any operator to whom an extension is granted and who pays the fee
within the period for which the extension is granted shall pay, in addition to
the fee, simple interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date on which the
fee would otherwise have been due.
   (D)   A report and a fee return are required for each reporting period even
though there may be no rents due or payable to the hotel (as defined in §
115.01) or operator during the preceding month nor any fees due.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.10 FAILURE TO FILE REPORTS.
   If an operator fails to make a report of the information required by §
115.09 within the time and manner prescribed, the Administrator may examine the
books, records, and files of the operator to determine the fee due on the
rents, as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.11 SPECIAL DETERMINATION AND COLLECTION; OPERATOR DELAY.
   (A)   The City Administrator may make a special determination of the fee
amount and may make the amount due and payable immediately; provided that:
      (1)   The City Administrator reasonably believes that delay may
jeopardize either the collection of any amount of any fee or the determination
of that fee amount; and
      (2)   The purpose of the collection is noted on the special
determination.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall serve notice of the special determination
to the operator in person or, if by first class mail, at the operator’s last
known address shown in the Administrator’s records.
   (C)   The operator shall pay the determined amount to the City Administrator
immediately upon receiving notice of the special determination.
   (D)   After making the required payment, but within 14 days of receiving
notice of the special determination, the operator may appeal the decision by
filing a petition for re-determination with the Administrator, pursuant to §
115.17.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.12 OPERATOR REQUIRED TO KEEP RECORDS.
   (A)   Every operator shall state the fee imposed under this chapter
separately on room receipts and shall account for such fees separately in the
hotel’s records.
   (B)   Every operator liable for the reporting or payment of the fee imposed
under this chapter shall keep such records, receipts, and other pertinent
documents in such form as the City Administrator may require.
   (C)   Every operator shall keep such records for not less than three years,
unless the City Administrator issues written authorization to destroy them
sooner.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.13 RECORDS EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Pursuant to ORS 192.355(16) and except as provided by division (B)
below, no City employee or agent, and no employee or agent of cities
participating by ordinance or resolution under this chapter, may disclose the
records, reports, and returns required by this chapter to be submitted to or
inspected by the City to allow it to determine the amount of any transient fee
payable or the amount of such fees paid, to the extent that such information is
in a form that would permit identification of the individual concern or
enterprise.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall limit the use that the City may make of
such information for regulatory purposes, or the admissibility of such
information in any enforcement proceedings.
   (C)   In the event that the payment of fees imposed under this chapter is
delinquent by more than 60 days, the City shall disclose, upon a legal request
of any person, the following information:
      (1)   The identity of the individual concern or enterprise that is
delinquent;
      (2)   The period for which the fees are delinquent; and
      (3)   The actual or estimated amount of the delinquency.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.14 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever an operator has paid the amount of any fee, penalty, or
interest more than once, or the City Administrator has erroneously or illegally
collected or received it under this chapter, it may be refunded; provided that
the operator first files a petition for redetermination and refund with the
administrator, pursuant to §
115.17. In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, the
petitioner shall state the date of overpayment. All refunds shall be charged to
the transient room fee reserve account.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever the fee required by this chapter has been collected by
the operator, and deposited by the operator with the City Administrator, and it
is later determined that the fee was erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the Administrator, it may be refunded by the City Administrator to
the transient; provided, that the transient, or the City Administrator or other
person acting in the transient’s behalf, first files a petition for re-
determination and refund with the City Administrator, pursuant to §
115.17.
      (2)   In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, the
petitioner shall state the specific reason upon which the claim is founded and
file the petition within three years from the date of the overpayment. All
refunds shall be charged to the transient room fee reserve account.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.15 DELINQUENCY.
   Unless an operator obtains an extension pursuant to §
115.09, the operator becomes delinquent with respect to this chapter any time
the operator fails:
   (A)   To submit reports completely, accurately, on time, or as otherwise
required by this chapter; or
   (B)   To remit his or her fee payment fully, on time, or as otherwise
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.16 SANCTIONS.
   (A)   An operator who is delinquent may be subject to one or more of the
following sanctions:
      (1)   If an operator is delinquent in submitting reports, the City
Administrator may take one or both of the following measures:
         (a)   Examine the operator’s books, records, and files in order to
compute the fee due on the rents, as provided for by this chapter; and/or
         (b)   Assess the fee at no more than twice the amount estimated to be
due and add a penalty of 10% of the amount of the fee assessed. This penalty
shall be in addition to all other penalties. The amount of assessment of
additional fee and penalty shall depend on the operator’s record of past
delinquencies.
      (2)   If an operator is delinquent in making fee payments the City
Administrator may assess interest payments on the outstanding fee accounts at a
rate of 10% per annum from the date due until the date of payment.
   (B)   Once the City Administrator determines that an operator is delinquent
and is subject to the sanction or sanctions imposed by divisions (A)(1) or (A)
(2) above, the City Administrator shall give that operator a written notice of
the delinquency.
      (1)   The notice may be served personally or by mail, and, if by mail,
the notice shall be sent by certified mail and addressed to the operator at the
last known address as it appears in the records of the City Administrator. In
case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is
complete at the time of postmark by the United States Post Office.
      (2)   Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade the provisions of
this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof
mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close
of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or
within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.
      (3)   The amount stated in the determination shall become due and payable
immediately upon
petition for re-determination pursuant to §
115.17.
   (C)   At any time within three years after any fee or any amount of fee
required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three
years after any determination becomes final, the City Administrator may bring
an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United
States in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent, together with
penalties and interest.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.17 PETITION FOR RE-DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Any operator who receives a notice of determination or delinquency may
petition the City Administrator or designated representative for re-
determination. The petitioner may request an oral hearing on the matter by
stating this request on the petition.
      (1)   The petition for re-determination allowed under this section must
be received by the Administrator no more than 14 days after the City
Administrator serves the notice of delinquency or determination. It must be on
a form supplied by the Administrator or it must state substantially the same
information.
      (2)   No petition for re-determination shall be effective for any purpose
unless the operator has first paid any and all fees and interest due and
payable on the account.
      (3)   In the event of an oral hearing, the Administrator shall give
petitioner a ten-day written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The
Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time, as necessary.
      (4)   After reconsidering his or her determination, the Administrator
shall prepare a decision in writing and shall serve notice of this decision to
the petitioner by first class mail. Service shall be complete at the time of
postmark by the United States Postal Service.
   (B)   As a result of the re-determination, the Administrator may increase or
decrease the amount of the delinquency or determination. If an increase is
established, it shall be due and payable immediately after the decision is
made. If a decrease is established, the Administrator shall refund the amount
or credit it to the operator or the hotel’s assignees or executors.
   (C)   The decision of the Administrator upon a petition for re-determination
becomes final, unless within 14 days following the service of such notice the
petitioner files an appeal of the re-determination with the City Council
pursuant to §
115.18.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.18 APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.
   A petitioner affected by the re-determination of the City Administrator, or
designated representative, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of
appeal with the Administrator within 14 days of the service of the re-
determination. The City Administrator shall transmit the notice of appeal,
together with the file of the appealed matter, to the City Council which shall
fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The City Council shall give the
appellant not less than 14 days’ written notice of the time and place of
hearing. The City Council shall consider the matter de novo and may approve,
revise, or remand the Administrator’s redetermination. The City Council’s
decision shall be by written order and shall be subject to writ of review
proceedings pursuant to ORS 34.010.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.19 LIENS.
   (A)   The tax paid to the operator and owed to the City, and interest,
penalty, filing fees, and any advertising costs incurred when the tax becomes
delinquent, shall be a lien on all tangible personal property in the operator’s
hotel from the date of its recording with the County Clerk until the tax is
paid. The tax, penalty, and interest owed to the City by the operator shall
continue to accrue until such time as the lien is satisfied. The lien shall be
superior to all subsequently recorded liens on all tangible personal property
in the operator’s hotel. The lien may be foreclosed and the necessary property
may be sold to discharge the lien, as provided by law.
   (B)   Notice of the personal property lien shall be issued by the City
Administrator when the operator has defaulted in payment of the tax, interest,
and penalty. A copy of the notice shall be sent by certified mail to the
operator.
   (C)   Personal property subject to the lien may be foreclosed in the same
manner as a non-possessory chattel lien as set forth in ORS Chapter 87.
   (D)   A lien for the tax, interest, and penalty shall be immediately
released by the City Administrator when the full amount has been paid to the
City. The operator or person making the payment shall receive a receipt stating
that the full amount of the tax, interest, and penalty has been paid, that the
lien is released and the record of the lien is satisfied.
   (E)   The tax imposed by this chapter, together with the interest,
administrative costs, attorney fees, and penalties herein provided and the
filing fees paid to the Clerk of the County, and advertising costs which may be
incurred when same becomes delinquent as determined by the Administrator and as
set forth in this chapter, shall become a lien on the hotel real property 30
days after notification of payment due. The lien hereby created may be
foreclosed in any manner provided bylaw.
   (F)   In the event of litigation to foreclose a lien created by this
section, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney
fees and other costs and disbursements provided by law.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to register pursuant to this chapter is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100 per day for each continuing day of violation, in addition to the
penalties assessed for nonpayment as set forth herein.
(Ord. 663, passed 6-3-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
134.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinance
   
130.03   Attempt to commit offenses
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions contained in the Oregon Criminal Code of 2020, as now
or hereafter constituted, are adopted by reference and made a part of this
title.
   (B)   Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the
general definitions and the definitions appearing in the definitional and other
sections of particular chapters of the code shall be applicable throughout this
title.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973)
§ 130.02 SOLICITING OR CONFEDERATING TO VIOLATE ORDINANCE.
   No person shall solicit, aid, abet, employ, or engage another, or
confederate with another to violate a provision of this title.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 ATTEMPT TO COMMIT OFFENSES.
   A person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this
title or any ordinance of the City, but who for any reason is prevented from
consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this title, or any ordinance of the City, an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of
an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this title is punishable by a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 365 days or by both fine and
imprisonment; provided, however, if there is a violation of any provision
identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, attaching punishment shall
be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in the state law.
   (C)   In addition to the imposition of penalties, violations of §§
132.08,
132.09,
132.12, and
133.47 are declared to be public nuisances and subject to abatement, as
provided in
Chapter 90 of this code or other lawful means.
   (D)   When a person shall be convicted of an offense under the laws of the
City and shall be adjudged to pay a fine and costs and shall fail to pay the
fine and costs, the Municipal Judge may collect the fine by sentencing such
person so fined to labor on the streets or on other public works, one day for
each $10 of such fine unpaid. Persons fined and sentenced to labor, as set out
in this section, shall be under the charge and supervision of the Chief of
Police and law enforcement.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Theft
   
131.02   Trespass
   
131.03   Violating privacy of another
   
131.04   Mischief
Graffiti
   
131.15   Definitions
   
131.16   Graffiti prohibited
   
131.17   Possession of graffiti implement prohibited
   
131.18   Graffiti nuisance property
   
131.19   Graffiti removal required
   
131.20   Graffiti notice to remove
   
131.21   City abatement options
   
131.22   Parental responsibility
   
131.23   Parental civil liability
   
131.24   Seizure impoundment
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 THEFT.
   ORS 164.015 to 164.135 (Oregon Criminal Code of 2020), as now or hereafter
constituted, is adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter, save
and except penalty provisions.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 TRESPASS.
   No person shall enter or remain unlawfully in or upon premises.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 VIOLATING PRIVACY OF ANOTHER.
   No person other than a law enforcement officer performing a lawful duty
shall enter upon land or into a building used in whole or in part as a dwelling
not his or her own without permission of the owner or person entitled to
possession thereof and while so trespassing look through or attempt to look
through a window, door, or transom of the dwelling or that part of the building
used as a dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of any other person.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 MISCHIEF.
   No person shall, with intent to cause substantial inconvenience to the owner
or to another person and having no right to do so nor reasonable ground to
believe he or she has such right, tamper or interfere with property of another.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
131.99
GRAFFITI
§ 131.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATE. To remove the graffiti by such means, in such manner, and to such an
extent as the City Chief of Police or designee reasonably determines is
necessary to remove the graffiti from public view.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, design, painting, writing, drawing,
or carving that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, or otherwise
applied to property without the prior authorization of the owner of the
property regardless of the GRAFFITI content or nature of the material used in
the commission of the act or the material of the property.
   GRAFFITI NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property to which graffiti has been applied, if
the graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way, from any other public or
private property, or from any premises open to the public, and if the graffiti
has not been abated within the time frame provided by this subchapter.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Any aerosol paint container, brush, felt tip marker,
etching device, carving tool, or graffiti stick or other implement that could
be used to apply graffiti.
   OWNER. The legal owner of the property and includes the person or persons in
control of the premises.
   PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. All public spaces, including, but not limited
to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, and public open space, as well as
private property on to which the public is regularly invited or permitted to
enter for any purpose.
   PROPERTY. Any real or personal property and that which is affixed incident
or appurtenant to real property, including, but not limited to, any premises,
house, building, tree, rock, fence, structure, or separate part thereof,
whether permanent or not.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner or an entity or person acting as an agent for
owner by agreement, who has authority over the property or is responsible for
the property’s maintenance or management, irrespective of any arrangement to
the contrary with any other party, each owner shall always be a responsible
party for the purposes of this subchapter. There may be more than one
RESPONSIBLE PARTY for a particular property.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.16 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be unlawful for any person to
place or put, by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, or mark
or any type commonly known as graffiti on any public or private property
without the permission of the owner of the premises on which the surface is
located, or upon any natural surfaces such as rocks or trees, or any other
surface whatsoever. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or command
another person to apply graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or
abet, or agree to aid or abet, another person to plan to apply or apply
graffiti.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17 POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT PROHIBITED.
   No person may possess, with the intent to apply graffiti on any real or
personal property of another, any graffiti implement.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 GRAFFITI NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for a property owner or person in charge of property to
allow graffiti to remain on the property after notice has been given and
removal time has expired.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19 GRAFFITI REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   Any person found to be in violation of §
131.18 shall be required to remove or cause to be removed the graffiti from the
surface on which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not possible to
determine the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it shall be the
duty of the owner or person in control of the premises on which the graffiti
has been applied to promptly remove the graffiti after notice as hereinafter
set forth. If, after notice as hereinafter provided, the graffiti nuisance is
not abated, the City may proceed to abate the graffiti nuisance and the costs
of same shall be assessable against the property.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.20 GRAFFITI NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   (A)   Whenever law enforcement or his or her designated representative
discovers graffiti on any public or private property or any surfaces visible to
persons utilizing public rights-of-way within the City, law enforcement may
cause a notice to be issued to the owner or person in control of the premises
to abate the nuisance and remove the graffiti or cover it with paint or other
suitable substance.
   (B)   Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected
premises, as shown on the last property tax assessment rolls of the County,
with a copy to the occupant of the premises. If there is no known address for
the owner, the notice shall be served at the property address. Service of the
notice may be accomplished through personal service on the owner, occupant, or
person in charge or control of the property; by posting the notice on the
property itself; or by certified mail.
   (C)   Notice shall be in writing and shall clearly state that the owner or
person in charge or control of the property is required by this subchapter to
remove from public view or paint over the graffiti within 15 days of receipt of
the notice; that failure to so abate may cause the City to abate the nuisance
and to assess the costs to the owner; that if the costs of the abatement are
not paid within 30 days of the date the billing is sent, an assessment of the
costs as stated or as determined by the City Council may be made by resolution
and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City liens; and, upon such
entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the
nuisance was removed or abated. The owner or person served may, within ten days
of receipt of the notice, deliver in writing to the City Administrator or
designee his or her objections to the removal requirement and request a hearing
before the City Council.
   (D)   In the event graffiti contains profanity, obscene graphics, racial
comments, or is of a sexual nature, the written notice shall require removal
within 48 hours from time of receipt of the notice.
   (E)   If the property owner requests a hearing before the City Council, the
hearing shall, if feasible, be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be
final. A ten-day period may be given to the property owner after the Council
decision so that the property owner shall have additional opportunity to abate
the nuisance.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.21 CITY ABATEMENT OPTIONS.
   (A)   Nuisances which remain unabated after the expiration of the 15-day
notice without the filing of an objection by the owner under §
131.20(C), may be removed, abated, or destroyed by the City or its agents. The
City Administrator or designee may use City personnel to abate the nuisance or
may contract with an outside party to abate the nuisance at the City
Administrator or designee’s discretion.
   (B)   If the City abates any nuisance under the provisions of this
subchapter, a statement of charges billed to the property owner shall be mailed
or personally delivered to the property owner.
   (C)   If payment is not received from the property owner within 30 days of
the date the billing is sent, an assessment of the costs as stated or as
determined by the City Council shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon
be entered in the docket of City liens; and, upon such entry being made, shall
constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or
abated; and the lien shall be enforced in the manner as provided in ORS 223.605
through 223.650.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.22 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   No parent, guardian, or other person having the legal custody of a
minor person under the age of 18 years may allow or permit the minor to be in
violation of §§
131.16 or
131.17 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Upon a subsequent violation by a minor, the parent, guardian, or
person having legal custody shall be served with a subpoena to appear before
the court with the minor and show cause why §§
131.16 or
131.17 of this subchapter have been violated a second time.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.23 PARENTAL CIVIL LIABILITY.
   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the parent or parents of an
un-emancipated minor child shall be liable for actual damages to person or
property in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child in
accordance with provisions of ORS 30.765.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.24 SEIZURE IMPOUNDMENT.
   In addition to any citation issued, a graffiti implement possessed in
violation of this subchapter may be immediately seized and impounded by law
enforcement. The court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall
determine whether the instrument shall be returned to the defendant or deemed
contraband and disposed of according to state law.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
131.16 is a Class 2 violation.
      (2)   As per §
131.17, possessing a graffiti implement is a Class 4 violation.
      (3)   A violation of §
131.18 shall be a Class 3 violation as set by the ordinances of the City.
      (4)   Violating parental responsibility under §
131.22 is a Class 1 violation.
(Ord. 649, passed 10-7-2015)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
132.01   Begging
   
132.02   Lodging
   
132.03   Cruelty to animals
   
132.04   Vehicles injuring animals
   
132.05   Livestock and poultry
   
132.06   Animals at large
   
132.07   Removal of carcasses
   
132.08   Obstruction of building entrances
   
132.09   Obstruction of sidewalks
   
132.10   Vending goods on streets or sidewalks
   
132.11   Expectoration
   
132.12   Obstruction of and tampering with fire hydrants
   
132.13   Possession of burglar’s tools
   
132.14   Offensive littering
§ 132.01 BEGGING.
   No person shall accost another in a public place for the purpose of
soliciting alms.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 LODGING.
   No person shall lodge in a car, outbuilding, or other place not intended for
that purpose without permission of the owner or person entitled to the
possession thereof.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person shall intentionally
or recklessly:
      (1)   Subject any animal under human custody or control to cruel
mistreatment;
      (2)   Subject any animal under his or her custody or control to cruel
neglect; or
      (3)   Kill without legal privilege any animal under the custody or
control of another, or any wild bird.
   (B)   As used in this section, “animal” includes birds.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.04 VEHICLES INJURING ANIMALS.
   Any person operating a vehicle within the City who shall run over, strike,
injure, maim, or kill any domestic animal shall immediately stop and render aid
to such animal, if injured; or provide for the disposition of the carcass, if
such animal is killed; and, in either case, such person shall make due and
diligent inquiry to determine the owner of such animal; and if the owner be
found, he or she shall notify him or her of the occurrence and also report the
same forthwith to law enforcement.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.05 LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY.
   Livestock and poultry shall be kept in accordance with § 91.14.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 380, passed 11-5-1973) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 132.06 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   Except for household pets, no owner or person in charge of an animal shall
permit the animal to be at large. Animals at large may be taken into custody by
the City and disposed of in accordance with §§ 91.09(A) and 91.35.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 380, passed 11-5-1973) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 132.07 REMOVAL OF CARCASSES.
   The removal of carcasses shall be in accordance with § 91.15.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 380, passed 11-5-1973) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 132.08 OBSTRUCTION OF BUILDING ENTRANCES.
   No person shall obstruct the entrance to a building.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 132.09 OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.
   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a cellar door or grate
located in or upon a sidewalk or public pathway to remain open except when such
entrance is being used and, when being used, there are adequate safeguards for
pedestrians using the sidewalk.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.10 VENDING GOODS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall use or occupy any portion of a street or sidewalk for the
purpose of vending goods, wares, or merchandise by public outcry or otherwise,
unless a license has first been obtained.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.11 EXPECTORATION.
   No person shall spit or expectorate upon a sidewalk or building or in a
public place except in receptacles provided for that purpose, or defile in any
manner a drinking fountain used by the public.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.12 OBSTRUCTION OF AND TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of property adjacent to a street
upon which is located a fire hydrant to place or maintain within eight feet of
such fire hydrant any bush, shrub, or tree or other obstruction.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to be parked in front of a fire
hydrant.
   (C)   No unauthorized person shall unfasten, open, draw water from, or
otherwise tamper with a fire hydrant.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 132.13 POSSESSION OF BURGLAR’S TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess any burglar tool with the intent to use the
tool or knowing that some person intends to use the tool to commit or
facilitate a forcible entry into premises or theft by a physical taking.
   (B)   BURGLAR TOOL means an acetylene torch, electric arc, burning bar,
thermal lance, oxygen lance, or other similar device capable of burning through
steel, concrete, or other solid material, or nitroglycerine, dynamite,
gunpowder, or any other explosive, tool, instrument, or other article adapted,
designed, or commonly used for committing or facilitating a forcible entry into
premises or theft by a physical taking.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.14 OFFENSIVE LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall create an objectionable stench or degrade the beauty
or appearance of property or detract from the natural cleanliness or safety of
property by intentionally:
      (1)   Discarding or depositing any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, or
other refuse upon the land of another without permission of the owner or upon
any public way;
      (2)   Draining or causing or permitting to be drained, sewage or the
drainage from a cesspool, septic tank, recreational, or camping vehicle waste
holding tank or other contaminated source upon the land of another without
permission of the owner or upon any public way; or
      (3)   Permit any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, or other refuse to be
thrown from a vehicle which he or she is operating; except that this section
shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle transporting passengers for
hire, subject to regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Public
Utility Commissioner of the state or a person operating a school bus subject to
ORS 801.460 et seq.
   (B)   As used in this section, PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to,
roads, streets, alleys, lanes, trails, beaches, parks, and all recreational
facilities operated by the City, state, or County for use by the general
public.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
General Provisions
   
133.01   Assault
   
133.02   Menacing
   
133.03   Recklessly endangering another person
   
133.04   Disorderly conduct
   
133.05   Disorderly conduct at fires
   
133.06   Loitering
   
133.07   Harassment
   
133.08   Abuse of venerated objects
   
133.09   Public nudity
   
133.10   Public indecency
Offenses Involving Weapons
   
133.25   Concealed weapons
   
133.26   Discharge of weapons
Offenses Involving the Administration of Government
   
133.40   Unsworn falsification
   
133.41   Obstructing governmental administration
   
133.42   Tampering with public records
   
133.43   Impersonation
   
133.44   False reports
   
133.45   Resisting or refusing to aid officer
   
133.46   Escape
   
133.47   Police and fire communications
Alcohol
   
133.60   Definition
   
133.61   Consumption of alcoholic liquor in public place
   
133.62   Consumption of alcoholic liquor in public places; exceptions
   
133.63   Public intoxication and drinking
   
133.64   Drinking in motor vehicles
 
   
133.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.01 ASSAULT.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly cause physical injury to
another; or
   (B)   With criminal negligence, cause physical injury to another by means of
a deadly weapon.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 MENACING.
   No person shall, by word or conduct, intentionally attempt to place another
person in fear of imminent serious physical injury.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 RECKLESSLY ENDANGERING ANOTHER PERSON.
   No person shall recklessly engage in conduct which creates a substantial
risk of serious physical injury to another person.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm or by recklessly creating a risk thereof:
   (A)   Engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior;
   (B)   Use abusive or obscene language or make an obscene gesture in a public
place;
   (C)   Disturb any lawful assembly of persons without lawful authority;
   (D)   Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or on a public way or
public place;
   (E)   Congregate with other persons in a public place and refuse to comply
with a lawful order of the police to disperse;
   (F)   Initiate or circulate a report, knowing it to be false, concerning an
alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, or other emergency;
and
   (G)   Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which
he or she is not licensed or privileged to do.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AT FIRES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person at or near a fire to obstruct or
impede the fighting of the fire, interfere with Fire District personnel or Fire
District apparatus, to behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to observe
promptly an order of a member of the Fire District or law enforcement.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, members of the Fire District are endowed
with the same powers of arrest as are conferred upon law enforcement officers
for violations of City ordinances.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object.
Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law
enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this
section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or herself
and to explain his or her presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of
an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer did not comply
with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation
given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by law enforcement
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. Any law enforcement
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler without
a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the suspect
caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect’s escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after being warned by law
enforcement officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted,
to loiter in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, cross-
walk, walkway area, mall, or that portion of private property utilized for
public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to block,
obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any building open to the
public.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such action is
consistent with the intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to
commit an act of prostitution are that the person is a known prostitute or
panderer and repeatedly beckons, in the attempt to stop or engage male or
female passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor
vehicles by engaging their operators by hailing, waving of arms, or other
bodily gestures. The violator’s conduct must be such as to demonstrate a
specific intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act
of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division (C)
unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain
his or her conduct, no one shall be convicted of violating this division (C) if
it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful
purpose.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(Ord. 681, passed 6-28-2023)
§ 133.07 HARASSMENT.
   No person shall, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person:
   (A)   Subject another to offensive physical contact;
   (B)   Publicly insult another by abusive or obscene words or gestures in a
manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response;
   (C)   Communicate with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone,
mail, email, or other form of written communication, in a manner likely to
cause annoyance or alarm; or
   (D)   Engage in a course of conduct that alarms or seriously annoys another
person and which serves no legitimate purpose.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 ABUSE OF VENERATED OBJECTS.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally abuse a public monument or structure or
a place of worship or burial.
   (B)   As used in this section, ABUSE means to deface, damage, defile, or
otherwise physically mistreat in a manner likely to outrage public
sensibilities.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.09 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   No person shall willfully and publicly display his or her person in
such a manner that it becomes a nudity display.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, and the post-pubertal human female breast above the
areola.
      PUBLICLY DISPLAY. The exposing, placing, exhibiting, or in any fashion
displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner
that it can be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by
normal unaided viewing it from a public thoroughfare or vehicle.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.10 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, perform:
   (A)   An act of sexual intercourse;
   (B)   An act of deviate sexual intercourse; or
   (C)   An act of urination or defecation except in toilets provided for that
purpose.
(Ord. 450, passed 7-27-1978) Penalty, see §
133.99
OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
§ 133.25 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   No person shall carry a concealed weapon as defined by ORS 166.240, ORS
166.250, or in accordance with ORS 166.293 about their person, unless it is a
licensed firearm per ORS 166.291 and ORS 166.292, or the person is exempted by
ORS 166.250(1) or ORS 166.260. Concealed weapons may include, but are not
limited to, revolvers, pistols, or other firearms, any knife (other than an
ordinary pocketknife) having a blade that projects or swing into position by
force of a spring or by centrifugal force, any dirk, dagger, ice pick,
slingshot, metal knuckles, or any similar instrument by the use of which injury
could be inflicted upon the person or property of any other person. For the
purposes of this section, an ordinary pocketknife is one with a maximum blade
length of three and one-half inches, which is not a switch blade or spring-
blade knife.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.26 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   Except at firing ranges approved by the County, no person other than an
authorized law enforcement officer shall fire or discharge a gun or other
weapon, including spring- or air-actuated pellet guns, air guns, BB guns, bow
and arrow, slingshots, or any weapon which propels a projectile by use of gun-
powder or other explosive, jet, or rocket propulsion.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 527, passed 7-13-1993) Penalty, see §
133.99
OFFENSES INVOLVING THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 133.40 UNSWORN FALSIFICATION.
   No person shall knowingly make any false written statement to a public
servant in connection with an application for any benefit.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.41 OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally obstruct, impair, or hinder the
administration of law or other governmental function by means of intimidation,
force, or physical interference or obstacle.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the obstruction of unlawful
governmental action or interference with the making of an arrest.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.42 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC RECORDS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, knowingly destroy, mutilate,
conceal, remove, make a false entry in, or falsely alter any public record.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.43 IMPERSONATION.
   No person shall, with intent to obtain a benefit or to injure or defraud
another, falsely impersonate a public servant and do an act in such assumed
character.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.44 FALSE REPORTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly initiate a raise alarm or report which is
transmitted to a Fire District or law enforcement agency or other organization
that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly make or file with law enforcement or with
the City Attorney or a law enforcement officer engaged in his or her official
duties a false, misleading, or unfounded statement or report concerning the
violation or alleged violation of a City ordinance or the commission or alleged
commission of a crime.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.45 RESISTING OR REFUSING TO AID OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist any law enforcement officer acting in the
performance of his or her duties; or, when requested to do so, refuse to assist
any such officer in the discharge of his or her duties; or by any means
whatsoever, hinder, delay, or obstruct any such officer acting in the
performance of his or her duties.
   (B)   As used in this section, RESIST refers to the ordinary meaning of that
term.
   (C)   It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the law
enforcement officer lacked legal authority to make an arrest, provided he or
she was acting under color of his or her official authority.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.46 ESCAPE.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Knowingly escape or attempt to escape from official detention; or
      (2)   Knowingly cause, aid, assist, abet, or facilitate an escape from
official detention.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ESCAPE. An unlawful departure.
      OFFICIAL DETENTION.
         (a)   Arrest by a law enforcement officer;
         (b)   Detention in a vehicle or facility for the transportation or
custody of persons under arrest, charge, or conviction of an offense;
         (c)   Detention for extradition or deportation; and
         (d)   Other detention because the person detained is charged with or
convicted of an offense.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.47 POLICE AND FIRE COMMUNICATIONS.
   No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a
disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of
any Law Enforcement or Fire District radio communication system.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
ALCOHOL
§ 133.60 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNSEALED CONTAINER. Any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any
alcoholic liquor, which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of
which have been partially removed. This definition does not apply to a wine
bottle that has been opened and re-corked in a restaurant.
(Ord. 633, 2-6-2013)
§ 133.61 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor or possess an unsealed
container in or upon any street, alley, public grounds, or other public place
unless such place has been licensed for that purpose by the state’s Liquor
Control Commission.
(Ord. 633, 2-6-2013) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.62 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES; EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor or
have in his, her, or their possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle
containing any alcoholic liquor which has been opened or unsealed, or the
contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon any public
street or sidewalk, school, park, public boat landing, dock, and other
attendant facilities, municipal building, and premises used in connection with
public passenger transportation. However, the City Council or its designee may
permit the service and consumption of alcoholic liquors in any public place or
within designated municipal buildings on such terms and conditions as the
Council may provide. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
drinking or alcoholic liquor in any establishment wherein the same may be sold
for on-premises consumption under the laws of the state or when a permit has
been granted by the City Council or its designee.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.63 PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING.
   No person shall create, while in a state of intoxication, any disturbance of
the public in any public or private business or place.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.64 DRINKING IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor while an
occupant of a motor vehicle on any street in this City.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 371, passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The first violation of §
133.61 shall be a Class 3 offense. The second violation of this section within
a one-year period shall be a Class 2 offense. The third and any subsequent
violations of this section within a one-year period shall be a Class 1 offense.
   (C)   A violation of § 133.66 constitutes a Class 2 violation for the first
offense. A violation of §
133.61 constitutes a Class 1 violation for the second or subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 633, 2-6-2013; Ord. 637, passed 5-7-2014)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
Section
   
134.01   Child neglect
   
134.02   Children confined in vehicles
   
134.03   Endangering welfare of minors
   
134.04   Curfew
   
134.05   Places of amusement
   
134.06   Misrepresentation of age by minor
   
134.07   Failing to supervise a child
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 CHILD NEGLECT.
   No person having custody or control of a child under ten years of age shall,
with criminal negligence, leave the child unattended in or at any place for
such period of time as may be likely to endanger the health or welfare of such
child.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.02 CHILDREN CONFINED IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who has under his or her control or guidance a child under
ten years of age shall lock or confine or leave the child unattended or permit
the child to be locked or confined or left unattended in a vehicle for a period
of time longer than five consecutive minutes.
   (B)   It shall be lawful and the duty of a law enforcement officer, finding
a child confined in violation of the terms of this section, to enter the
vehicle and remove the child, using such force as is reasonably necessary to
effect an entrance to the vehicle where the child may be confined in order to
remove the child.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 ENDANGERING WELFARE OF MINORS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Knowingly sell or cause to be sold tobacco in any form to a person
under 18 years of age; or
      (2)   Employ a person under 18 years of age in or about a cardroom,
poolroom, billiard parlor, or dance hall, unless the establishment is a
“recreational facility,” as defined in §
134.05(C).
   (B)   No person shall solicit, aid, abet, or cause a person under 18 years
of age to:
      (1)   Violate a law of the United States or a state or to violate a City
or County ordinance; or
      (2)   Run away or conceal himself or herself from a person or institution
having lawful custody of the minor.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.04 CURFEW.
   No minor person under the age of 18 years shall idle, wander, stroll, or
play in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds or other
unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, and 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day on Friday and Saturday. This
section shall not apply to a minor person accompanied by an adult person having
the care and custody of the minor person nor to a minor person who is engaged
at the time in a legitimate business as directed by an adult person having the
care and custody of such minor person and requiring the presence of such minor
person in such prohibited places during the hours of said curfew.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.05 PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall enter, visit, or loiter in or
about a public cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor, or dance hall, unless the
establishment is a “recreational facility,” as defined in division (C) below.
   (B)   No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public
cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor, or public place of amusement shall permit
a person under 18 years of age to engage therein in any game of cards, pool,
billiards, dice, darts, pinball, games of like character, or games of chance,
either for amusement or otherwise.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the playing of billiards or pool in a
recreational facility. As used in this section, a RECREATIONAL FACILITY means
an area, enclosure, or room in which facilities are offered to the public to
play billiards or pool for amusement only; and
      (1)   Which is clean, adequately lighted, and ventilated;
      (2)   In which no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and
      (3)   Access to which does not require passing through a room where
alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.06 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE BY MINOR.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Being less than a certain, specified age, knowingly represent himself
or herself to be of any age other than his or her true age with the intent of
securing a right, benefit, or privilege, which, by law, is denied to persons
under that certain, specified age; or
   (B)   Being unmarried, knowingly represent that he or she is married with
the intent of securing a right, benefit, or privilege which by law is denied to
unmarried persons.
(Ord. 367, passed 2-5-1973) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.07 FAILING TO SUPERVISE A CHILD.
   (A)   Offense of failing to supervise a child. A person commits the offense
of failing to supervise a child if the person is the parent, lawful guardian,
or other person lawfully charged with the care or custody of a child under 18
years of age and the child violates any provision of the City Code.
   (B)   Affirmative defense. In a prosecution of a person for failing to
supervise a child, it is an affirmative defense that the person took reasonable
steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the person is alleged to
have failed to supervise the child.
(Ord. 543, passed 2-6-1996) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of §§
134.01 through
134.07, the court may order that the defendant make restitution to a victim of
the minor’s conduct.
         (a)   In determining whether to order restitution which is complete,
partial, or nominal, the court shall take into account:
            1.   The financial resources of the defendant and the burden that
payment of restitution will impose, with due regard to the other obligations of
the defendant;
            2.   The ability of the defendant to pay restitution on an
installment basis or on other conditions to be fixed by the court; and
            3.   The rehabilitative effect on the defendant of the payment of
restitution and the method of payment.
         (b)   The amount of restitution ordered under this division (B) may
not exceed $2,500.
   (2)   Failing to supervise a child is a violation punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000.
      (3)   If a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of failing to
supervise a child and if the person has not previously been convicted of
failing to supervise a child, the court:
         (a)   Shall warn the person of the penalty for future convictions of
failing to supervise a child and shall suspend the imposition of sentence; and
         (b)   May not order the person to pay restitution provided by this
division (B).
      (4)   If a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of failing to
supervise a child, the court, with the consent of the person, may suspend
imposition of sentence and order the person to complete a parent effectiveness
program approved by the court. Upon the person’s completion of the program to
the satisfaction of the court, the court may discharge the person. If the
person fails to complete the parent effectiveness program to the satisfaction
of the court, the court may impose a sentence authorized by this division (B).
There may be only one suspension of sentence under this division (B) with
respect to a person.
(Ord. 543, passed 2-6-1996)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS, AND CAMPERS
      
152.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
      
153.   HISTORIC RESOURCES
      
154.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
155.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
      
156.   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Subdivision standards
   
150.02   Moving of buildings
Dangerous Buildings and Structures
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Notice and hearing
   
150.17   Abatement
Adoption of Building Code
   
150.30   Standards applicable to building
   
150.31   City Code administration
   
150.32   Local interpretation
   
150.33   Unsafe buildings
   
150.34   Appeals
   
150.35   Notice to stop work
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   The substance of the ordinance is not reproduced here because of its great
length. Copies of the applicable ordinance, development code, or design
standards are available for the use of the public at the office of the City
Recorder.
(Ord. 409, passed 1-5-1976)
§ 150.02 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   The substance of the ordinance is not reproduced here because of its great
length. Copies of the applicable ordinance, development code, or design
standards are available for the use of the public at the office of the City
Recorder.
(Ord. 319, passed 5-6-1963)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or other structure which, for the want of
proper repairs or by reason of age and dilapidated condition or by reason of
poorly installed electrical wiring or equipment, defective chimney, defective
gas connection, defective heating apparatus, or for any other cause or reason,
is especially liable to fire, and which building or structure is so situated or
occupied as to endanger any other building or property or human life. Said term
shall also mean and include any building or structure containing any
combustible or explosive material, rubbish, rags, waste, oils, gasoline, or
inflammable substance of any kind, especially liable to cause fire or danger to
the safety of such building, premises, or to human life. Said term shall also
mean and include any building or structure which shall be kept or maintained or
shall be in a filthy or unsanitary condition, especially liable to cause the
spread of contagious or infectious disease or diseases. Said term shall also
mean and include any building or structure in such weak or weakened condition
or dilapidated or deteriorated condition as to endanger any person or property
by reason of probability of partial or entire collapse thereof.
   PERSON. Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-5-1962)
§ 150.16 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor, Fire Chief, or any City Councilmember shall find
or be of the opinion that there is a dangerous building in the City, it shall
be his or her duty to report the same to the City Council. Thereupon, the City
Council shall, within a reasonable time, fix a time and place for a public
hearing thereon.
   (B)   Notice shall be mailed to the owner of record of the premises whereon
said building is located, by the City Recorder, notifying said owner in general
terms that a hearing will be held concerning said property and the time and
place thereof.
   (C)   At said time and place, or at such other time or times, or place or
places, as the City Council may adjourn to said hearing shall be held; and the
City Council shall determine by resolution whether or not said building is
dangerous. The City Council may, as a part of said hearing, inspect said
building; and the facts observed by said City Council at such inspection may be
considered by it in determining whether or not said building is dangerous. At
said hearing, the owner or other person interested in said property or building
shall have the right to be heard, if such owner or person requests the same.
   (D)   Ten days’ notice of any such hearing shall be given by publication in
a newspaper published in the City, or by posting notices thereof in three
public places in said City; and if the last-mentioned notice be published or
given as herein required, no irregularity or failure to mail notices shall
invalidate the proceedings. At such hearing, the City Council shall have the
power to order any building declared to be dangerous, removed, and abated if,
in its judgment, such removal or abatement is necessary in order to remove said
dangerous condition; or the City Council shall have the power to order said
building made safe and to prescribe what acts or things must be done to render
the same safe.
   (E)   Ten days’ notice of said findings and of any orders made by the City
Council shall be given to the owner of said building, his or her agent or other
person controlling the same; and if said orders be not obeyed and said building
rendered safe within the time in said order specified, being not less than ten
days, then the City Council shall have the power and duty to order said
building removed or made safe at the expense of the property on which the same
may be situated.
   (F)   In that event, the City Council must specify with convenient certainty
the work to be done, and shall file a statement thereof with the Recorder, and
shall advertise for bids for the doing of said work in the manner provided for
advertising for bids for street improvement work; and thereafter said bids
shall be received, opened, and contract let, the City Council shall ascertain
and determine the probable cost of said work, and assess the same against the
property upon which said building is situated.
   (G)   Said assessment shall be declared by an ordinance, and it shall be
entered in the docket of City liens and shall thereupon be and become a lien
against said property; and the creation of said lien and the collection and
enforcement of said cost shall all be done and performed in substantially the
same manner as in the case of the cost of street improvements; but
irregularities or informalities in the procedure shall be disregarded.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-5-1962) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 ABATEMENT.
   Every building or part thereof, which shall be hereafter found by the City
Council to be a dangerous building, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance;
and the same may be abated either summarily, or the procedure hereinabove
specified may be followed, or a suit for abatement thereof may be brought by
the City in the circuit court of the County.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-5-1962) Penalty, see §
150.99
ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE
§ 150.30 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO BUILDING.
   (A)   In addition to compliance with this subchapter and other ordinances of
the City, building and related activities shall comply with provisions of the
State Building Code, as it is defined in ORS 455.010. It is referred to as the
“Building Code” within this code.
   (B)   No person shall conduct building or related activities without
compliance with these standards, as well as other standards adopted by the
City.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.31 CITY CODE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The City shall provide for the administration of a plan checking,
building permit, and inspection program for structural, mechanical, and
plumbing work, but not for electrical work. This City program is applicable to
building, construction, or remodeling, whether public or private, that falls
under the jurisdiction of the Building Code as amended by the state.
   (B)   The County’s Building Inspector, as assigned by the County, is
authorized to enforce all the provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   The County’s Building Inspector shall have the power to render
written and oral interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce
administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in
conformance with the intent and purpose of this code.
      (2)   The County’s Building Inspector shall be an independent contractor
or employee who shall be licensed and registered as required by all applicable
state codes. The County’s Building Inspector shall report his or her actions
and activities to the City Administrator.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999)
§ 150.32 LOCAL INTERPRETATION.
   The County’s Building Inspector may approve a material or a method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this subchapter, in accordance with
relevant sections of the Uniform Building Code, provided he or she finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material, method, or work
offered is for the purpose intended and the equivalent of that specifically
prescribed by this subchapter in quality, safety, and energy conservation, and
that the Director of the Department of Consumer and Business Services has not
issued a report disapproving the material or method for the purpose. The
County’s Building Inspector may refer the proposed design in accordance with
the appeals procedure provided in the “Building Inspection Program and
Operating Plan” adopted by the City.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999)
§ 150.33 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   The City hereby adopts § 102, “Unsafe Building or Structure” of the 2019
Uniform Building Code or as it may be amended hereafter.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999)
§ 150.34 APPEALS.
   Appeals of the decisions of the County’s Building Inspector shall be in
accordance with the most current “Building Inspection Program and Operating
Plan” adopted by the City.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999)
§ 150.35 NOTICE TO STOP WORK.
   (A)   Whenever any work is done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter (or other pertinent laws or ordinance implemented through its
enforcement), the County’s Building Inspector may order the work stopped by
notice in writing served on any person(s) engaged in the doing or causing of
such work to be done. Such person(s) shall stop work until specifically
authorized by the County’s Building Inspector to proceed thereafter. The
County’s Building Inspector will notify, in writing, the City Administrator of
any stop work orders issued within the city. A stop work order may be appealed
in accordance with procedures established in the “Building Inspection Operation
Plan.”
   (B)   Failure to comply with a stop work order shall be subject to the
penalties described in this subchapter.
(Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall be the owner of, or shall be in possession of, or
in responsible charge of any dangerous building within the city, and who shall
knowingly suffer or permit any such building to be or remain dangerous for as
long as ten days after receipt of notice, as herein provided, shall be guilty
of a violation of §§
150.16 and
150.17 and shall be sent to court for the assessment of appropriate fines or
other penalties.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of §§
150.30 through
150.35. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
150.30 through
150.35 shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of §§
150.30 through
150.35 is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such
violation such person shall be punishable by fines or other penalties.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-5-1962; Ord. 556, passed 1-5-1999)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS, AND CAMPERS
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Sanitary certificates
   
151.04   City permit requirements
   
151.05   Fire-resistant exteriors
   
151.06   Mobile home permits
   
151.07   Special permits
   
151.08   Construction standards
   
151.09   Exemption from City permits
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   Inasmuch as a growing proportion of the inhabitants are living in mobile
homes, it is desirable and necessary to regulate the use of the mobile homes
within the city, in order to promote the safety, welfare, convenience, public
health, and morale and to preserve the landscape of the City.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOMES.
      (1)   A trailer or structure that is:
         (a)   Designed to be transported or used upon the highways;
         (b)   Capable of being used for human habitation or for business,
commercial, or office purposes; and
         (c)   1.   Over 32 feet in overall length from the foremost point of
the trailer hitch to the rear extremity of the trailer body, eight feet or less
in width, and six feet or more in height from floor to ceiling; or
            2.   Over eight feet wide, six feet or more in height from floor to
ceiling, and of any length. Where a MOBILE HOME telescopes for travel, a size
specified herein shall apply to the home as fully extended.
      (2)   A detached residential dwelling unit designed, after fabrication,
for transportation on streets on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other
trailer; and arriving at a lot or site where it is to be occupied
as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, located on jacks or other temporary or
permanent foundations, connecting to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer
is not to be considered as a MOBILE HOME.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any lot or parcel of land upon which one or more mobile
homes or trailers, used for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, or business entity, including
family members or business associates.
   TRAILER. A vehicle or structure equipped with wheels for highway use that is
intended for human occupancy.
   TRAILER PARK. Any privately owned place where two or more trailers used for
human occupancy are parked within 50 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or
parcel of land under the same ownership.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970; Ord. 526, passed 12-14-1992)
§ 151.03 SANITARY CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   No mobile home, when used for human habitation, shall be located,
parked, or moved to any location within the City for a period longer than 48
hours outside a trailer park, without first obtaining a certificate of
sanitation from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue the
same after ascertaining that the sanitary facilities meet with the standards
provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   No certificate of sanitation shall be issued unless and until the
Building Inspector determines that the sanitation facilities provided by ORS
183.310 to 183.510 and 446.062 and the rules and regulations adopted by the
state’s Board of Health, pursuant thereto, are complied with; and a copy of
such rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the City Recorder.
Such sanitary certificate shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a City mobile
home permit.
   (C)   (1)   No occupant of a mobile home shall allow water or waste material
to leak out upon the ground from his or her mobile home or any connection
between his or her mobile home and sewage facilities.
      (2)   Every mobile home located outside a trailer park shall be provided
with a separate sewer connection, not serving any other existing building or
mobile home.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 CITY PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No more than one mobile home may be located on any standard City lot
at any time, with the exception of nonoccupied camping vehicles.
   (B)   All mobile homes shall conform to the chapter as to setback:
      (1)   Front yard shall be ten feet deep from lot line to any structure;
      (2)   Rear yard shall be five feet deep from lot line to any structure;
and
      (3)   Side yards shall be five feet deep from lot line to structure or
ten feet from property line on corner lot.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter stated, no mobile home shall have an area of
less than 500 square feet as determined by the exterior dimensions of the main
living quarters.
   (D)   All mobile homes shall be skirted with suitable material, although
exposed permanent foundations may be used in lieu of commercial skirting
material.
   (E)   Existing City ordinances shall be complied with as they relate to
sight distanced in regards to shrubs or plantings, garbage and refuse disposal,
keeping of animals, and sewage disposal.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 FIRE-RESISTANT EXTERIORS.
   No City mobile home permit shall be granted unless such mobile home is
constructed of metal exterior walls and roof of equally fire-resistant
material.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 MOBILE HOME PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall park or place any mobile home used for sleeping or
living purposes within any commercial, industrial, or residential zone within
the City, without first obtaining a permit from the City. An application for a
permit shall be filed with the City Recorder. The application shall contain a
general description of the trailer, year, model, and make, and the purpose for
which the trailer will be used and exact location thereof. Upon the filing of
the application, the Building Inspector shall inspect the premises upon which
the trailer will be located, and the general layout as to sewer and water
facilities.
   (B)   If the Council is satisfied that the location of said mobile home will
not violate any of the sanitary rules and regulations or disturb or become a
nuisance to the residents of the area in which the mobile home will be located,
the Council may grant a permit by which said applicant may place or park said
mobile home and use the same for living or sleeping purposes.
   (C)   Upon the acceptance of the application, the applicant shall pay to the
Recorder a permit fee equaling the sum of 0.5% of the assessed valuation of
said mobile home or the true cash value, whichever is greater.
   (D)   Said permit is nontransferable.
   (E)   The Council reserves the right to reject any application or refuse to
grant said permit.
   (F)   Such permit may, upon proper application, be renewed or extended or
rejected by the Council.
   (G)   All mobile homes shall be placed on tax rolls as a residence, when
appropriate legislation becomes effective. Until such time, all permit fees as
required by City ordinances shall be complied with.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Special permits for short-term residency may be issued at the discretion of
the Council. In such cases, a waiver of the minimum footage requirement may be
granted by the Council.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 151.08 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The City Building Inspector shall regulate any room additions to
existing mobile homes and the addition of any outbuildings or ramadas. Before
the construction of any such additions, there must be appropriate permits
obtained.
   (B)   All mobile homes must be approved by the Building Inspector.
   (C)   The removal of the wheels or the placement of a mobile home on posts,
footings, or permanent or temporary foundations shall not remove the mobile
home from the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 EXEMPTION FROM CITY PERMITS.
   This chapter shall not apply to those mobile homes outside trailer courts
and within the residential zone of the city which, as of October 1, 1966, were
being used as a place of residence; provided, however, that should any such
mobile home be moved from its present location, it shall immediately lose its
classification under this chapter. Provided, further, the Council reserves the
right to order the discontinuance within a reasonable time of the use of a
mobile home for sleeping or living purposes within a residential zone, upon
reasonable notice or by amendment of this chapter.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of any provisions of §§
151.01 through
151.09 shall be punishable, upon conviction in the Court, by a fine as set by
Council resolution.
(Ord. 349, passed 3-2-1970
CHAPTER 152: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
152.01   Initiating improvement
   
152.02   Engineer’s report
   
152.03   Action on Engineer’s report
   
152.04   Resolution and notice of hearing
   
152.05   Manner of doing work
   
152.06   Hearing
   
152.07   Calls for bids
   
152.08   Assessment method and alternative methods of financing
   
152.09   Assessment ordinance
   
152.10   Notice of assessment
   
152.11   Lien record and foreclosure proceedings
   
152.12   Error in assessment calculation
   
152.13   Supplemental assessments
   
152.14   Rebates
   
152.15   Remedies
   
152.16   Abandonment of proceedings
   
152.17   Curative provisions
   
152.18   Reassessment
§ 152.01 INITIATING IMPROVEMENT.
   (A)   When the Council considers it necessary to require that improvements
to a street, sewer, water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain, or other public
improvement defined in ORS 223.387 be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessment according to benefits conferred, the Council shall declare by
resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the City Engineer
to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report with the
Recorder.
   (B)   When owners of two-thirds of the property that will benefit by
improvements defined in division (A) above request by written petition that the
Council initiate an improvement, the Council shall declare by resolution that
it intends to make the improvement and direct the City Engineer to make a
survey of the improvement and file a written report with the Recorder.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.02 ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   Unless the Council directs otherwise, the report shall contain the
following:
   (A)   A map or plat showing the general nature, location, and extent of the
proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for payment of the cost;
   (B)   Plans, specifications, and estimates of work to be done. If the
proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with another governmental
agency, the Engineer may adopt plans, specifications, and estimates of that
agency;
   (C)   An estimate of probable cost of the improvement, including legal,
administrative, and engineering costs;
   (D)   An estimate of unit cost of the improvement to the benefitted
properties, per square foot, per front foot, or another unit of cost;
   (E)   A recommendation concerning the method of assessment to be used to
arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or a portion of the cost of the
improvement to benefitted properties;
   (F)   A description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be
benefitted, with names of the record owners and, when readily available, names
of contract purchasers as shown on books and records of the County Tax
Department. To describe each lot or parcel of land under provisions of this
section, it shall be sufficient to use the tax account number assigned to the
property by the Tax Department or the book and page designations shown on books
and records of the County Clerk; and
   (G)   A recommendation on the rate of interest to be paid on assessments
bonded under the Bancroft Bonding Act and ORS Chapter 223.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.03 ACTION ON ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   After the Engineer’s report is filed with the Recorder, the Council may, by
resolution, approve the report, modify the report, and approve it as modified,
require the Engineer to supply additional or different information for the
improvement or abandon the improvement.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.04 RESOLUTION AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   After the Council has approved the Engineer’s report as submitted or
as modified, the Council shall declare, by resolution, that it intends to make
the improvement and direct the Recorder to give notice of the Council’s intent
by two publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   The report of the Engineer is on file in the office of the Recorder
and is subject to public examination;
      (2)   The Council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement
on a specific date, which shall be not less than ten days after the first
publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to the improvement
will be heard by the Council, and that the improvement will be suspended for
not less than six months if written remonstrances are filed before or during
the hearing by owners of two-thirds of the property to be assessed; and
      (3)   A description of the property to be benefitted by the improvement,
owners of the property as shown on books and records of the County Tax
Department, and the Engineer’s estimate of total cost of the improvement to be
paid by special assessments to benefitted properties. For purposes of this
section, it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be benefitted by
the tax account number assigned to the property and used by the County Tax
Department, or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the
County Clerk.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.05 MANNER OF DOING WORK.
   The Council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction
work may be done in whole or in part by the City, by contract, by another
governmental agency, or by a combination thereof.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.06 HEARING.
   If written remonstrances are less than the amount required to suspend the
proposed improvement, the Council may, by motion, at the time of the hearing or
within 60 days thereafter, on the basis of written remonstrances and oral
objections, order the improvement carried out in accordance with the resolution
or, if the project was initiated by Council motion and not by petition of the
property owners, abandon the improvement.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.07 CALLS FOR BIDS.
   The Council may direct the Recorder to advertise for bids for construction
of all or part of the improvement project. If part of the improvement work is
to be done under contract bids, the Council shall proceed in accordance with
procedures of state law for public contracting.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.08 ASSESSMENT METHOD AND ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF FINANCING.
   (A)   The Council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the
improvement, may:
      (1)   Use any just and reasonable method to determine the extent of an
improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;
      (2)   Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be
assessed among the benefitted properties; and
      (3)   Authorize payment by the City of all or part of the cost of an
improvement when, in the opinion of the Council, the topographical or physical
conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work
warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefitted
properties.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the Council from
using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state
grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds,
or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the
Council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any
remaining cost.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.09 ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   If the Council determines the public improvement shall be made, when
the estimated cost is determined on the basis of the contract award or City
departmental cost or after the work is done and the cost has been actually
determined, the Council shall decide whether the benefitted property shall bear
all or a portion of the cost. The Recorder or other persons designated by the
Council shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot within the
assessment district and file the assessments in the Recorder’s office.
   (B)   Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each
lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the County Tax Assessor’s
roll. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property
and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the Recorder. An
objection shall state the grounds for the objection.
   (C)   At the hearing, the Council shall:
      (1)   Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify, or revise the
assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar
benefits accruing to it from the improvement; and
      (2)   By ordinance, spread the assessment.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.10 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Within ten days after the ordinance levying assessments has been
passed, the Recorder shall send a notice of assessment to each owner of
assessed property by registered or certified mail and publish notice of the
assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The first
publication of notice shall be not later than 20 days after the date of the
assessment ordinance.
   (B)   The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner,
a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the
date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to
run on the assessment and property will be subject to foreclosure unless the
owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within ten
days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the assessment
in full within 30 days after the date of the assessment ordinance.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.11 LIEN RECORD AND FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   After the assessment ordinance is adopted, the Recorder shall enter
into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, parcel
of land, or portion of land, a description of the improvement, names of
property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry into the
lien docket, the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots, parcels of
land, or portions of land that have been assessed for improvement.
   (B)   Assessments liens of the City shall be superior and prior to all other
liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.
   (C)   Thirty days after the date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall
be charged at a rate of 3% more than the interest rate in §
152.02(G), and the City may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens
in the manner provided by state law.
   (D)   The City may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure
sale. The City bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who
would be entitled under state law to redeem the property.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.12 ERROR IN ASSESSMENT CALCULATION.
   Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the
attention of the Recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error.
If there has been an error, the Recorder shall recommend to the Council an
amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the
amendment, the Recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of
liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by registered or certified
mail.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.13 SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENTS.
   If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is
determined, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray
expenses of the improvement, the Council may declare the insufficiency by
motion and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The Council shall set a
time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment and direct the City
Recorder to publish one notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. After the hearing, the Council shall make a just and
equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the
docket of liens as provided by §
152.11. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed,
and collection of the assessment shall be made, in accordance with §§
152.11 and
152.12.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.14 REBATES.
   On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously
levied on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of
the improvement, the Council shall determine the excess and declare it by
ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered in the lien docket
as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the
person who paid it or that person’s legal representative shall be entitled to
payment of the rebate credit.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.15 REMEDIES.
   Subject to curative provisions of §
152.17 and rights of the City to reassess as provided in §
152.18, proceedings for writs of review and other appropriate equitable or
legal relief may be filed as provided by state law.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.16 ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The Council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under this chapter
at any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been
placed on property under this procedure, that shall be canceled, and payments
made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that
person’s legal representative.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.17 CURATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:
      (1)   Failure of the Engineer’s report to contain all information
required by §
152.02;
      (2)   Failure to have all the required information in the improvement,
resolution, assessment ordinance, lien docket, or notices required to be
published and mailed;
      (3)   Failure to list the name of or mail notice to an owner of property
as required by this chapter; and
      (4)   Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other
act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless
it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person
complaining.
   (B)   The Council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by
suitable action and proceedings.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 152.18 REASSESSMENT.
   When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an
improvement made by the City has been set aside, annulled, declared, or
rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of this state or by a
federal court having jurisdiction, or when the Council doubts the validity of
the assessment, supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it, the
Council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law.
(Ord. 474, passed 1-10-1983)
CHAPTER 153: HISTORIC RESOURCES
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Historic Landmarks Committee
   
153.04   Historic resources survey
   
153.05   Local Landmark Register
   
153.06   Removal process from Local Landmark Register
   
153.07   Permit application process
   
153.08   Demolition, moving, or new construction
   
153.09   Exterior alteration or remodeling
   
153.10   Guidelines for the exterior alteration of a historic landmark
   
153.11   Public notice
   
153.12   County’s Building Inspector powers
   
153.13   Violation procedure
   
153.14   Appeals
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Districts, buildings, objects, structures, and sites in the City
having special historical, architectural, or cultural significance should be
identified, recognized, and preserved as a part of the City’s heritage.
   (B)   To this end, regulatory controls and administrative procedures are
necessary for the following reasons:
      (1)   Stabilize and improve property values through restoration efforts;
      (2)   Encourage ongoing viability of historic buildings;
      (3)   Promote the education of local citizens on the benefits associated
with an active historic preservation program;
      (4)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
      (5)   Protect and enhance the City’s attractions for tourists and
visitors; and
      (6)   Strengthen the economy of the City.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. The addition to, removal of, removal from, or physical
modification and/or repair of any exterior part or portion of a historical
landmark.
   DEMOLITION. To raze, destroy, dismantle, deface, or in any other manner
cause partial or total ruin to a historic resource.
   ELIGIBLE/CONTRIBUTING. A building, structure, object, or site originally
constructed within the applicable period of significance that retains and
exhibits sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These
properties strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential
historic district.
   ELIGIBLE/SIGNIFICANT. A building, structure, object, or site originally
constructed within the applicable period of significance that retains and
exhibits sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These
properties strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential
historic district, and are likely individually eligible for listing in the
Local Landmark Register.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A geographical definable area of local, state, or
national historical significance, the boundaries of which have specifically
been adopted by the City Council.
   HISTORIC INTEGRITY. The quality of wholeness of historic location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association of a historic
resource, as opposed to its physical condition.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. Any historic resource which is classified as
“contributing” or “significant” on the Amity Historic Resources Survey.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER. The City Administrator or designee
responsible for the administration of this chapter.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A building, structure, object, site, or district that is
at least 50 years old or is of exceptional significance and potentially meets
the age, integrity, and significance criteria for listing in the Local Landmark
Register, but may not necessarily be recorded in the Historic Resources Survey.
   HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY. The record of buildings, structures, objects, and
sites recorded by the City used to identify historic resources potentially
eligible for listing in the Local Landmark Register.
   HISTORIC RESOURCES OF STATEWIDE SIGNIFICANCE. Buildings, structures, sites,
objects, and districts that are listed in the National Register.
   HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE. The physical association of a building, structure,
site, object, or district with historic events, trends, persons, architecture,
method of construction, or that have yielded or may yield information important
in prehistory or history.
   LANDMARK. A building, structure, site, object, or district listed in the
City’s Local Landmark Register.
   LOCAL LANDMARK REGISTER. The list of historic resources officially
recognized by the City as important to in its history and afforded the
protection under this chapter.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The nation’s official list of
buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts important in the nation’s
history and maintained by the National Park Service in Washington, D.C. and
hereafter referred to as the NATIONAL REGISTER. Historic resources listed in
the NATIONAL REGISTER are referred to as “historic resources of statewide
significance” in Oregon Revised Statutes.
   MAY. The act referred to is discretionary. (See SHALL.)
   NON-CONTRIBUTING. A building, structure, object, or site originally
constructed within the applicable period of significance that does not retain
or exhibit sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These
properties do not strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential
historic district in their current condition.
   NOT IN PERIOD. A building, structure, object, or site that was originally
constructed outside the applicable period of significance.
   NOTICE OF DELAY. A notice submitted to the Building Department by the
Historic Preservation Officer, which indicates that an application does not
conform with the requirements of this chapter and sets forth delay periods on
the issuance of a building permit, a demolition permit, or a moving permit for
an historic landmark.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Activities that do not remove materials or alter
qualities that make a historic resource eligible for listing in the Local
Landmark Register, including cleaning; painting, when color is not specifically
noted in the landmark’s record of designation; and limited replacement of
siding, trim, and window components when such material is beyond repair and
where the new piece is of the same size, dimension, material, and finish as
that of the original historic material. Excluded from this definition is the
replacement of an entire window sash or more that 20% of the siding or trim on
any one side of a landmark at any one time within one calendar year.
   PERMIT CLEARANCE. Indication that an application conforms with the
requirements of this chapter and which must be submitted to the Building
Department by the Historic Preservation Officer prior to any building permit,
demolition permit, or moving permit being issued for an historic landmark.
   RECORD OF DESIGNATION. The official document created by the Historic
Preservation Officer that describes how a landmark meets the criteria for
listing in Section 7, the Local Landmark Register.
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a local landmark to a state of
utility through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient use
while preserving those portions and features of the local landmark and its site
that conveys its historic significance.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (See MAY.)
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.03 HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The City’s Historic Landmarks Committee is hereby established as an
advisory body to the Planning Commission with the following provisions.
      (1)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall consist of five members
selected at large. Each member shall be entitled to one vote. The Mayor,
subject to Council approval, shall appoint a Historic Landmark Committee,
hereinafter referred to as the “Committee,” of five members with a demonstrated
competence, knowledge, or interest in historic preservation with preference
given to those with professional experience in the fields of preservation,
architecture, archaeology, community history, building trades, real estate, or
related specialties.
      (2)   Initial appointments to the Committee shall be for terms of one,
two, and three years as determined by the Mayor. Subsequent terms of
appointment shall be for three years, or, in the case of a replacement, for the
remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment by
the City Council after the expiration of their terms.
      (3)   All members may serve three-year terms commencing on the first
Tuesday in January, except that the initial term of the first members shall be
for the duration of their appointments as Historic Landmarks Committee members.
Any vacancy occurring in a position for any reason other than the expiration of
the term shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the
term.
      (4)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall:
         (a)   Review the building permit applications for alterations to
historic landmarks or construction upon historic sites where the guidelines for
alteration provided in §
153.09 would be violated as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer;
         (b)   Review of the demolition permit applications which would result
in the destruction of historic landmarks;
         (c)   Evaluate and designate historic districts, buildings,
structures, sites, and objects as provided by the procedures in §
153.05;
         (d)   Conduct surveys, inventories, and studies of potential historic
resources as budgeted;
         (e)   Make recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council
regarding historic preservation issues, including, but not limited to,
ordinance amendments and historic district designations;
         (f)   Promote public awareness and appreciation of the City’s historic
resources as budgeted;
         (g)   The Committee shall support the enforcement of all state laws
relating to historic preservation; and
         (h)   Conduct other historic preservation functions as determined by
the Historic Preservation Officer.
   (B)   The Historic Landmarks Committee at its first meeting of each calendar
year shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson who shall hold office
during the remainder of said year. Members of the Committee shall also elect a
Secretary who shall be responsible for keeping an accurate record of all
proceedings of said Committee.
   (C)   A simple majority of the Historic Landmarks Committee members then
serving shall constitute a quorum. The Historic Landmarks Committee, with the
majority of its members concurring, may make and alter rules and regulations
for its government and procedure consistent with the City charter and
ordinances and with the state. The Historic Landmarks Committee may set a
regularly scheduled meeting time. If no regular meeting time is established,
the Historic Landmarks Committee shall be called to meetings by the Historic
Preservation Officer at such times as it is required to meet, which is not less
than four times per year. All meetings are subject to the state’s Public
Meetings law.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.04 HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY.
   (A)   The Historic Resources Survey lists, describes, and determines the
eligibility of historic resources for listing in the Local Landmarks Register.
Not all properties listed in the Historic Resources Survey are eligible for
listing in the Local Landmarks Register. A property need not be first listed in
the Historic Resources Survey before being nominated to the Local Landmark
Register.
   (B)   The Committee shall determine and periodically revise priorities for
the identification and evaluation of historic resources based on the
community’s needs and interests.
      (1)   Surveyed properties shall be identified as Eligible/Significant
(ES), Eligible/Contributing (EC), Non-Contributing (NC), or Not in Period (NP).
Evaluation and documentation of properties in the Historic Resources Survey
shall meet the requirements of the document “Guidelines for Historic Resources
Surveys in Oregon, 2010” or most recent guidance for such efforts published by
the SHPO and be supplied to the agency within six months of the completion of
the study.
      (2)   The Historic Resources Survey shall be maintained as a public
record with the exception of archaeological sites, which is prohibited by state
law.
      (3)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall be authorized to recommend
all additions, deletions, and changes to the survey. Any addition, deletion, or
change, including a reevaluation of the significance of any resource, shall
conform to the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.05 LOCAL LANDMARK REGISTER.
   (A)   The Committee may designate historic resources to the Local Landmark
Register as a means of providing recognition of their significance and
providing incentives and guidelines for their preservation. The Local Landmark
Register is maintained by the Historic Preservation Officer and shall be
available to the public.
   (B)   Historic resources within the corporate boundaries of the City and
listed in the National Register, including all National Register-listed
historic districts in their entirety may be listed in the Local Landmark
Register using the procedures outlined in division (D) below, but need not be
documented as outlined in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(4) below. In such cases,
the National Register nomination shall serve as the Record of Designation. As
historic resources of statewide significance, all National Register properties,
including individual properties in recognized National Register historic
districts, are subject to the regulations pursuant to state law.
   (C)   Any building, structure, object, site, or district may be designated
to the Local Landmark Register if it meets all of the criteria listed below.
      (1)   The property is located within the boundaries of the City.
      (2)   The property is over 50 years of age or of exceptional importance,
or in the case of a district, the majority of the properties are over 50 years
old or have exceptional significance.
      (3)   The property possesses sufficient historic integrity, in that there
are no major alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the
significant historic features. Major alterations that may destroy the historic
integrity include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof,
enlargement or enclosure of windows on principal facades, addition of upper
stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls
with non-historic materials, and moving the resource from its original location
to one that is dissimilar to the original, additions which significantly
detract from or obscure the form and appearance of the historic resource when
viewed from the public right-of-way.
      (4)   The property has historic significance as demonstrated by meeting
at least one of the following criteria:
         (a)   Association with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
         (b)   Association with the lives or persons significant in our past;
         (c)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction or that represent the work of a master or that possess
high artistic values or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction; and/or
         (d)   Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
   (D)   The nomination procedures are as follows:
      (1)   There is no fee associated with nominating a historic resource to
the Local Landmark Register;
      (2)   The nomination for a Historic Resource to the Local Landmark
Register must include a description of the boundaries of the proposed area and
the buildings, structures, object, and sites and a statement explaining how the
historic resource(s) meet(s) the criteria;
      (3)   Prior to setting the proposed nomination on the agenda, the
Historic Preservation Officer shall inform property owners in writing of the
nomination process pursuant to local and state law. To be listed in the Local
Landmark Register, the property’s legal owner shall provide a written statement
to the City acknowledging that the owner understands the nomination process and
the results of such a designation and wishes to have the property listed in the
Local Landmark Register;
      (4)   Upon acceptance of a complete application and receipt of written
owner consent, the Historic Preservation Officer shall schedule a public
hearing before the Landmark Committee pursuant to applicable state and local
laws;
      (5)   The Committee shall review the documentation and may make a
recommendation to approve, deny, or table the application pending further
testimony, or to allow the petitioner to provide additional information as
requested by the Landmark Committee. The Landmark Committee shall forward
written findings to the Planning Commission for approval or denial;
      (6)   Upon final approval by the Planning Commission shall prepare a
record of designation that includes the original nomination materials and any
additional materials considered during the nomination process that establishes
the eligibility of the Historic Resource for listing in the Local Landmark
Register; and
      (7)   Historic Resources designated as landmarks, excepting archeological
sites, shall be noted in the Historic Landmarks Map.
   (E)   Historic resources listed in the Local Landmark Register receive the
following benefits:
      (1)   All uses and restrictions established by the underlying zoning,
existing conditional use permits, and other applicable design standards shall
remain in effect unless changed through due process;
      (2)   City Staff shall consider granting zoning variances and/or
conditional use permits in order to encourage the productive use and
preservation of landmarks; and
      (3)   The local County’s Building Inspector shall consider waiving
certain code requirements in accordance with the existing state building codes.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.06 REMOVAL PROCESS FROM LOCAL LANDMARK REGISTER.
   The following process shall be required to remove a landmark from the Local
Landmark Register.
   (A)   Landmarks concurrently listed in the Local Landmark Register and
National Register will be considered for removal from the Local Landmark
Register only after the landmark is removed from the National Register and the
state’s Historic Preservation Office has provided written evidence of the
removal to the Historic Preservation Officer.
   (B)   Any individual or group, including the Landmark Committee acting on
its own initiative, may initiate the removal of a landmark or individual
property from the Local Landmark Register by submitting a complete application
to the Historic Preservation Officer.
   (C)   The Historic Preservation Officer shall establish standards for an
application for the removal of a landmark from the Local Landmark Register.
Upon acceptance of an application, the Historic Preservation Officer shall
schedule a public hearing pursuant to applicable local and state laws.
   (D)   In order to recommend the approval of an application for the removal
of a landmark, the Landmark Committee must find the following:
      (1)   The landmark has ceased to meet the criteria for listing in the
Local Landmark Register because the qualities which caused it to be originally
listed have been lost or destroyed; and/or
      (2)   The property owner at the time the property was added to the Local
Landmark Register did not provide written permission for such action as
required under §
153.05.
   (E)   Landmarks accidentally destroyed by flood, fire, or other natural or
accidental act or demolished under the provisions of §
153.08 and meeting the definition of demolished may be removed from the Local
Landmark Register by the Historic Preservation Officer. Notice of this action
and written evidence documenting the landmark demolition shall be provided to
the Planning Commission and the Landmark Committee at their next regular
meeting. The same information shall be provided to the state’s Historic
Preservation Office. If a landmark is also listed in the National Register, the
Planning Commission shall request that the state’s Historic Preservation Office
remove the property from the National Register.
   (F)   At the hearing of an application to remove a landmark from the Local
Landmarks Register, the Planning Commission shall consider the recommendations
of the Landmark Committee and use the provisions of this section in approving,
approving with conditions, or denying the application.
   (G)   Upon removing a landmark from the Local Landmark Register, the
Historic Preservation Officer shall post a notice on the property and in the
City’s newsletter announcing the removal, the criteria under which the removal
was approved and the historic significance of the property.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.07 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.
   An application for a building permit, moving permit, or a demolition permit
for a historic building, structure, site, or object submitted to the City shall
be subject to procedures listed in divisions (A) and (B) below and in §§
153.08 and
153.09.
   (A)   “Contributory” resources. Upon receipt of an application or an inquiry
regarding a building permit, moving permit, or demolition permit for any
historic resource classified as “contributory” on the Historic Resources
Survey. The City shall provide the property owner with information about the
City’s historic preservation program. The permit application process shall then
proceed as usual.
   (B)   “Historic landmarks.” The following procedures apply.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an inquiry regarding an application for the moving,
alteration, or demolition of a historic landmark, the City shall direct the
potential applicant to make application with the Historic Landmarks Committee.
      (2)   Application for a building permit, moving permit, or demolition
permit for a historic landmark must include an application for permit
clearance. Any application to the Historic Landmarks Committee for alteration
or demolition of a historic landmark shall be processed as an application for
permit clearance. The application for permit clearance shall be in such form
and detail as the Historic Landmarks Committee and Historic Preservation
Officer prescribe, and this may require the following: written description of
proposal, legal description of property, site plan, minimum of five exterior
photographs, materials list, and architectural drawings of any proposed
alterations.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.08 DEMOLITION, MOVING, OR NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The City shall submit all requests for demolition or moving of an
historic landmark and new construction on historical sites (landmarks) on which
no structure exists to the Historic Preservation Officer who shall, within 21
days, schedule a public hearing of the Historic Landmarks Committee to review
the request. A failure to review within 45 days shall be considered as an
approval of the application.
   (B)   The Historic Landmarks Committee may approve, approve with conditions,
or delay the issuance of a demolition permit, moving permit, or building
permit. The Historic Landmarks Committee may delay a permit for up to 120 days
from the date the request is received by the Building Department during which
time it will provide the owner of the structure with possible alternatives for
demolition, including information concerning local, state, and federal
preservation programs.
   (C)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall base its decision on the
following criteria:
      (1)   The City’s historic policies set forth in the comprehensive plan
and the purpose of this chapter;
      (2)   The economic use of the historic landmark and the reasonableness of
the proposed action and their relationship to the historic landmark’s
preservation or rehabilitation;
      (3)   The physical condition of the historic landmark;
      (4)   Whether the historic landmark constitutes a hazard to the safety of
the public or its occupants;
      (5)   Whether the historic landmark is a deterrent to an improvement
program of substantial benefit to the City which overrides the public interest
in its preservation;
      (6)   Whether retention of the historic landmark would cause financial
hardship to the owner not outweighed by the public interest in the landmark’s
preservation; and
      (7)   Whether retention of the historic landmark would be in the best
interests of a majority of the citizens of the City, as determined by the
Historic Landmarks Committee, and, if not, whether the historic landmark may be
preserved by an alternative means such as through photography, item removal,
written description, measured drawings, sound retention, or other means of
limited or special preservation.
   (D)   If the structure for which a demolition permit request has been filed
has been damaged in excess of 70% of its assessed value due to fire, flood,
wind, or other natural disaster, permit clearance may be given by the Historic
Preservation Officer without processing the request through the Historic
Landmarks Committee.
   (E)   Any permit may be conditioned by the Historic Preservation Officer or
the Historic Landmarks Committee to secure interior and/or exterior
documentation of the landmark prior to the proposed action. Required
documentation shall consist of no less than 20 photographs of any affected area
in digital or print (with negatives) form. Any permit may also be conditioned
to preserve site landscaping such as individual plants or trees or to preserve
selected architectural features such as doors, windows, brackets, moldings, or
other details.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.09 EXTERIOR ALTERATION OR REMODELING.
   The City shall submit to the Historic Preservation Officer all building
permit requests for exterior alteration to an historical landmark. The Historic
Preservation Officer shall, within five working days, review the permit
application for compliance with the requirements as set out in §
153.10 of this chapter.
   (A)   If the Historic Preservation Officer finds the proposed alterations to
be in compliance with §
153.10, he or she shall submit to the Building Department a permit clearance
form which will indicate that the requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied by the request.
   (B)   If the Historic Preservation Officer finds the proposed alteration to
be in noncompliance with the requirements of §
153.10, he or she shall immediately issue a “notice of delay” to the County’s
Building Inspector and call for a meeting of the Historic Landmarks Committee
to review the application.
      (1)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall meet within 40 days of the
date the completed permit application was submitted to the Building Department.
The applicant shall be notified of the time and place of the review and is
encouraged to be present, although his or her presence shall not be necessary
for action on the plans. A failure to review within 40 days shall be considered
an approval of the application.
      (2)   If the Historic Landmarks Committee finds the proposed alterations
to be in compliance with §
153.10, it shall direct the Historic Preservation Officer to submit to the
Building Department a permit clearance form.
      (3)   If the Historic Landmarks Committee finds the proposed alterations
to be in noncompliance with §
153.10, it must:
         (a)   Approve the application subject to compliance with conditions
which will bring the application into conformance with §
153.10. Permit clearance will be subject to said conditions; or
         (b)   Direct the Historic Preservation Officer to issue a notice of
delay which places up to a 60 day delay from the date of the Committee action
on issuance of a building permit for the proposed alteration and provide the
applicant with information concerning local, state, and federal preservation
programs. If the proposed alteration affects a “significant” resource, the
delay period may be extended an additional 60 days.
   (C)   Any permit may be conditioned by the Historic Preservation Officer or
the Historic Landmarks Committee to secure interior and/or exterior
documentation of the landmark prior to the proposed action. Required
documentation shall consist of no less than 20 digital photographs. Any permit
may also be conditioned to preserve site landscaping such as individual plants
or trees or to preserve selected architectural features such as doors, windows,
brackets, moldings, or other details.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.10 GUIDELINES FOR THE EXTERIOR ALTERATION OF A HISTORIC LANDMARK.
   (A)   An application for exterior alteration of an historic landmark will be
considered if the change or the treatment proposed is determined to be
harmonious and compatible with the appearance and character of the historical
building. An application will not be considered if found detrimental to or
otherwise adversely affecting the architectural significance, the integrity of
historical appearance, and the educational and historical value of the
building.
   (B)   The following guidelines apply to exterior alterations to historical
buildings:
      (1)   Retention of original construction. So far as practical, all
original exterior materials and details shall be preserved or replaced to match
the original;
      (2)   Height. Additional stories may be added to historic buildings
provided that:
         (a)   The added height complies with requirements of the building and
zoning codes;
         (b)   The added height does not exceed that which was traditional for
the style of the building;
         (c)   The added height does not alter the traditional scale and
proportions of the building style; and
         (d)   The added height is visually compatible with adjacent historic
buildings.
      (3)   Additions. Horizontal additions may be added to historic buildings
provided that:
         (a)   The addition does not exceed that which was traditional for the
building style;
         (b)   The addition maintains the traditional scale and proportion of
the building; and
         (c)   The addition is visually compatible with adjacent historic
buildings.
      (4)   Visual integrity of structure. The lines of columns, piers,
spandrels, and other primary structural elements small be maintained so far as
is practicable.
      (5)   Scale and proportion. The scale and proportion of altered or added
building elements, the relationship of voids to solid (windows to wall) shall
be visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the
historic building.
      (6)   Materials, color, and texture. The materials, colors, and textures
used in the alteration or addition shall be visually compatible with the
traditional architectural character of the historic building.
      (7)   Lighting and other appurtenances. Exterior lighting and other
appurtenances, such as walls, fences, awnings, and landscaping shall be
visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the
historic building.
   (C)   The Historic Landmarks Committee shall base its decision on the
following criteria:
      (1)   Compliance with the guidelines in division (B) above;
      (2)   The City’s historic preservation policies set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan and the purpose statement of this chapter;
      (3)   The economic use of the historic landmark in relation to the
proposed alteration and its relationship to the public interest in the historic
landmark’s preservation or rehabilitation;
      (4)   The physical condition of the historical landmark; and
      (5)   The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement,
proportion, detail, scale, color, texture, and materials proposed to be used
with the existing landmark.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.11 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Public notice requirements shall be as follows.
   (A)   After the adoption of the initial survey, all new additions,
deletions, or changes to the survey shall comply with division (C) below.
   (B)   Any Historic Landmark Committee review of an application for a
building permit, moving permit, or demolition permit shall comply with division
(C) below.
   (C)   At least 20 days prior to the meeting, the owners of property located
within 150 feet of the historic resource under consideration shall be notified
via first class mail of the time and place of the Historic Landmarks Committee
meeting and the purpose of the meeting. The notice requirement will be
conclusively satisfied if the City mails the notice by first class mail to the
owners of record with County Assessor’s office as of the date of mailing.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.12 COUNTY’S BUILDING INSPECTOR POWERS.
   Nothing in this chapter may be interpreted to mean that the Historic
Landmarks Committee may issue building permits, as that is an ability reserved
to the County’s Building Inspector.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.13 VIOLATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A uniform complaint, or citation to appeal, may be issued to the owner
or occupier of an historic landmark property being used or altered in violation
of this chapter, requiring said owner or occupier to appear in municipal court
regarding a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   A trial shall be heard before the judge without a jury. No appeal from
the decision may be taken. The standard of proof required shall be by a
preponderance of the evidence.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.14 APPEALS.
   Any appeal of a decision by the Historic Landmarks Committee, including an
appeal of conditions placed on a permit by the Committee, may be made to the
City Planning Commission within ten days of the Historic Landmarks Committee’s
decision. If the appeal is filed, the Planning Commission shall receive a
report and a recommendation from the Historic Landmarks Committee and shall
hold a public hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
Public notice of an appeal shall be made according to §
153.11. Any permit shall be invalid and no work shall be undertaken during the
appeal process. Any decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A) A person convicted of violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 except for demolition
of a structure which shall be as provided for in §
153.09(D).
   (B)   A person convicted of demolishing a historic landmark without first
securing a demolition permit shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $1,500.
   (C)   In the event of the owner/occupier fails to pay a fine imposed upon
conviction of a violation, the court may issue a show cause order to the
individual so charged and require his or her presence in court to set forth the
reasons for said failure to pay. If good and sufficient reasons do not exist,
the Court may request the Council to adopt an ordinance making the amount a
lien against the property.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-7-2014)
CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
154.01   Comprehensive Plan adopted by reference
§ 154.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   This municipality’s Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 433, passed 1-7-1980; Ord. 639, passed 6-4-2014; Ord. 648, passed 7-1-
2015)
CHAPTER 155: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
155.01   Unified Development Code adopted by reference
§ 155.01 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   This municipality’s Unified Development Code is hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed 3- -2015; Ord. 650, passed 12-7-2016; Ord. 662, passed 4-8-2020;
Ord. 670, passed 9-1-2021; Ord. 677, passed 7-6-2022)
CHAPTER 156: SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
Section
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Scope
   
156.03   Definitions
   
156.04   System development charge established
   
156.05   Methodology
   
156.06   Authorized expenditures
   
156.07   Expenditure restrictions
   
156.08   Improvement plan
   
156.09   Collection of charge
   
156.10   Delinquent charges – hearings
   
156.11   Exemptions, reductions and waivers
   
156.12   Credits
   
156.13   Segregation and use of revenue
   
156.14   Appeal procedure
   
156.15   Prohibited connection – violation
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the
cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater, streets, storm drainage,
flood control, water quality, and parks and recreation upon those developments
that create the need for, or increase the demands on capital improvements.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.02 SCOPE.
   The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and
in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided
by law or imposed as a condition of development.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Facilities or assets used for:
      (1)   Water supply, treatment and distribution;
      (2)   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
      (3)   Storm drainage, flood control, water quality;
      (4)   Transportation; or
      (5)   Parks and recreation.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator for the City of Amity.
   DEVELOPMENT. A building or property use making a physical change in the use
or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels
(including partitions and subdivisions), and creation or termination of a right
of access.
   IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
156.04.
   OWNER. The owner of record title or the purchaser under a recorded sales
agreement and other persons having an interest of record in the described real
property.
   PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is
occupied or may be occupied by a structure, or structures or other use, and
that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning,
subdivision, and other development ordinance.
   PUBLIC CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Improvement upon the property of the City or
within an easement granted to the City which serves to further the operation of
the City government and the interests and welfare of the public; for example, a
facility or asset used for water supply, treatment and distribution; wastewater
collection, transmission, treatment and disposal; storm drainage, flood
control, and water quality; transportation; or parks and recreation.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. A public capital improvement that is:
      (1)   Required as condition of residential development approval;
      (2)   Identified in an improvement plan adopted by the City Council;
      (3)   And either not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is
the development approval; or
      (4)   Located in whole or in part on or contiguous property that is the
subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater
capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the
improvement fee is related.
   REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
156.04.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a
combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a
building or property, or at the time of connection to City services. SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT CHARGE does not include:
      (1)   Fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district;
      (2)   A charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment;
      (3)   The cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a
land use decision; or
      (4)   Fees that are in the amount necessary to reimburse the City for its
costs of inspecting and/or installing connections to wastewater, water or storm
facilities.
(Ord. 680, 6-7-2023)
§ 156.04 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   System development charges shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the Council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge,
the type of charge, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller
than the entire City, the geographic area subject to the charge.
   (B)   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, or other
local or state law, a system development charge is imposed upon all persons who
develop parcels of land that connect to or which otherwise are used to create a
need for the wastewater facilities, storm sewer facilities, water facilities,
transportation facilities, or parks and recreation of the City.
   (C)   An administrative charge associated with the cost of the City’s system
development charge program, including periodic and on-going direct and indirect
costs associated with complying with the requirement of state law and the cost
of administering system development charges, may be established by Council
resolution.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.05 METHODOLOGY.
   (A)   The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider
the cost of then existing facilities, prior contributions by then existing
users, the value of unused capacity, rate making principals employed to finance
publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by
the Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems
users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then
existing facilities.
   (B)   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider
the cost of project capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the
systems to which the fee is related.
   (C)   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the
reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the
Council.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.06 AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements
associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including
expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   (B)    Improvement fees shall be spent only on improvements associated with
the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to
repayment of indebtedness. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part
from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the
improvement plan adopted by the Council.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) of this section, system
development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system
development charge methodologies, developing and maintaining an improvement
plan, and providing an annual accounting of system development charge
expenditures.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.07 EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)    System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   (B)   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.08 IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Prior to the establishment of a system development charge the Council
shall adopt a capital improvement plan by resolution that:
      (1)   Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with the
improvement fee revenues; and
      (2)   Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each
improvement; and
      (3)   Identifies the estimated percentage of costs eligible to be funded
with revenues from improvement fees for each improvement.
   (B)   The plan may be modified at any time by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.09 COLLECTION OF CHARGE.
   (A)   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:
      (1)   A building permit;
      (2)   A development permit;
      (3)   A permit to connect to the water system;
      (4)   A permit to connect to the wastewater system;
      (5)   A permit to connect to the storm drainage system; or
      (6)   A permit for access.
   (B)   System development charges shall be assessed as adopted by resolution.
   (C)   If development is commenced or connection is made to a City system
without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately
payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required, or construction
began.
   (D)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall not issue such
permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, or
unless an exemption is granted pursuant to §
156.11.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.10 DELINQUENT CHARGES – HEARINGS.
   (A)   When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid
the City Administrator shall report to the Council the amount of the
uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is
attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the
person responsible for the payment of the fee.
   (B)   The City Council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and
direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner or person responsible
for payment of the fee, with a copy of the City Administrator’s report
concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either
personally, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal
and mailed notice and by posting notice on the parcel at least ten days before
the date set for the hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the Council may accept, reject, or modify the
determination of the City Administrator as set forth in the report. If the
Council finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it
shall, by motion, direct the City Administrator to docket the unpaid and
uncollected systems development charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of
the docketing, the City shall have a lien against the described land for the
full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest accruing at the rate
established by resolution of the Council and with the City’s actual cost of
serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in
the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.11 EXEMPTIONS, REDUCTIONS AND WAIVERS.
   (A)   Structures and uses established and existing on or before June 7,
1976, are exempt from system development charges imposed by this chapter,
except water and wastewater charge, to the extent of the structure or use then
existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that
date. Structure and uses affected by this division (A) shall pay the water and
wastewater charges pursuant to the terms of this subchapter upon the receipt of
a permit to connect to the water or wastewater system.
   (B)   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the Oregon Residential Specialty
Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge, except
water and sewer as described in division (A).
   (C)   An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not
increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility as
defined by resolution adopted by Council is exempt from that facility’s
portions of the system development charge.
   (D)   Any public facility or improvement which is or by agreement undertaken
by the City of Amity is exempt from system development charges imposed by the
terms of this chapter.
   (E)    If a structure is removed from real property and permit fees for a
new structure are paid within five years of the removal, then system
development charges shall be assessed only to the extent that the impact to the
City infrastructure is greater than the original structure. If permit fees for
a new structure or development are paid after five years, full system
development charges shall be assessed.
   (F)   System development charges may be waived or reduced for a proposed
specific use or structure by resolution of Council if Council finds such waiver
or reduction to be in the best interest of the community and an alternate
source of funding will be used.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.12 CREDITS.
   (A)   A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a
parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for uses that qualify for
an exemption pursuant to §
156.11. The system development charge shall be based upon the difference
between the system development charge calculated for the new use and the system
development charge calculated for the pre-existing use under the current
methodology. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system
development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.
   (B)   Credit shall also be given for the cost of a qualified public
improvement, upon acceptance by the City of that public improvement. The credit
provided for by this division (B) shall be only for the improvement fee charges
for the type of improvement being constructed and may be granted only for that
portion of such improvement that exceeds the City’s minimum standard facility
size or capacity needed to serve that development’s project or property. The
applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement
qualifies under this section. The request for credit shall be in writing no
later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the City. The credit
shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital
improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee.
   (C)   Credit shall be used within ten years from the date the credit is
given and not be transferable from one development to another, except in
compliance with standards adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.13 SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE.
   (A)   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the City.
That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on
account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than
those set forth in §
156.06.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall provide the City Council with an annual
accounting, based on the City’s fiscal year, for system development charges,
showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for
each type of facility and the projects funded from each account.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.14 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision of the expenditure to the
City Council by filing a written request with the City Administrator describing
with particularity the decision and the expenditure from which the person
appeals. An appeal of the expenditure must be filed within two years of the
date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   (B)   Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the
City Administrator under this chapter must be filed within ten days of the
decision.
   (C)   After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine
whether the City Administrator’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance
with this chapter and the provision of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm,
modify or overrule the decision. If the Council determines that there has been
an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the Council
shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within
one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 156.15 PROHIBITED CONNECTION – VIOLATION.
   No person may connect to any City system unless the appropriate system
development charge has been paid. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for, upon conviction
thereof before the Municipal Judge, shall be fined in an amount equal to a
class A infraction for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 680, passed 6-7-2023)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ZONING
      
III.   FUNDS
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
-             4-1-        Granting a franchise agreement to Comcast of Oregon
                          I, Inc.
327           2-3- 1964   Granting a nonexclusive gas utility franchise to
                          Northwest Natural Gas Company.
                          Granting the right to place, erect, and maintain
                          poles, wires, and other appliances and conductors and
376           9-4- 1973   to lay underground wires for the transmission of
                          electricity for communication purposes under and over
                          the streets, alleys, avenues, thoroughfares, and
                          public highways to Northwest Inc.
                          Granting the exclusive franchise to collect,
410           4-5- 1976   transport, and convey solid waste over and under the
                          streets of the City to Ezra Koch and Fred Koch, Jr.
                          Granting an exclusive franchise to provide solid
462           5-13- 1985  waste service, including recycling, reuse, and other
                          resource recovery and waste reduction services to
                          McMinnville City Sanitary Service, Inc.
533           1-13- 1994  Granting an electric, light, and power system
                          franchise to Portland General Electric Company.
                          Granting the right to place, erect, and maintain
                          poles, wires, and other appliances and conductors and
                          to lay underground wires for the transm ission of
541           7-11- 1995  electricity for communicati on purposes in, upon, and
                          over the streets, alleys, avenues, thoroughfares, and
                          public highways of the City to GTE of the Northwest,
                          Inc.
                          Granting a franchise agreement for electric, light,
635           11-6- 2013  and power systems to Portland General Electric
                          Company and repealing Ordinance 533.
                          Granting a telecommunications franchise to Astound
-             - - 2014    Broad band, LLC to use City rights-of-way to provide
                          telecommunications services.
                          Directing Portland General Electric Company to pay an
2014- 15      8-5- 2014   additional 1.5% of gross revenues received from
                          customers within the City on a quarterly basis.
643           2-4- 2015   Granting a franchise agreement to Comcast of Oregon
                          II, Inc. and repealing Ordinance 601.
                          Granting a non-exclusive franchise and right to
                          construct, operate, and maintain a data
645           3-4- 2015   communications service facility and provide
                          telecommunications services to Astound Broad band,
                          LLC, a wholly- owned subsidiary of Wave Division
                          Holdings, LLC.
646           5-6- 2015   Granting a franchise agreement to Comcast of Oregon
                          I, Inc. and repealing Ordinance 643.
656           5-1- 2019   Granting a franchise agreement to conduct general
                          Granting a franchise agreement to conduct general
669           5-5-2021    telecommunications business and granting a right to
                          use public rights-of-way within the City to Frontier
                          Communications North west, LLC, D/B/A Ziply Fiber.
686           2-5-2025    Amending the franchise agreement between the City and
                          Astound Broadband, LLC for an additional ten years.
                         
 
TABLE II: ZONING
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
565   3-14-  Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan map designation and zoning map.
      2000
607   4-13-  Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan map and the zoning map.
      2005
608   4-5-   Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan map and the zoning map.
      2006
864   3-31-  Amendment to the City’s Urban Growth Boundary to take in approximately 24
      2011   acres.
625   6-1-   Amendment to the city’s Urban Growth Boundary by including approximately 24
      2011   acres.
651   6-7-   Annexation of territory (Tax Lot 2000 on the County Tax Map R5420) and
      2017   amendment to the City’s zoning map.
666   12-2-  Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning map.
      2020
687   8-6-   Annexation of territory (Tax Lot 00100 on County Tax Map R5420DB) and
      2025   amendment to the City’s zoning map.
            
 
TABLE III: FUNDS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed  Description
667           2-3-2021       Authorizing the issuance of a revenue bond to
                             finance improvements to the City’s water system.
                            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
ORS Cites Code Section
ORS Cites               Code Section
12.070                  55.034
30.765                  131.23
Chapter 34              91.129
34.010                  115.18
Chapter 87              115.19
133.005(3)              95.04
153.018(2)(e)           91.999
153.019                 70.99
153.025(2)              91.999
153.990                 91.231
164.015 through 164.135 131.01
164.345                 51.99
166.240                 133.25
166.250                 133.25
166.250(1)              133.25
166.260                 133.20
166.291                 133.25
166.292                 133.25
166.293                 133.25
167.310 through 167.388 91.001,
                        91.030
181.555                 30.01
183.310 to 183.510      151.03
192.502(16)             115.13
197.015                 92.64
Chapter 203             91.050
Chapter 223             152.02,
                        156.10
223.205 et seq.         92.04
223.295                 Charter §
                        40
223.297 to 223.314      156.14
223.387                 152.01
223.605 through 223.650 131.21
Chapter 227             30.39
Chapter 244             30.41
320.300(8)              115.05
357.405 through 357.621 94.01
433.365                 91.145
446.062                 151.03
454.225                 54.08,
                        54.38
455.010                 150.30
468B.050                53.04
Chapter 471             114.01,
                        114.09
471.027                 114.01 
471.605                 114.46
471.610                 114.46
471.615                 114.46
Chapter 474             114.01,
                        114.09
475B                    113.03,
                        113.99
475.005 et seq.         113.01,
                        113.02
475.035                 113.01
475.305                 113.40
480.111                 110.34
                        91.001,
                        91.009,
Chapter 609             91.030,
                        91.050,
                        91.051,
                        91.218
609.140                 91.202
609.150                 91.215
609.155                 91.216
609.157                 91.217
609.160                 91.217
609.205                 91.012 
609.305                 91.012
686.030                 91.054
697.105                 113.23
Chapter 801 through 826 70.01
801.220                 73.13
801.460 et seq.         132.14
801.590                 74.01
806.010                 70.65,
                        70.68
807.010(1)              70.65
811.175                 70.65
811.395                 73.04
811.400                 73.04
811.425                 73.03
814.010                 73.13,
                        73.15
814.487                 73.08,
                        73.09
815.052                 73.08,
                        73.09
815.100 through 815.200 74.01
815.284                 73.10
Chapter 816             74.01
819.100                 74.01
819.110                 74.02
819.110 through 819.120 74.02
819.150                 74.02,
                        74.99
819.170                 74.04
819.180                 70.65,
                        74.04
                        
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
98-1     2-3-1998    50.01
                     32.15,
                     32.16,
                     32.17,
2012-07  8-1-2012    32.18,
                     32.19,
                     32.20,
                     32.21
2019-09  9-4-2019    51.03
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.        Date Passed Code Section
                            110.01,
                            110.02,
                            110.03,
                            110.04,
                            110.05,
                            110.06,
                            110.07,
567             - -         110.08,
                            110.09,
                            110.10,
                            110.11,
                            110.13,
                            110.14,
                            110.15,
                            110.99
-               4-1-        TSO Table I
301             1-21-1957   30.15,
                            30.16
                            114.01,
                            114.02,
                            114.03,
                            114.04,
                            114.05,
                            114.07,
                            114.08,
                            114.09,
                            114.20,
                            114.21,
                            114.22,
303             1-6-1958    114.23,
                            114.24,
                            114.25,
                            114.40,
                            114.41,
                            114.42,
                            114.43,
                            114.44,
                            114.45,
                            114.46,
                            114.47,
                            114.48,
                            114.99
307A            3-2-1959    91.35,
                            91.999
                            150.15,
316             2-5-1962    150.16,
                            150.17,
                            150.99
319             5-6-1963    150.02
327             2-3-1964    TSO Table I
                            112.01,
344             12-6-1968   112.02,
                            112.03,
                            112.99
                            151.01,
                            151.02,
                            151.03,
                            151.04,
349             3-2-1970    151.05,
                            151.06,
                            151.07,
                            151.08,
                            151.09,
                            151.99
                            130.01,
                            130.02,
                            130.03,
                            130.99,
                            131.01,
                            131.02,
                            131.03,
                            131.04,
                            132.01,
                            132.02,
                            132.03,
                            132.04,
                            132.05,
                            132.06,
                            132.07,
                            132.08,
                            132.09,
                            132.10,
                            132.11,
                            132.12,
                            132.13,
                            132.14,
                            133.01,
367             2-5-1973    133.02,
                            133.03,
                            133.04,
                            133.05,
                            133.07,
                            133.08,
                            133.26,
                            133.40,
                            133.41,
                            133.42,
                            133.43,
                            133.44,
                            133.45,
                            133.46,
                            133.47,
                            133.63,
                            133.64,
                            133.99,
                            134.01,
                            134.02,
                            134.03,
                            134.04,
                            134.05,
                            134.06
368             6-4-1973    114.02,
                            114.03
371             6-4-1973    133.64
                            70.01,
                            70.02,
                            70.03,
                            70.04,
                            70.05,
                            70.06,
                            70.07,
                            70.08,
                            70.09,
                            70.10,
                            70.11,
                            70.12,
                            70.13,
                            70.14,
                            70.30,
                            70.31,
                            70.32,
                            70.33,
                            70.45,
                            70.47,
372             6-4-1973    70.48,
                            70.49,
                            70.50,
                            72.02,
                            72.04,
                            72.05,
                            72.06,
                            72.07,
                            72.08,
                            72.09,
                            72.10,
                            72.11,
                            72.25,
                            72.26,
                            72.27,
                            75.01,
                            75.02,
                            75.03,
                            75.04,
                            75.05,
                            75.06
376             9-4-1973    TSO Table I
                            132.05,
380             11-5-1973   132.06,
                            132.07
383             12-3-1973   50.02
398             12-2-1974   114.99
399             1-6-1975    114.04
409             1-5-1976    150.01
410             4-5-1976    TSO Table I
418             8-1-1977    91.999
450             7-27-1978   133.10
433             1-7-1980    154.01
                            152.01,
                            152.02,
                            152.03,
                            152.04,
                            152.05,
                            152.06,
                            152.07,
                            152.08,
474             1-10-1983   152.09,
                            152.10,
                            152.11,
                            152.12,
                            152.13,
                            152.14,
                            152.15,
                            152.16,
                            152.17,
                            152.18
462             5-13-1985   TSO Table I
489             4-13-1987   94.01
494             7-13-1987   10.19
                            51.01,
                            51.02,
                            51.03,
                            51.04,
                            51.05,
                            51.06,
                            51.07,
                            51.08,
                            51.09,
                            51.10,
500             11-14-1988  51.12,
                            51.13,
                            51.14,
                            51.15,
                            51.16,
                            51.17,
                            51.18,
                            51.19,
                            51.20,
                            51.21,
                            51.99
                            111.01,
                            111.02,
                            111.03,
                            111.04,
                            111.05,
504             2-13-1989   111.06,
                            111.07,
                            111.08,
                            111.09,
                            111.10,
                            111.11,
                            111.99
                            113.01,
                            113.02,
507             11-13-1989  113.03,
                            113.04,
                            113.99
                            110.01,
                            110.02,
                            110.04,
                            110.05,
510             - -1990     110.07,
                            110.08,
                            110.14,
                            110.15,
                            110.99
515             10-9-1991   51.03
523             10-12-1992  51.17
526             12-14-1992  151.02
527             7-13-1993   133.26
533             1-13-1994   TSO Table I
541             7-11-1995   TSO Table I
539             8-1-1995    70.65 -
                            70.68
543             2-6-1996    134.07,
                            134.99
546             10-12-1996  51.03
                            110.01 -
564             - -1999     110.15,
                            110.99
                            150.30 -
556             1-5-1999    150.35,
                            150.99
565             3-14-2000   TSO Table II
                            110.01 -
O-567           10-10-2000  110.15,
                            110.99
                            91.050 -
                            91.056,
                            91.070,
                            91.071,
                            91.085 -
                            91.088,
                            91.100 -
                            91.108,
                            91.120 -
                            91.131,
                            91.145,
                            91.146,
County Ord. 692 7-12-2001   91.160 -
                            91.172,
                            91.185 -
                            91.187,
                            91.200 -
                            91.202,
                            91.215 -
                            91.218,
                            91.230 -
                            91.238,
                            91.250 -
                            91.252,
                            91.999
568             4-2-2002    31.01
-               4-18-2003   115.01
607             4-13-2005   TSO Table II
608             4-5-2006    TSO Table II
613             6-6-2007    30.01
614             6-5-2008    71.02,
                            71.99
615             8-6-2008    32.10
                            52.01 -
620             10-7-2009   52.07,
                            52.20 -
                            52.36
                            70.15,
                            70.16,
                            72.01,
                            92.01 -
622             11-3-2010   92.06,
                            92.24 -
                            92.27,
                            92.40 -
                            92.47,
                            92.99
624             2-2-2011    92.60 -
                            92.68
864             3-31-2011   TSO Table II
625             6-1-2011    TSO Table II
628             2-1-2012    10.99
629             5-2-2012    90.56
                            72.02 -
630             6-6-2012    72.04,
                            72.12,
                            72.99
                            73.01 -
632             11-7-2012   73.15,
                            73.99
                            133.60,
633             2-6-2013    133.61,
                            133.99
635             11-6-2013   TSO Table I
--              -2014       TSO Table I
2014-15         8-5-2014    TSO Table I
637             5-7-2014    133.99
                            153.01 -
638             5-7-2014    153.14,
                            153.99
639             6-4-2014    154.01
                            93.01 -
642             11-5-2014   93.11,
                            93.99
643             2-4-2015    TSO Table I
-               3- -2015    155.01
645             3-4-2015    TSO Table I
646             5-6-2015    TSO Table I
648             7-1-2015    154.01
                            131.15 -
649             10-7-2015   131.24,
                            131.99
650             12-7-2016   155.01
651             6-7-2017    TSO Table II
                            90.01,
                            90.02,
                            90.15 -
652             4-4-2018    90.21,
                            90.35 -
                            90.41,
                            90.55 -
                            90.62
                            91.001 -
                            91.016,
653             4-4-2018    91.030 -
                            91.034,
                            91.999
654             6-6-2018    50.45 -
                            50.48
655             6-6-2018    50.30 -
                            50.33
656             7-3-2018    31.15 -
                            31.23
                            110.30 -
657             8-1-2018    110.38,
                            110.99
                            110.30 -
657-1           8-1-2018    110.38,
                            110.99
658             10-3-2018   Ch. 76, Sch. I
659             12-5-2018   31.15
656             5-1-2019    TSO Table I
657-2           11-6-2019   51.35 -
                            51.39
662             4-8-2020    155.01
661             5-6-2020    30.30 -
                            30.44
                            115.01 -
663             6-3-2020    115.19,
                            115.99
665             10-7-2020   74.01 -
                            74.04
666             12-2-2020   TSO Table II
667             2-3-2021    TSO Table III
                            95.01 -
668             4-7-2021    95.04,
                            95.99
669             5-5-2021    TSO Table I
670             9-1-2021    155.01
671             9-1-2021    Adopting Ordinance
672             10-6-2021   51.22,
                            51.99
673             4-6-2022    Ch. 76, Sch. I
675             6-1-2022    51.08
676             7-6-2022    51.99
677             7-6-2022    155.01
678             8-3-2022    113.40
679             4-5-2023    33.01 -
                            33.06
680             6-7-2023    156.01 -
                            156.15
                            93.02,
681             6-28-2023   95.02,
                            95.03,
                            133.06
683             8-7-2024    113.40
686             2-5-2025    TSO Table I
687             8-6-2025    TSO Table II
                           
 
 
