CITY OF METOLIUS, OREGON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through local legislation 263, passed 7-6-2020
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Section
Charter
Chapter 1: Names and Boundaries
   
1. Title of enactment
   
2. Name of city
   
3. Boundaries
   
4. Existing ordinances, existing rights and liabilities continued
Chapter II: Powers
   
5. Powers of the city
   
5a. (Repealed)
   
5b. Occupation tax
   
6. Construction of charter
Chapter III: Form of Government
   
7. Where powers vested
   
8. Council
   
9. Councilmen
   
10. Mayor
   
11. Other officers
   
12. Salaries
   
13. Qualifications of officers
Chapter IV: Council
   
14. Meetings
   
15. Quorum
   
16. Journal
   
17. Proceedings to be public
   
18. Mayor’s functions at Council meetings
   
19. President of the Council
   
20. Vote required
Chapter V: Powers and Duties of Officers
   
21. Mayor
   
22. Municipal judge
   
23. Recorder
Chapter VI: Elections
   
24. Regular elections
   
25. Notice of regular elections
   
26. Special elections
   
27. Regulating of elections
   
28.Canvass of returns
   
29. Tie votes
   
30. Commencement of terms of office
   
31. Oath of office
   
32. Nominations
Chapter VII: Vacancies in Office
   
33. What creates vacancy
   
34. Filling of vacancies
Chapter VIII: Ordinances
   
35. Enacting clause
   
36. Mode of enactment
   
37. When ordinances take effect
Chapter IX: Public Improvements
   
38. Condemnation
   
39. Improvements
   
40. Special assessments
   
41. Bids
Chapter X: Miscellaneous Provisions
   
42. Debt limit
   
43. Torts
   
44. Water
   
45. Existing ordinances continued
   
46. Bond issue
   
46a. Sewer bond issue
   
46b. Irrigation system bond issue
   
47. Separability clause
   
48. Emergency clause
   
49. Annexation
CHARTER
   To provide for the government of the City of Metolius, Jefferson County,
Oregon; and to repeal all charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the
time that this charter takes effect.
   Be it enacted by the people of the City of Metolius, Jefferson County,
Oregon.
CHAPTER 1: NAME AND BOUNDARIES
§ 1 TITLE OF ENACTMENT.
   This enactment may be referred to as the City of Metolius Charter of 1966.
§ 2 NAME OF CITY.
   The municipality of Metolius, Jefferson County, Oregon shall continue to be
a municipal corporation with the name “City of Metolius.”
§ 3 BOUNDARIES.
   The City of Metolius, in Jefferson County, Oregon, shall upon taking effect
of this charter, continue to be a municipal corporation, under the name and
style of the city of Metolius, with its corporate territory and the boundaries
thereof described as follows:
   Beginning at the North end of the East Butte Avenue, according to the Plat
of Metolius now on file in the office of the County Clerk of the County of
Jefferson, State of Oregon; thence running due South to the South side of Ninth
Street; thence West to the West side of Washington Avenue; thence Southwest to
the intersection of the West line of the Northeast quarter of the Southwest
Quarter; thence North to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter; thence East to the Northeast corner of the Southeast Quarter
of the Northwest Quarter; thence Northeast to the Northeast corner of the
Northwest quarter of the Northeast Quarter; thence due East along the North
line of Section twenty-eight, township eleven South, Range Thirteen East, to
the East side of Butte Avenue, to the point of beginning. All the above-
described land lying in Section twenty-eight, Township Eleven South, Range
thirteen East of the Willamette Meridian, in the County of Jefferson, State of
Oregon. All descriptions by streets and avenues are as shown on the plat of the
town site of Metolius now on file in the office of the County Clerk of the
County of Jefferson, State of Oregon.
§ 4 EXISTING ORDINANCES, EXISTING RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances of the municipality consistent with this charter and in force
when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed. No right
or liability of the municipality shall be impaired or discharged by the
adoption of this charter, except as this charter otherwise provides.
CHAPTER II: POWERS
§ 5 POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The city shall have all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common
law of the United States and of this State expressly or impliedly grant or
allow municipalities as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated
each of those powers.
§ 5a.
(Repealed by vote of the people 5-15-1984)
§ 5b OCCUPATION TAX.
   The city council may license and tax any occupation, business, trade or
profession operating in said city.
§ 6 CONSTRUCTION OF CHARTER.
   In this charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be
exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the city would have if
the particular power were not mentioned. The Charter shall be liberally
construed to the end that the city may have all powers necessary or convenient
for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may
assume pursuant to state laws, and to the municipal home rule provisions of the
state constitution.
CHAPTER III: FORM OF GOVERNMENT
§ 7 WHERE POWERS VESTED.
   Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be
vested in the council.
§ 8 COUNCIL.
   The council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilmen elected from the
city at large.
§ 9 COUNCILMEN.
   The councilmen in office at the time this charter is adopted shall continue
in office, each until the end of his term of office as fixed by the charter of
the city in effect at the time this charter is adopted. At each biennial
general election after this charter takes effect, three councilmen shall be
elected, each for a term of four years.
§ 10 MAYOR.
   At each biennial general election a mayor shall be elected for a term of two
years.
§ 11 OTHER OFFICERS.
   Additional officers of the city shall be a municipal judge, a recorder, a
treasurer, a police chief, a street superintendent, a water superintendent, a
city attorney, and such other officers as the council deems necessary. Each of
these officers shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the
council and may be removed by the mayor with the consent of the council. The
council may combine any two or more appointive city offices and may designate
any appointive officer to supervise any other appointive officer except the
municipal judge in the exercise of his judicial functions.
§ 12 SALARIES.
   The compensation for the services of each city officer and employee shall be
the amount fixed by the council.
§ 13 QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS.
   No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the
time of his election he is a qualified elector within the meaning of the state
constitution and has resided in the city during the twelve months immediately
preceding the election. The council shall be final judge of the qualifications
and election of its own members, subject, however, to review of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
CHAPTER IV: COUNCIL
§ 14 MEETINGS.
   The council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month in the
city at a time and at a place which it designates. It shall adopt rules for the
government of its members and proceedings. The mayor upon his own motion may,
or at the request of three members of the council shall, by giving notice
thereof to all members of the council then in the city, call a special meeting
of the council for a time not earlier than three hours nor later than forty-
eight hours after notice is given. Special meetings of the council may be held
at any time by the common consent of all the members of the council.
§ 15 QUORUM.
   A majority of members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its
business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent
members in a manner provided by ordinance.
§ 16 JOURNAL.
   The council shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept. Upon the
request of any of its members, the ayes and nays upon any question before it
shall be taken, and a record of the vote entered in the journal.
§ 17 PROCEEDINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   No action by the council shall have legal effect unless the motion for the
action and the vote by which it is disposed of take place at proceedings open
to the public.
§ 18 MAYOR’S FUNCTIONS AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The mayor shall be chairman of the council and preside over its
deliberations. He shall have a vote on all questions before it. He shall have
authority to preserve order, enforce the rules of the council, and determine
the order of business under the rules of the council.
§ 19 PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.
   At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its
first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council by ballot shall elect a
president from its membership. In the mayor’s absence from a council meeting,
the president shall preside over it. Whenever the mayor is unable to perform
the functions of his office, the president shall act as mayor.
§ 20 VOTE REQUIRED.
   Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of
the members of the council present at a council meeting shall be necessary to
decide any question before the council.
CHAPTER V: POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS
§ 21 MAYOR.
   The mayor shall appoint the committees provided by the rules of the council.
He shall sign all approved records of proceedings of the council. He shall have
no veto power and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council within three
days after their passing. After the council approves a bond of a city officer
or a bond for a license, contract, or proposal, the mayor shall endorse the
bond.
§ 22 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city. He shall hold
within the city a court known as the municipal court for the City of Metolius,
Jefferson County, Oregon. The court shall be open for the transaction of
judicial business at times specified by the council. All area within the city
shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal judge
shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all crimes and offenses
defined and made punishable by ordinances of the city and of all actions
brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or authorized by
ordinances of the city. He shall have authority to issued process for the
arrest of any person accused of an offense against the ordinances of the city,
to commit any such person to jail or admit him to bail pending trial, to issue
subpoenas, to compel witnesses to appear and testify in court on the trial of
any cause before him. To compel obedience to such subpoenas, to issue any
process necessary to carry into effect the judgments of the court, and to
punish witnesses and others for contempt of the court. When not governed by
ordinances or this charter, all proceedings in the municipal court for the
violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws
of the state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.
§ 23 RECORDER.
   The recorder shall serve ex officio as clerk of the council, attend all its
meetings unless excused there from by the council, keep an accurate record of
its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose, and sign all orders on the
treasury. In the recorder’s absence from a council meeting, the mayor shall
appoint a clerk of the council pro tem who, while acting in that capacity,
shall have all the authority and duties of the recorder.
CHAPTER VI: ELECTIONS
§ 24 REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   Regular city elections shall be held at the same time and places as biennial
general state elections, in accordance with applicable state election laws.
§ 25 NOTICE OF REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   The recorder, pursuant to directions from the council, shall give at least
ten days’ notice of each regular city election by posting notice thereof at a
conspicuous place in the city hall and in one public place in each voting
precinct of the city. The notice shall state the officers to be elected, the
ballot title of each measure to be voted upon, and the time and place of
election.
§ 26 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   The council shall provide the time, manner, and means for holding any
special election. The recorder shall give at least ten days notice of each
special election in the manner provided by the action of the council ordering
the election.
§ 27 REGULATING OF ELECTIONS.
   Except as this charter provides otherwise and as the council provides
otherwise by ordinances relating to elections, the general laws of the state
shall apply to the conduct of all city elections, recounts of the returns there
from, and contests thereof.
§ 28 CANVASS OF RETURNS.
   In all elections held in conjunction with state and county elections, the
state laws governing the filing of returns by the county clerk shall apply. In
each special city election the returns there from shall be filed with the
recorder on or before noon of the day following, and not later than five days
after the election, the council shall meet and canvass the returns. The results
of all elections shall be made a matter of record in the journal of the
proceedings of the council. The journal shall contain a statement of the total
number of votes cast at each election, the votes cast for each person and for
and against each proposition, the name of each person elected to office, the
office to which he has been elected, and a reference to each measure enacted or
approved. Immediately after the canvass is completed, the recorder shall make
and sign a certificate of election of each person elected and deliver the
certificate to him within one day after the canvass. A certificate so made and
delivered shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of the statements
contained in it.
§ 29 TIE VOTES.
   In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the
successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a
manner prescribed by the council.
§ 30 COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of a person elected at a regular city election shall
commence the first of the year immediately following the election.
§ 31 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, each officer shall take an
oath or shall affirm that he will support the constitutions and laws of the
United States and of Oregon and that he will faithfully perform the duties of
his office.
§ 32 NOMINATIONS.
   A qualified elector who shall have resided in the city during the 12 months
immediately preceding the election may be nominated for an elective city
position. Nomination shall be by petition specifying the position sought in a
form prescribed by the council. Such petitions shall be signed by not fewer
than 20 electors. No elector shall sign more than one petition for each vacant
position. If he does so, his signature shall be valid only on the first
sufficient petition filed for the position. The signatures to a nomination
petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate paper of
the petition shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof,
indicating the number of signers of the paper and stating that each signature
appended thereto was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be. With each signature shall be stated the
signer’s place of residence, identified by its street and number or other
sufficient description. All nominating papers comprising a petition shall be
assembled and filed with the recorder as one instrument not earlier than 90 nor
later than 30 days before the election. The recorder shall make a record of the
exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name
and address of the person by whom it is filed. If the petition is not signed by
the required number of qualified electors, the recorder shall notify the
candidate and the person who filed the petition within five days after the
filing. If the petition is insufficient in any other particular, the recorder
shall return it immediately to the person who filed it, certifying in writing
wherein the petition is insufficient. Such deficient petitions may be amended
and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same
candidate may be filed, within the regular time for filing nomination
petitions. The recorder shall notify an eligible person of his nomination, and
such person shall file with the recorder his written acceptance of nomination,
in such form as the council may require, within five days of notification of
nomination. Upon receipt of such acceptance of nomination, the recorder shall
cause the nominee’s name to be printed on the ballots. The petition of
nomination for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the
office of the recorder until the term of office for which the candidate is
elected expires.
   The name of any person qualified to hold elective office in the city may be
written in upon the ballot in space provided therefore, for any elective office
for which an election is being held in the city. Should any such person receive
a plurality of all votes cast for any such office, said person shall thereby be
elected to such office.
CHAPTER VII: VACANCIES IN OFFICE
§ 33 WHAT CREATES VACANCY.
   An office shall be deemed vacant upon the incumbent’s death; adjudicated
incompetence; conviction of a felony, or other offense pertaining to his
office, or unlawful destruction of public records; resignation; recall from
office; or ceasing to possess the qualifications for the office; upon the
failure of the person elected or appointed to the office to qualify therefore
within ten days after the time for his term of office to commence; or in the
case of a mayor or councilman, upon his absence from the city for 30 days
without the consent of the council or upon his absence from meetings of the
council for 60 days without like consent and upon a declaration by the council
of vacancy.
§ 34 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   Vacancies in elective offices in the city shall be filled by a majority of
the incumbent members of the council. The appointee’s term of office shall
begin immediately upon his appointment and shall continue throughout the
unexpired term of his predecessor. During the temporary disability of any
officer or during his absence temporarily from the city for any cause, his
office may be filled pro tem in the manner provided for filling vacancies in
office permanently.
CHAPTER VIII: ORDINANCES
§ 35 ENACTING CLAUSE.
   The enacting clause of all ordinance thereafter enacted shall be, “The City
of Metolius Ordains as Follows”:.
§ 36 MODE OF ENACTMENT.
   (1)   Except as this section provides to the contrary, every ordinance of
the council shall, before being put upon its final passage, be read fully and
distinctly in open meeting on tow different days.
   (2)    Except as this section provides to the contrary, an ordinance may be
enacted at a single meeting of the council by unanimous vote of all council
members present, upon being read first and in full then by title.
   (3)   Any of the readings may be by title only (a) if no council member
present at the meeting requests to have the ordinance read in full or (b) if a
copy of the ordinance is provided for each council member and three copies are
provided for public inspection in the office of the city recorder not later
than one week before the first reading of the ordinance and notice of their
availability is given forthwith upon the filing, by (I) written notice posted
at the city hall and two other public places in the city or (ii) advertisement
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. An ordinance enacted after
being read by title alone may have no legal effect if it differs substantially
from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading, unless each section
incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open council
meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the council.
   (4)   Upon the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members
shall be taken and recorded in the journal.
   (5)   Upon the enactment of an ordinance the recorder shall sign it with the
date of its passage and his name and title of office and within three days
thereafter the mayor shall sign it with the date of his signature, his name and
the title of his office.
§ 37 WHEN ORDINANCES TAKE EFFECT.
   An ordinance enacted by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its enactment. When the council deemed it advisable, however, and
ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and in case of
emergency, it may take effect immediately.
CHAPTER IX: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 38 CONDEMNATION.
   Any necessity of taking property for the city by condemnation shall be
determined by the council and declared by a resolution of the council
describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.
§ 39 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The procedure for making, alternating, vacating or abandoning a public
improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent no so
governed, by the applicable general laws of the state. Action on any proposed
public improvement, except a sidewalk or except an improvement unanimously
declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be
suspended for six months upon a remonstrance thereto by the owners of two-
thirds of the property to be specially assessed therefore. For the purpose of
this section “owner” shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land,
except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land
sale contract or according to a verified writing by the record holder of legal
title to the land filed with the city recorder, the said purchaser shall be
deemed the “owner”.
§ 40 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing the payment of special
assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against
real property shall be governed by general ordinance.
§ 41 BIDS.
   A contract in excess of $1,000.00 for a public improvement to be made by a
private contractor shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder for the
contract and shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications approved
by the council.
CHAPTER X: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 42 DEBT LIMIT.
   Except by consent of the voters, the city’s voluntary floating indebtedness
shall not exceed $5,000.00; nor its bonded indebtedness, $5,000.00 at any one
time. For purposes of calculating the limitation, however, the legally
authorized debt of the city in existence at the time this charter takes effect
shall not be considered. All city officials and employees who create or
officially approve any indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be
jointly and severally liable for the excess.
§ 43 TORTS.
   In no event shall the city be liable in damages for an injury to person, a
damage to property, or a death, caused by a defect or a dangerous condition in
a public thoroughfare, site, or facility, unless the city has had actual notice
prior to the injury, damage or death that the defect or condition existed and
has had a reasonable time thereafter in which to repair or remove it. In no
case shall more than $500 be recovered as damages for an injury, damage or
death resulting from such a defect or dangerous place. No action shall be
maintained against the city for damages growing out of such injury, damage or
death unless the claimant first gives written notice to the council within 30
days after the injury, damage or death is sustained, stating specifically the
time when, the place where, and the circumstances under which it was sustained,
and that he will claim damages therefore of the city in an amount which he
specifies. But in no event shall the action be started until 30 days have
elapsed after the presentation of this notice to the council.
§ 44 WATER.
   The council shall have the authority to provide domestic and irrigation
water for the city, and to this end may make all necessary contracts in the
manner and form said council deems expedient.
§ 45 EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances of the city consistent with this charter and in force when it
takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.
§ 46 BOND ISSUE.
   The City of Metolius, acting by and through its city council, is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue and sell negotiable general obligation bonds
of the said City of Metolius for the purpose of construction and furnishing a
city hall within the City of Metolius, in an amount not exceeding $20,000.00 to
be designated “City Hall Bonds of 1967” for the purpose aforesaid.
   The city council shall provide for the issuance of said bonds by resolution,
which shall not be subject to the referendum provisions of any law. Such
resolution shall fix the date of said city hall bonds, shall designate the
denominations thereof, the rate of interest, the maturity date, which shall not
be more than 25 years from the date of said city hall bonds, the redeemable
date, the place or places of payment, within or without the State of Oregon, of
both principal and interest, shall prescribe the form of said city hall bonds
and shall provide for the levying of tax upon all taxable property of the city,
sufficient, with no other available funds, to pay the interest on said bonds,
and to provide for a sinking fund to pay the principal of said bonds when the
same respectively mature. Such city hall bonds shall be signed by the Mayor,
countersigned by the city treasurer, attested by the city recorder and the seal
of the city shall be affixed thereto. The interest accruing on such city hall
bonds shall be evidenced by the interest coupons thereto attached, bearing the
lithographed facsimile signature of the treasurer of the city, and when so
executed such coupons shall be binding obligations of the city, according to
their import.
§ 46a SEWER BOND ISSUE.
   The City of Metolius, acting by and through its City Council, is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue and sell negotiable general obligation bonds
of the said City of Metolius for the purpose of construction a sewer system for
the City of Metolius, in an amount not exceeding $225,000 to be designated
“City Sewer System Bonds” for the purposes aforesaid.
   The City Council shall provide for the issuance of said bonds by resolution,
which shall not be subject to the referendum provisions of any law. Such
resolution shall fix the date of said city sewer system bonds, shall designate
the denominations thereof, the rate of interest, the maturity date, which shall
not be more than 25 years from the date of said City sewer system bonds, the
redeemable date, the place or places of payment, within or without the State of
Oregon, of both principal and interest, shall prescribe the form of said City
sewer system bonds and shall provide for the levying of tax upon all taxable
property of the City, sufficient, with no other available funds, to pay the
interest on said bonds, and to provide for a sinking fund to pay the principal
of said bonds when the same respectively mature. Such City sewer system bonds
shall be signed by the Mayor, countersigned by the city treasurer, attested by
the city recorder and the seal of the city shall be affixed thereto. The
interest accruing on such City sewer system bonds shall be evidenced by the
interest coupons thereto attached, bearing the lithographed facsimile signature
of the treasurer of the city, and when so executed such coupons shall be
binding obligations of the city, according to their import.
(Added by vote of the people 5-22-1973)
§ 46b IRRIGATION SYSTEM BOND ISSUE.
   The City of Metolius, acting by and through its City Council, is hereby
authorized and empowered to construct a pressurized irrigation system for the
City of Metolius and to issue and sell negotiable general obligation bonds of
the said City of Metolius for the purpose of constructing such pressurized
irrigation system for the City of Metolius, in an amount not exceeding $120,000
to be designated “Metolius Irrigation System Bonds” for the purposes aforesaid.
   The City Council shall provide for the issuance of said bonds by ordinance
or resolution, which shall not be subject to the referendum provisions of any
law. Such ordinance or resolution shall fix the date of said Metolius
Irrigation system bonds, shall designate the denominations thereof, the rate of
interest, the maturity date, which shall not be more than 25 years from the
date of said Metolius Irrigation system bonds, the redeemable date, the place
or places of payment, within or without the State of Oregon, of both principal
and interest, shall prescribe the form of said Metolius Irrigation system bonds
and shall provide for the levying of tax upon all taxable property of the City,
sufficient, with no other available funds, to pay the interest on said bonds,
and to provide for a sinking fund to pay the principal of said bonds when the
same respectively mature. Such Metolius Irrigation system bonds shall be signed
by the Mayor, countersigned by the city treasurer, attested by the city
recorder and the seal of the city shall be affixed thereto. The interest
accruing on such Metolius Irrigation system bonds shall be evidenced by the
interest coupons thereto attached, bearing the lithographed facsimile signature
of the treasurer of the city, and when so executed such coupons shall be
binding obligations to the city, according to their import.
(Added by vote of the people 11-6-1979)
§ 47 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held
invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or
part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.
§ 48 EMERGENCY CLAUSE.
   In order to better preserve the public health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens of Metolius, Oregon, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and
this charter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its approval by
the qualified voters of the city at an election called for that purpose held
upon the 8th day of November 1966.
§ 49 ANNEXATION.
   (Vote on Annexation) Unless mandated by State law, annexations to the City
of Metolius which exceed five (5) acres shall be approved by a majority vote of
the electorate voting on the question of annexation.
(Approved by majority vote by mail election 5-16-2000)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Metolius Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BUSINESS DAY. Any 24-hour day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or federal
or state legal holiday.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The area within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Metolius, Oregon, as presently established
or as amended by ordinance, annexation, or other legal actions at a future
time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNTY. Jefferson County, Oregon.
      DAY. Calendar day unless otherwise indicated as business day or working
day.
      GOVERNING BODY. City Council.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oregon.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City
Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, the spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean at least 24 hours’ notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council shall take effect as provided in
the city charter. If there is no city charter, all ordinances passed by the
City Council shall take effect as provided by the City Council or applicable
state law.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and any amending ordinances are listed following
the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 161, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 170, passed 1-2-1979; Ord. 185,
passed 4-1-1990)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (O.R.S. 192.410)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see O.R.S. 192.314
§ 10.18 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of an infraction
unless the violation is made a misdemeanor by ordinance.
   (B)   Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any
ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of
an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by
imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of
the city is punishable by a penalty of not more than $250.
   (D)   Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this
code is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person, and shall be
punishable accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.010) (Ord. 184, passed - -1995)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PERSONNEL
      
31.   PUBLIC PROJECTS AND RECORDS
CHAPTER 30: CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PERSONNEL
Section
Personnel System
   
30.01   Purpose
   
30.02   Administration
   
30.03   Adoption of rules and regulations
Planning Commission
   
30.15   Creation
   
30.16   Membership; compensation
   
30.17   Terms of office; vacancy filling
   
30.18   President and Vice President
   
30.19   Secretary
   
30.20   Quorum
   
30.21   Rules and regulations
   
30.22   Meetings
   
30.23   Consulting advice
   
30.24   Powers and authority
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
§ 30.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to establish fair and equitable personnel
procedures in recruiting, hiring, paying, promoting, disciplining, and
retaining employees of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.010) (Ord. 102, passed - -1981)
§ 30.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The personnel policies and programs established by this subchapter shall be
administered by the Mayor of the city or his or her designee, subject to this
subchapter, adopted personnel rules and regulations, the city charter, and
Oregon Revised Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.020) (Ord. 102, passed - -1981)
§ 30.03 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor is authorized to prepare rules and regulations for the personnel
program to be administered in the city and, from time to time, to prepare
amendments as needed. The Mayor shall submit the rules and regulations and any
amendments to the City Council, and they shall become effective upon approval
by the Council by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.030) (Ord. 102, passed - -1981)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 30.15 CREATION.
   There is created a City Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission for the city.
(Prior Code, 2.04.010) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959)
§ 30.16 MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.
   The Commission shall consist of five members, to be appointed by the Mayor
with Council approval. A person must be and remain a resident of the city to be
eligible for membership on the Planning Commission. Once a member is no longer
a city resident, that member can no longer participate in Planning Commission
activities. Planning Commission members shall receive no compensation.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.020) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959; Ord. 228, passed - -2002)
§ 30.17 TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCY FILLING.
   Planning Commission members shall hold office for four years unless removed
as provided in this section. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor for the
unexpired portion of the term. City Council may, by majority vote, remove any
member from the Planning Commission when the Council believes it is in the best
interest of the city to do so.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.030) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959; Ord. 228, passed - -2002)
§ 30.18 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT.
   The Commission, at its first meeting, shall elect a President and Vice
President, who shall be members appointed by the Mayor and who shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.040) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959)
§ 30.19 SECRETARY.
   The Commission shall elect a Secretary who need not be a member of the
Commission. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all Commission
proceedings. The Commission shall, by October 1 or each year, make and file a
report of all its transactions with the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.050) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959)
§ 30.20 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the Commission appointed by the Mayor shall
constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.060) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959; Ord. II 3, passed - -1981)
§ 30.21 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government
and procedure consistent with laws of this state and with the city charter and
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.070) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959; Ord. 113, passed - -1981)
§ 30.22 MEETINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall meet at least once a month, at such times and
places as may be fixed by the Commission. Special meetings may be called at any
time by the chairperson or by three members by written notice served upon each
member of the Commission at least 24 hours before the time specified for the
proposed meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.080) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959; Ord. 113, passed - -1981)
§ 30.23 CONSULTING ADVICE.
   The Commission may employ consulting advice on municipal problems a
secretary and such clerks as may be necessary, and pay for their services and
for such other expenses as the Commission may lawfully incur, including the
necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their
duties as members of the Commission, out of funds at the disposal of the
Commission, as authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.090) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959)
§ 30.24 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Commission shall have all the powers which are now or hereafter
granted to it by ordinances of this city or by general laws of the state. The
Commission shall control the subdivision of land and may make recommendations
to the City Council, to public officials, and to individuals regarding land
use; location of thoroughfares, public buildings, parks, and other public
facilities; and, regarding any other matter relating to the planning and
development of the city and the surrounding area. The Commission may make
studies, hold hearings, and prepare reports and recommendations on its own
initiative or at the request of the City Council. All recommendations and
suggestions made to the City Council by the Commission shall be in writing.
   (B)   The Commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf
of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money,
except as herein provided, and then only after the City Council shall have
first authorized such expenditures by appropriate ordinance (or resolution),
which ordinance (or resolution) shall provide the administrative method by
which such funds shall be drawn and expended.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.100) (Ord. 26, passed - -1959)
CHAPTER 31: PUBLIC PROJECTS AND RECORDS
Section
Public Records
   
31.01   Participation in records management program
   
31.02   Designation of Records Officer; duties
Public Contracts and Purchasing
   
31.15   Definitions
   
31.16   Contract Review Board
   
31.17   Contracting Agency
   
31.18   Model rules
   
31.19   City Recorder contracting authority
   
31.20   Competitive bids exemption
   
31.21   Bid rejection
   
31.22   Bidder disqualification
   
31.23   Appeal of disqualification
   
31.24   Additional authority
   
31.25   Surplus property
   
31.26   Personal services contracts
Special Assessments for Local Improvements
   
31.40   Initiating improvements
   
31.41   Engineer’s report
   
31.42   Action on Engineer’s report
   
31.43   Resolution and notice of hearing
   
31.44   Manner of doing work
   
31.45   Hearing
   
31.46   Call for bids
   
31.47   Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing
   
31.48   Assessment ordinance
   
31.49   Notice of assessment
   
31.50   Lien records and foreclosure proceedings
   
31.51   Errors in assessment calculations
   
31.52   Supplemental assessment
   
31.53   Rebates
   
31.54   Remedies
   
31.55   Abandonment of proceedings
   
31.56   Curative provisions
   
31.57   Reassessment
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 31.01 PARTICIPATION IN RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
   The City Council, meeting in duly and regularly constituted session, does
find and determine that it is in the best interest of the city to have a
Records Officer and records management program, and does, by the ordinance
codified in this subchapter, state such intent and election to so participate
in the records management program as defined by the State Archivist.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010) (Ord. 177, passed - -1991)
§ 31.02 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS OFFICER; DUTIES.
   (A)   Whereas, among the conditions set forth in O.R.S. 192.105, each state
agency and political subdivision shall designate a Records Officer to
coordinate its record management program and to serve as liaison with the State
Archivist, the City Recorder is designated as the Records Officer for the city.
   (B)   The Records Officer shall have the duty:
      (1)   To create, maintain, monitor, and update the city-wide records
retention schedule through coordination with the State Archivist and department
supervisors;
      (2)   To create a records management manual providing for proper records
handling, retention, and storage for all city departments;
      (3)   To review requests for new records equipment;
      (4)   To assist in establishing storage facilities;
      (5)   To keep updated on records law and procedures in order to implement
required procedures and/or educate staff regarding record retention; and
      (6)   Report to the State Archivist regarding the records management
program as required.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.020) (Ord. 177, passed - -1991)
PUBLIC CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING
§ 31.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Local Contract Review Board as established in §
31.16.
   INFORMAL PRICE QUOTE. The procedure whereby the City Recorder or designee
ascertains by correspondence, telephone calls, or by direct contact the various
prices for the items involved, quoted by a number of reliable firms that shall
have the item for sale. The City Recorder shall maintain all records and
evidence of such informal bids.
   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any purchase, lease, or sale by the city of personal
property, public improvements or services other than agreements that are
exclusively for personal services.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any construction or improvements on real property by or
for the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.16 CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD.
   The City Council is designated as the Local Contract Review Board. The Local
Contract Review Board may delegate its powers and responsibilities consistent
with O.R.S. Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, the Oregon Public Contracting Code,
the Attorney General’s Model Rules, and the City Municipal Code.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.17 CONTRACTING AGENCY.
   The City Recorder is designated as the city’s contracting agency and is
further designated as the purchasing agent for the city. The City Recorder is
delegated and is authorized to exercise all authorities granted by O.R.S.
Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, the Attorney General’s Model Rules, and by
ordinance or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.022) (Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.18 MODEL RULES.
   Except as provided in this subchapter, or by subsequent ordinance or
resolution, the Model Rules adopted by the Attorney General under O.R.S.
Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, as they now exist, and as they may be amended in
the future, are hereby adopted as the city’s public contracting rules.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.024) (Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.19 CITY RECORDER CONTRACTING AUTHORITY.
   The City Recorder shall have contracting authority as follows:
   (A)   To enter into contracts for procurement of goods or services not to
exceed $1,000 by any manner deemed practical or convenient by the City
Recorder, including by direct selection or award;
   (B)   To enter into contracts for procurement of goods or services not to
exceed $5,000 by seeking at least three informally solicited competitive price
quotes or competitive proposals from prospective contractors and approval of
the Contract Review Board. The City Recorder shall keep a written record of the
sources of the quotes or proposals received. If three quotes or proposals are
not reasonably available, fewer may be accepted, but the City Recorder shall
make a written record of the effort made to obtain the quotes or proposals; and
   (C)   To enter into contracts for the emergency procurement of goods or
services when an emergency exists and the Contract Review Board is unavailable.
The City Recorder shall document the nature of the emergency and describe the
method used for the selection of the particular contractor.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.026) (Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.20 COMPETITIVE BIDS EXEMPTION.
   All public contracts and public improvements shall be based on competitive
bids, except:
   (A)   Purchase through federal programs as provided by O.R.S. 279A.180 or
otherwise made with or the cost of which is provided by other public agencies
or the federal government;
   (B)   Contracts for any item that is available only through one company,
firm, or individual, with the determination of a sole source based on written
findings consistent with state law;
   (C)   Contracts for any purchase, the amount of which is greater than $5,000
and less than $30,000, may be made by an informal quote where the local
Contract Review Board has determined that the awarding of the contract without
competitive bidding will result in cost savings;
   (D)   Emergency contracts provided that the Contract Review Board complies
with any requirements of O.R.S. Chapters 2790A, 279B, 279C, and the Model Rules
in making the exemption;
   (E)   Any other contract (including sole source and brand name specification
contracts) where the public interest would be promoted by exemption the
contract from the competitive bidding process, provided that the Board complies
with any requirements of O.R.S. Chapters 279A, 279B, 279C, and the Model Rules
in making the exemption; or
   (F)   Any other contract exempted by state law or the Model Rules.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.030) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.21 BID REJECTION.
   The Board may reject any bid not in compliance with all prescribed public
bidding procedures and requirements and may reject all bids if it is in the
public interest to do so.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.070) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.22 BIDDER DISQUALIFICATION.
   The Board may disqualify any bidder on a contract if:
   (A)   The bidder does not have sufficient financial ability to perform the
contract. Evidence that the person can acquire a surety bond in the amount and
type required shall be sufficient to establish financial ability;
   (B)   The bidder does not have equipment available to perform the contract;
   (C)   The bidder does not have personnel of sufficient experience to perform
the contract;
   (D)   The bidder has breached contractual obligations to public and private
contracting agencies; or
   (E)   For such other reasons as may be allowed by statute or rule.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.080) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 104, passed - -1981;
Ord. 149, passed - -1987; Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.23 APPEAL OF DISQUALIFICATION.
   A bidder who has been disqualified may appeal such disqualification to the
Board as follows.
   (A)   The bidder shall, within three business days from receipt of notice of
disqualification, notify the City Manager in writing that he or she wishes to
appeal the disqualification.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Manager shall inform
the Board.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board shall notify the
person appealing of the time and place of the hearing.
   (D)   The Board shall conduct the hearing according to the statutory
requirement and decide the appeal within ten days after receiving the
notification and shall set forth in writing the reasons for its decisions.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.090) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.24 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   In addition to the powers and duties established by this subchapter, the
Board shall have such additional powers as authorized by state law and
administrative rule.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.100) (Ord. 78, passed - -1977; Ord. 149, passed - -1987;
Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.25 SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   The City Recorder shall have the authority to dispose of surplus property by
any means determined to be in the best interest of the city, including, but not
limited to, transfer to other departments, government agencies, nonprofit
organizations, sale, trade, auction, or destruction; provided however, that
disposal of personal property have a residual value of more than $1,000 shall
be subject to authorization by the Contract Review Board.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.110) (Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
§ 31.26 PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS. Those that require specialized technical,
creative, professional, or communication skills and knowledge, and that the
quality of services depends on attributes that are unique to the service
provider. Such SERVICES include architects, engineers, attorneys, auditors, and
other licensed professionals, artists, computer programmers, consultants,
property managers, and such other services as may be designated as personal
services by the Board.
   (B)   The City Manager is authorized to set the selection criteria for any
personal services contract. However, the criteria should included consideration
of the contractor’s education, experience, and capability to perform the work.
(Prior Code, § 2.32.120) (Ord. 233, passed - -2005)
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 31.40 INITIATING IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   When the Council considers it necessary to make any street, sewer,
water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain, or any other public improvement
defined in O.R.S. 223.001(a) to be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessment according to benefits conferred, then the Council shall, by
resolution, declare its intention to make the improvement and direct the City
Engineer to make a survey and written report for the improvement and file it
with the Recorder.
   (B)   When the owners of two-thirds of the property to be benefitted by any
of the improvements defined in division (A) above request by written petition
that the Council initiate an improvement, then the Council shall by resolution
declare its intention to make the improvement and direct the City Engineer to
make a survey and written report for the improvement and file it with the
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.010) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981; Ord. 187, passed - -1995)
§ 31.41 ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   Unless the Council directs otherwise, the Engineer’s report referred to in §
31.40 shall contain the following:
   (A)   A map or plat showing the general nature, location, and extent of the
proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of
the cost;
   (B)   Plans, specifications, and estimates of the work to be done. However,
when the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other
governmental agency, the Engineer may adopt the plans, specifications, and
estimates of that agency;
   (C)   An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including legal,
administrative, and engineering costs;
   (D)   An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially
benefitted properties, per square foot, per front foot, or whatever unit of
cost is to be used;
   (E)   A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive
at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the
improvement to the properties specially benefitted;
   (F)   The description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be
specially benefitted, with the names of the record owners and, when readily
available, the names of the contract purchasers, as shown on the books and
records of the County Tax Department. For purposes of describing each lot or
parcel of land under the provisions of this section, it shall be sufficient to
use the tax account number assigned to the property and issued by the tax
department or the book and page designations as shown on the books and records
of the County Clerk; and
   (G)   A recommendation regarding the rate of interest, not to exceed 10% per
annum, to be paid on assessments bonded under the Bancroft Bonding Act and
O.R.S. Chapter 223.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.020) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.42 ACTION ON ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   After the Engineer’s report is filed with the Recorder, the Council may, by
resolution, approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified,
require the Engineer to supply additional or different information for the
improvement, or it may abandon the improvement.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.030) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.43 RESOLUTION AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   After the Council has approved the Engineer’s report as submitted or
modified, the Council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to make the
improvement and direct the Recorder to give notice of the Council’s intention
to make the improvement by two publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   The report of the Engineer is on file in the office of the Recorder
and is subject to public examination;
      (2)   The Council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement
on a specified date, which shall not be less than ten days following the first
publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to such
improvement will be heard by the Council; and that if, prior to or at the
hearing, there are written remonstrances of the owners of two-thirds of the
property to be specially assessed therefor, the improvement will be abandoned
for not less than six months; and
      (3)   A description of the property to be specially benefitted by the
improvement, the owners of the property as shown on the books and records of
the County Tax Department, and the Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the
improvement to be paid for by special assessment to benefitted properties. For
purposes of this division (B)(3), it shall be sufficient to describe the
property to be specially benefitted by tax account number assigned to the
property and used by the County Tax Department or the book and page designation
as shown on the books and records of the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.040) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.44 MANNER OF DOING WORK.
   The Council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction
work may be done in whole or in part by the city, by a contract, by any other
governmental agency, or by any combination thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.050) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.45 HEARING.
   If the written remonstrances represent less than the amount of property
required to defeat the proposed improvement, then, on the basis of hearing
written remonstrances and oral objections, if any, the Council may, by motion
at the time of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter, order the improvement
to be carried out in accordance with the resolution or, if the project was
initiated by the Council’s motion and not the petition of property owners,
abandon the improvement.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.060) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.46 CALL FOR BIDS.
   The Council may direct the Recorder to advertise or bids for construction of
all or any part of the improvement project. If any part of the work of the
improvement is to be done under contract bids, then the Council shall proceed
in accordance with the procedures of state law for public contracting.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.070) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.47 METHOD OF ASSESSMENT AND ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF FINANCING.
   (A)   The Council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the
improvement, may:
      (1)   Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any
improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;
      (2)   Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed that is just
and reasonable among the properties determined to be specially benefitted; and/
or
      (3)   Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of any
improvement, when, in the opinion of the Council, the topographical or physical
conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work
involved warrants only a partial payment of or no payment by the benefitted
property of the costs of the improvement.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the Council from
using any other available means of financing improvements, including federal
and state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general
obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. In the event that such
other means of financing improvements are used, the Council may levy special
assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of
the costs of the improvement.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.080) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.48 ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   If the Council determines that the public improvement shall be made,
when the estimated cost is ascertained on the basis of the contract award or
city departmental cost, or after the work is done and the cost has been
actually determined, the Council shall determine whether the property
benefitted shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The Recorder or other
person designated by the Council shall prepare the proposed assessment to the
respective lots within the assessment district and file it in the Recorder’s
office.
   (B)   Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each
lot proposed to be assessed at the owner’s address as shown on the County Tax
Assessor’s rolls. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on
the owner’s property and shall fix a date by which time objections shall be
filed with the Recorder. Any such objection shall state the grounds for
objection.
   (C)   Within 60 days of the date fixed for the filing of objections, the
Council shall:
      (1)   Consider the objections and may adopt, correct, modify, or revise
the proposed assessments;
      (2)   Determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot
within the district according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing to
it from the improvement; and
      (3)   By ordinance spread the assessment.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.090) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.49 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Within ten days after the ordinance levying assessments has been
passed, the Recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of
assessment to the owner of the assessed property and shall publish notice of
the assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the
first publication of which shall be not later than 20 days after the date of
the assessment ordinance.
   (B)   The notice of assessment shall recite the date of the assessment
ordinance and shall state that upon the failure of the owner of the property
assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within ten
days from the date of the first publication of notice, or upon the failure of
the owner to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date of the
assessment ordinance, then interest will begin to run on the assessment and
that the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure. The notice shall
also contain a description of the property assessed, the name of the owner of
the property and the amount of each assessment.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.100) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.50 LIEN RECORDS AND FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   After passage of the assessment ordinance by the Council, the Recorder
shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the amount assessed upon
each particular lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, together with a
description of the improvement, the name of the owners, and the date of the
assessment ordinance. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered
shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land, or
portions of land which have been assessed for improvement.
   (B)   All assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all
other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits. Interest
shall be charged at a rate not to exceed 10% per annum until paid on all
amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance.
After expiration of 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, the city
may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the
manner provided by state law. However, the city may enter a bid for the
property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all
bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to
redeem the property.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.110) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.51 ERRORS IN ASSESSMENT CALCULATIONS.
   Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the
attention of the Recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error
in fact. If the Recorder finds that there has been an error in fact, he or she
shall recommend to the Council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to
correct the error. Upon enactment of the amendment, the Recorder shall make the
necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a correct notice of
assessment by registered or certified mail.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.120) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.52 SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
   If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is
ascertained, and if it is found that the amount of the assessment is
insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the Council may by
motion declare the insufficiency and prepare a proposed supplemental
assessment. The Council shall set a time for hearing of objections to the
supplemental assessment and shall direct the City Recorder to publish one
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing,
the Council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by
ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of city liens as provided by §
31.50. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed, and
the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with §§
31.50 and
31.51.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.130) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.53 REBATES.
   If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found that the
assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay
the costs of the improvement, then the Council must ascertain and declare the
excess by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the
lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has
been paid, the person who paid it or his or her legal representative shall be
entitled to the payment of the rebate credit, or the portion which excess the
amount unpaid on the original assessment.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.140) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.54 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Subject to the curative provisions of §
31.56 and the rights of the city to reassess as provided in §
31.57, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed not
earlier than 30 days nor later than 60 days after the filing of written
objections, as provided by §
31.48.
   (B)   A property owner who has filed written objection with the Recorder
prior to the public hearing may have the right to apply for a writ of review
based upon the Council’s exercising its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or
exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of some substantial right of the owner
if the facts supporting the claim have been specifically set forth in the
written objection.
   (C)    A property owner who has filed written objection with the Recorder
prior to the public hearing may begin a suit for equitable relief based upon a
total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city. If notice of the
improvement was not sent to the owner and if the owner did not have actual
knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing, then the owner may
file written objection alleging lack of jurisdiction with the Recorder within
30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement.
   (D)   A provision of this section shall not be construed to lengthen any
period of redemption or to affect the running of any statute of limitation. A
proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings
are commenced and diligently pursued by the Council to remedy or cure the
alleged errors or defects.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.150) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.55 ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The Council may abandon proceedings of improvements made under this
subchapter at any time prior to the final completion of the improvements. If
liens have been placed upon any property under this procedure, they shall be
canceled, and any payments made on the assessments shall be refunded to the
person paying them, his or her assigns or legal representatives.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.160) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.56 CURATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:
      (1)   A failure of the Engineer’s report to contain all of the
information required by §
31.41;
      (2)   A failure to have all of the information required to be in the
improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket, or notices
required to be published and mailed;
      (3)   A failure to list the name of or mail notice to the owner of any
property as required by this subchapter; or
      (4)   Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other
act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or step specified,
unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon
the person complaining.
   (B)   The Council shall have the authority to remedy and correct all such
matters by suitable action and proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.170) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
§ 31.57 REASSESSMENT.
   When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for any
improvement which has been made by the city has been set aside, annulled,
declared, or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this
state, or any federal court having jurisdiction, or when the Council is in
doubt as to the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, or
reassessment, or any part of it, the Council may make a reassessment in the
manner provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.180) (Ord. 115, passed - -1981)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PUBLIC WORKS REGULATIONS
      
51.   WATER AND SEWER
      
52.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PUBLIC WORKS REGULATIONS
Section
Systems Development Charge
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   System development charge established
   
50.04   Methodology
   
50.05   Authorized expenditures
   
50.06   Expenditure restrictions
   
50.07   Improvement plan
   
50.08   Collection of charge
   
50.09   Exemptions
   
50.10   Credits
   
50.11   Notice
   
50.12   Segregation and use of revenue
   
50.13   Refunds
   
50.14   Implementing regulations; amendments
   
50.15   Appeal procedure
   
50.16   Prohibited connection
   
50.17   Construction
 
   
50.99   Penalty
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the
cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater drainage, streets, and parks
upon those developments and redevelopments that create the need for or increase
the demands on capital improvements.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.010)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Public facilities or assets used for:
      (1)   Water supply, treatment, or distribution, or any combination;
      (2)   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment, or disposal, or any
combination;
      (3)   Drainage or flood control;
      (4)   Transportation; or
      (5)   Parks and recreation.
   DEVELOPMENTS. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other
structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas,
and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. DEVELOPMENT
includes redevelopment of property. DEVELOPMENT includes improved open areas
such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or
unimproved lands.
   IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
50.03.
   LAND AREA. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the
parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of
the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude
for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose.
   OWNER. The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers
under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of
record in the described real property.
   PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that, in
accordance with city regulations, is occupied or may be occupied by a structure
or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces
required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a building permit, development permit, a
permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer or water system, or water
right-of-way access permit is issued.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. A capital improvement that is:
      (1)   Required as a condition of development approval; and/or
      (2)   Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to §
50.07, and either:
         (a)   Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the
subject of the development approval; or
         (b)   Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is
the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with
greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to
which the improvement fee is related. For purposes of this definition,
CONTIGUOUS means in a public way which abuts the parcel.
   REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
50.03.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE.
      (1)   A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or a combination thereof
assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement
at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the
time of connection to the capital improvement.
      (2)   A SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE includes that portion of a sewer or
water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to
reimburse the city for its average cost of inspection and installing
connections with water and sewer facilities.
      (3)   A SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE does not include fees assessed or
collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a
local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with
requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.020) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.03 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   System development charges shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the Council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge,
the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a
geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to
the charge.
   (B)   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this subchapter or
other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon
all development within the city, upon the act of making a connection to the
city water or sewer system within the city, and upon all development outside
the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer
facilities, storm sewers, or water facilities of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.030) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.04 METHODOLOGY.
   (A)   The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee
shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, including without
limitation, design, financing, and construction costs, prior contributions by
then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or
private persons, the value of unused capacity available to future system users,
rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements,
and other relevant factors identified by the Council. The methodology shall
promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than
an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.
   (B)   The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall
consider the estimated cost of projected capital improvements needed to
increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. The
methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for
the projected need for available system capacity for future system users.
   (C)   The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee or the
reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.040) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.05 AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements
associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including
expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   (B)   (1)   Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing
capital improvements associated with the system for which the fee is assessed,
including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the
improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement
increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities
or providing new facilities.
      (2)   The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees
must be related to demands created by current or projected development. A
capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from
the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant
to §
50.07.
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B)(1) above, system development
charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the
provisions of this subchapter, including the costs of developing system
development expenditures.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.050) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.06 EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   (B)   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.060) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.07 IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Prior to the establishment of a system development charge, the Council
shall adopt a plan that includes a list of:
      (1)   The capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee
revenues;
      (2)   The estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement;
and
      (3)   A description of the process for modifying the plan.
   (B)   In adopting this plan, the Council may incorporate by reference all or
a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements
plan, or similar plan that contains the information required by this section.
The Council may modify such plan and list at any time.
   (C)   A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is
not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is
based on the periodic application of an adopted specific cost index or a
modification to any of the factors related to the rate that are incorporated in
the established methodology.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.070) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.08 COLLECTION OF CHARGE.
   (A)   The system development charge is payable upon the issuance of:
      (1)   A building permit;
      (2)   A development permit;
      (3)   A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of
a building permit;
      (4)   A permit or approval to connect to the water system;
      (5)   A permit or approval to connect to the sewer system; or
      (6)   A right-of-way access permit.
   (B)   If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the
system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital
improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property unrelated
to seasonal or ordinary fluctuations in usage.
   (C)   If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or
sewer systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is
immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
   (D)   The City Recorder or his or her designee shall collect the applicable
system development charge from the permittee when a permit that allows building
or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer
system of the city is made.
   (E)   The City Recorder or his or her designee shall not issue such permit
or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, or unless an
exemption is granted pursuant to §
50.09.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.080) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Structures and uses established and legally existing on or before the
effective date of this subchapter are exempt from a system development charge,
except water and sewer charges, to the extent of the structure or use then
existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that
date;
   (B)   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge;
   (C)   An alteration, addition, replacement, or change in use that does not
increase the parcels or structures uses of the public improvement facility are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge; and
   (D)   City-owned parks and public facilities.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.090) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.10 CREDITS.
   (A)   When a development occurs that is subject to a system development
charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable,
shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for
the use that will result from the development, the difference between the
system development charge for the existing use and the system development
charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If the
change in the use results in the system development charge for the proposed use
being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system
development charge shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given unless
provided for by another division of this section.
   (B)   A credit shall be given to the permittee for the cost of a qualified
public improvement upon acceptance by the city of the public improvement. The
credit shall not exceed the improvement fee, even if the cost of the capital
improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee, and shall only be for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed.
   (C)   If a qualified public improvement is required to be built larger or
with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project,
a credit shall be given for the cost of the portion of the improvement that
exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve
the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the
burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit
under this division (C). The request for credit shall be filed in writing no
later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city.
   (D)   When the construction of a qualified public improvement located in
whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of
development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement
fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of
the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against
improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development
project.
   (E)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (D) above, when establishing a
methodology for a system development charge, the city may provide for a credit
against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee, or both, for capital
improvement constructed as part of the development which reduce the
development’s demand upon existing capital improvements and/or the need for
future capital improvements, or a credit based upon any other rationale the
Council finds reasonable.
   (F)   Credits shall not be transferable from one development to another.
   (G)   Credits shall not be transferable from one type of system development
charge to another.
   (H)   Credits shall be used within ten years from the date the credit is
given.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.100) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.11 NOTICE.
   (A)   The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written
request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for
any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the
list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a
system development charge. The methodology supporting the system development
charge shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt
or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person on the list to
receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city.
   (B)   The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30
days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person
whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is
required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.110) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.12 SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE.
   (A)   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all funds of the city. That
portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of
a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than set forth in
§
50.05.
   (B)   The appropriate city official shall provide the city council with an
annual accounting, by January 1 of each year, for system development charge
revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each
account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amount spent on each project
funded in whole or in part with system development charge revenues shall be
included in the annual accounting.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.120) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.13 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Refunds may be given by the Recorder upon finding that there was a
clerical error in the calculation of the SDC.
   (B)   Refunds shall not be allowed for failure to timely claim credit or for
failure to timely seek an alternative SDC rate calculation at the time of
submission of an application for a building permit.
   (C)   The city shall refund to the applicant any SDC revenues not expended
within ten years of receipt.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.130) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.14 IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS; AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council delegates authority to the Mayor to adopt necessary
procedures to implement provisions of this subchapter, including the
appointment of an SDC program administrator. All rules pursuant to this
delegated authority shall be filed with the office of and be available for
public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.140) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.15 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the
City Council by filing a written request with the City Recorder describing with
particularity the decision of the Mayor and the expenditure from which the
person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of
the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   (B)   Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the
Mayor under this subchapter must be filed in writing with the City Recorder
within ten days of the decision.
   (C)   After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine
whether the Mayor decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this
subchapter and the provisions of O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.214 and may affirm,
modify, or overrule the decisions. If the Council determines that there has
been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the Council
shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within
one year to the credit of the account or fund from with it was spent. The
decision of the Council shall be reviewed only as provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to
34.100, and not otherwise.
   (D)   A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council
pursuant to §
50.04 shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption. A person shall
contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only
as provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.150) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.16 PROHIBITED CONNECTION.
   No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the
appropriate system development charge has been paid or the lien or installment
payment method has been applied for and approved.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.160) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this subchapter,
unless otherwise stated in this subchapter, the following rules of construction
shall apply.
   (A)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this subchapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
   (B)   The word SHALL is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word MAY
is permissive.
   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   (D)   The phrase USED FOR includes “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“maintained for,” or “occupied for.”
   (E)   Where a regulation involves two or more connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events:
      (1)   AND indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions,
or events shall apply; and
      (2)   OR indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
   (F)   The word INCLUDES shall not limit a term to the specific example, but
is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind or
character.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.180) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
50.16 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, § 13.14.170) (Ord. 230, passed - -2003)
 
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWER
Section
Sewer Service System
   
51.01   Sewer Construction Account
   
51.02   Sewer service charges
   
51.03   Sewer service overcharges/undercharges
   
51.04   Annual review of sewer service charges
   
51.05   Discount for advance payment
   
51.06   Billing; charges payable when
   
51.07   Connection fees
   
51.08   When charges become liens
   
51.09   Collection of liens, rates, charges, and fees
   
51.10   Payments to be deposited in Operation and Maintenance Account
   
51.11   Charges applicable to all buildings
   
51.12   Industrial cost recovery
   
51.13   Sewer connection; permit required
   
51.14   Application requirements
   
51.15   Inspection of sewer connection
   
51.16   Buildings adjacent to sewer; connection required
   
51.17   Certain drainage and deposits into sewer prohibited
   
51.18   Discontinuance of sewer service
Sewer System Development Charges
   
51.30   Purpose
   
51.31   Scope
   
51.32   Methodology of establishing SDCs
   
51.33   Sewer System Development Fund
Irrigation Water
   
51.45   Irrigation Water Account established
   
51.46   Amount of irrigation charge
   
51.47   Billing of irrigation water charge
   
51.48   When charges become liens
   
51.49   Changes of rates
   
51.50   Irrigation season
   
51.51   Water use certification
   
51.52   Application and inspection of water connection
   
51.53   Inspections
   
51.54   Unlawful to turn on water
   
51.55   Suspension of rights
   
51.56   Water to be turned off for nonpayment or noncompliance delinquency
charges
   
51.57   Wastewater and use of water during designated period
   
51.58   City not liable for damages
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
§ 51.01 SEWER CONSTRUCTION ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The words SEWERAGE SYSTEM as used in this subchapter mean the system
of sanitary sewers of the city.
   (B)   (1)   The proceeds of sewerage system bonds of such city sold pursuant
to O.R.S. 224.210 to 224.260, the charter, and Ords. 67 and 68 of such city,
except $20,750, and grants received by such city from the federal and state
governments for sewerage system construction shall be credited to a fund
entitled “Sewer Construction Account.” Federal and state grants shall be
expended only for such sewerage treatment facilities or purposes as are
authorized by federal and state law or regulation. Other moneys in the Sewer
Construction Account may be expended for any other costs of construction of the
sewerage system of such city.
      (2)   Payments from such account may be made only on checks signed by the
Mayor, or, in his or her absence or inability to act, by the President of the
Council, and by the Recorder and countersigned by the Farmers’ Home
Administration County Supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.010) (Ord. 69, passed - -1974)
§ 51.02 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   There is levied on all owners of property whose premises have
connection with the sewerage system of such city, or are served thereby, a fee
for such service as set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   New users of the sewerage system shall pay for the first month of
service proportionately to the time served during the first month. In addition,
a deposit in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council will be
required on all new sewer accounts for those accounts not in the name of the
property owner as listed in the county records before any utility service is
provided. The deposit shall be held by the city to ensure payment of the
account. The deposit shall be returned, without interest, after 12 months,
provided the account has been paid in full each of the prior 12 months.
   (C)   The charges for sewer service provided users outside the corporate
limits of the city shall be twice those charged like sewer users within such
limits. These charges will be effective July 1, 1983.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.020) (Ord. 69, passed - -1974; Ord. 69-D, passed - -1982;
Ord. 69-E, passed - -1983; Ord. 199, passed - -1996; Ord. 238, passed - -2007;
Ord. 257, passed - -2018)
§ 51.03 SEWER SERVICE OVERCHARGES/UNDERCHARGES.
   (A)   Notice of any potential sewer service billing overcharge or
undercharge must be provided to the city or the customer within 12 months from
the date the bill containing the potential error was mailed. There shall be no
credit or charge for any billing errors beyond 12 months from the date of
notice to the customer or the city. The notice must be in writing and include
the dates of the billing containing the potential error. The city, upon
verification of the amount overcharged or undercharged by the city, shall:
      (1)   In the case of an overcharge, issue a sewer service credit to the
customer’s sewer service account in an amount equal to the overcharge divided
over no more than the next 12 months; or
      (2)   In the case of an undercharge, issue a sewer service charge to the
customer’s sewer service account in an amount equal to the undercharge divided
over no more than the next 12 months.
   (B)   If the customer is no longer receiving sewer service, the amount
payable to the customer shall be paid within 30 days after verification by the
city or the amount due from the customer shall be paid within 30 days after
verification by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.021) (Ord. 256, passed - -2018)
§ 51.04 ANNUAL REVIEW OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The Common Council of the city shall, at its own option, have the right to
review annually the amount of the sewer service charges contained in this
subchapter, which are assessed monthly or annually, and the Common Council of
the city shall make such changes of the monthly or annual service charge by
resolution as they may, in its discretion and judgment, determine is necessary
to recover the actual annual costs of operation and maintenance of the
distribution lines and treatment works.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.030) (Ord. 69-A, passed - -1975)
§ 51.05 DISCOUNT FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT.
   For property owners or users of sewer service who pay for six months or one
full year of service in advance, there will be allowed to said users a 5%
semiannual or 10% annual discount, respectively, from the current established
sewer service charges.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.040) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001; Ord. 246, passed - -2009)
§ 51.06 BILLING; CHARGES PAYABLE WHEN.
   (A)   Generally. The monthly rates for sewerage system use shall be billed
to each property owner by the Recorder or such other person or corporation as
the Council shall designate. The Council by motion or resolution, shall fix the
date, after completion of the sewerage system, when such rates first become
payable.
   (B)   Charges due when. Sewerage system charges shall become due and payable
on the first day of each month or such day as the Council may thereafter
designate by resolution.
   (C)   Sewer assessments.
      (1)   Generally. The monthly sewerage system charges shall be assessed on
both occupied and unoccupied properties. The sewerage system charges shall be a
personal obligation of the property owner of record.
      (2)   User billing. Upon the written request of the property owner and
the signed agreement of the user, the Recorder may bill the user of the
property directly. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the city shall
not be required to send copies of that bill or any other notices to the
property owner. However, the property owner shall remain ultimately responsible
for the sewerage system bill and any other charges associated with the use,
including, but not limited to, late fees, disconnect fees, and reconnect fees.
The city is not obligated to attempt to collect unpaid sewer bills from the
user.
      (3)   User requests for service discontinuance. A user who is authorized
to receive and pay the sewer service billing may have sewer service
discontinued in the user’s name by notifying the city at least 30 days in
advance of the desired date of discontinuance. The user shall pay all sewer
charges until the date of such discontinuance.
      (4)   Temporary discontinuance. A property owner may request a temporary
discontinuance of the billing for sewer service during a period of repairs or
maintenance to the property owner’s sewer system. The City Council, in its sole
discretion, may agree to waive the sewer billing for such period of time that
the City Council deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.050) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001; Ord. 246, passed - -2009)
§ 51.07 CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   The connection fees shall be $500. Applicants for connections shall
pay all costs of making the connection.
   (B)   Connections for buildings located outside the corporate limits of the
city shall be made by the owners of such buildings. The fee for such connection
shall be twice the rate that applies to buildings within the city as set forth
in division (A) above. The Council shall have sole discretion whether to
authorize such connection.
   (C)   Connections may be made to vacant lots within the city at the same
rates as for residential construction therein. Connections may be made to
vacant lots outside the corporate limits of the city at twice the rate for
residential connections within the city. If a building to be served by the
sewerage system of the city is constructed upon a lot within three years from
the time that a connection is made and paid in full, no additional connection
fee shall be made. If the time of completion of construction of a building upon
a lot exceeds three years from the date that the connection is made, an
additional connection charge of $50 per year will be made for each year from
the time of completion of construction and the time that water service is
provided for the building.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.060) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.08 WHEN CHARGES BECOME LIENS.
   Unless otherwise provided, each and every fee and service charge hereinabove
fixed or established shall be due and payable within ten days from the first
day of the month next following the month or fractional month of service. If
such fee or charge is not paid to the Recorder within such period, such fee or
charge shall become a lien in favor of the city against the property served or
subject to service. The Recorder shall make a record of such lien in a city
lien book or docket. Such record shall show the amount of the lien, the date
due, a description of the property affected or charged with the lien, and the
name of the recorded owner, or contract owner of the property if known. Such
lien and delinquent sewer charges and fees shall draw interest at the rate of
18% per annum until paid.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.070) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.09 COLLECTION OF LIENS, RATES, CHARGES, AND FEES.
   The city may use such means of collection of sewer liens, or rates, charges,
or sewer connection fees as are provided by the laws of the state or are
authorized by the charter and ordinances of the city. Any overdue sewer charge
or fee further may be collected, at the option of the city, by an action at law
in the name of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.080) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.10 PAYMENTS TO BE DEPOSITED IN OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT.
   All payments and collections of sewer service charges under this subchapter
shall be deposited in the Operation and Maintenance Account of the Sewer
Revenue Account of the city and shall be used exclusively for the operation,
maintenance, and repair of the sewerage system and lagoon or stabilization pond
of the city. Such account also may be used to pay reasonable administration
costs and expenses of collection of the charges and connection fees imposed by
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.090) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.11 CHARGES APPLICABLE TO ALL BUILDINGS.
   All buildings within the city which use water either from the city water
system or from a private water system must pay the applicable monthly sewer
service charge and the sewer connection charge.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.100) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.12 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   All industrial users shall be required to pay that portion of the
federal assistance grant under Pub. Law No. 92-500 allocable to the treatment
of waste from such users.
   (B)   The system for industrial cost recovery shall be implemented and
maintained according to the following requirements.
      (1)   Each year during the industrial cost recovery period, each
industrial user of the treatment works shall pay its share of the total federal
grant amount divided by the recovery period.
      (2)   The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to 30 years or
the useful life of the treatment works, whichever is less.
      (3)   Payments shall be made by industrial users no less often than
annually. The first payment by an industrial user shall be made not later than
one year after such user begins use of the treatment works.
      (4)   An industrial user’s share shall be based on all factors which
significantly influence the cost of the treatment works, such as strength,
volume, and flow rate characteristics. As a minimum, an industry’s share shall
be based on its flow versus treatment works capacity, except in unusual cases.
      (5)   An industrial user’s share shall be adjusted when there is a
substantial change in the strength, volume, or flow rate characteristics of the
user’s wastes, or if there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works.
      (6)   An industrial user’s share shall not include any portion of the
federal grant amount allocable to unused or unreserved capacity.
      (7)   An industrial user’s share shall include any firm commitment to the
city (sanitary district or county) of increased use by such user.
      (8)   An industrial user’s share shall not include an interest component.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.110) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.13 SEWER CONNECTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall make any sewer connection to the
sanitary sewer system or to a storm drain of the city without making
application and securing a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.120) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for sewer connection shall be made in writing in the form
approved by the City Council.
   (B)   If the application is approved and the fees paid as provided, the city
shall issue a sewer connection permit, specifying the location where said
connection shall be made.
   (C)   Application for sewer connection permits must conform with provisions
of any ordinances and other applicable laws regulating excavation in or under
streets or alleys. In addition, the application must be made by or authorized
by the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.130) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001)
§ 51.15 INSPECTION OF SEWER CONNECTION.
   The city shall be given reasonable notice to allow inspection of a sewer
connection before completion, and while the connection is still uncovered. All
work is to be done in accordance with the specifications contained in the
permit or specified by city official. The manner of the connection shall be
subject to the approval of the city official designated to inspect the work.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.140) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.16 BUILDINGS ADJACENT TO SEWER; CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   Wherever there is now, or may hereafter be, constructed in this city a
public sewer for the purpose of carrying off sewage within the city, the owner
or owners of the property abutting on any street or alley in which the sewer is
constructed, or whose property is adjacent to or along the line of said sewer
not constructed within a street or alley and is within a distance of 50 feet
thereof and is accessible thereto, must connect the houses or buildings on such
property with such sewer; and whenever the city shall notify in writing any
owner or owners of property to connect to the public sewer the building or
buildings situated on said property, it shall be the duty of such owner or
owners to make application, pay the fees as hereafter prescribed, and complete
said sewer connection within 30 days from the date of said notice, unless for
good and sufficient reason the city shall in writing extend the time for the
completion of such connection.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.150) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17 CERTAIN DRAINAGE AND DEPOSITS INTO SEWER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Neither temporary nor permanent drainage of excavation into the
sanitary sewer system shall be permitted. Drainage from roofs, storm sewers, or
storm drains shall not be permitted into the sanitary sewer system, and no such
connection shall be permitted.
   (B)   The following shall not be allowed to flow into or be deposited in the
sewer system:
      (1)   Petroleum, coal tar, vegetable and mineral oils and products, and
their derivatives and wastes;
      (2)   Greases, oils, and sludge from service stations, garages, repair
shops, machine shops, cleaning establishments, or other industries or
establishments;
      (3)   Explosive or inflammable liquids and gases;
      (4)   Acids, alkalies, or other corrosive liquids, gases, or substances
of sufficient strength to damage sewers, manholes, pumping stations, or
treatment plant units;
      (5)   Paints or waste products from paint manufactures;
      (6)   Substances which will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or
which, when mixed with sewage, will precipitate material and thus form deposits
in sewers;
      (7)   Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish, or metals of any kind;
      (8)   Live steam, exhaust steam, or water having a temperature above
140°F;
      (9)   Ground or unground fruit peelings and cores from canneries or
packing plants;
      (10)   Cull fruits and vegetables;
      (11)   Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds as those from peaches,
apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins, and squash;
      (12)   Paunch, stable, and barn manure;
      (13)   Cull walnuts and filberts;
      (14)   Offal from slaughterhouses;
      (15)   Dead animals; or
      (16)   Sulphite or sulphate liquor and “white” water from pulp and paper
mills.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.160) (Ord. 223, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.18 DISCONTINUANCE OF SEWER SERVICE.
   (A)   On the failure of any owner or user to comply with the rules and
regulations provided in this subchapter, or upon violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter by any owner or consumer or sewer system user, or
on the failure to pay the charges established for the use of the sewer system
required by any applicable city ordinance or resolution, the city sewer service
of any such owner or sewer system user may be discontinued by the authorized
representative or any other person designated by the Common Council of the
city, subject to the rules and regulations set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   (1)   A sewer account is delinquent when it is not paid within 15 days
following the due date as determined pursuant to §
51.06.
      (2)   At the city’s discretion, a second notice shall be mailed to the
owner and any user on or about 15 days after the account becomes delinquent.
The second notice shall state that sewer service will be discontinued after the
fifteenth day following the date of the second notice if the account balance is
not paid prior to that date.
      (3)   At least 24 hours prior to the discontinuance of sewer service for
delinquency, a disconnect notice shall be left at the premises receiving sewer
service and shall be mailed to the property owner and the user. The notice
shall state when sewer services shall be turned off unless all delinquent
amounts and charges are paid. An administrative charge set by City Council
resolution shall be added to the account if the account has not been paid and a
disconnect notice has been mailed to the customer or left at the premises
receiving sewer services.
      (4)   In all instances where sewer service has been discontinued because
of a delinquency, a restoration fee set by Council resolution shall be
collected in addition to the delinquent amount prior to restoration of service.
      (5)   The City Recorder or agent, in the case of extreme hardship or by
prior arrangement with the customer, shall have the discretion not to
discontinue service to a delinquent account upon acceptance of a valid plan for
payment of all past due charges.
      (6)   If the customer disputes the amount due on the account, the
customer shall have 15 days from the date of the second notice within which to
file a written request to have the account reviewed by the City Recorder or the
City Council. The request shall state the reasons why the customer believes the
amount to be in error.
         (a)   Any customer seeking timely review of a sewer bill in writing
shall be heard before discontinuation of sewer service. The hearing shall be
held by the City Recorder or other person so designated by the City Council and
may include a hearing in front of the City Council. The decision by the City
Recorder, the person designated by the City Council, or the City Council
itself, shall be final.
         (b)   After the hearing, if the City Recorder or the City Council’s
designate, or the City Council finds in favor of the customer, any or all of
the appropriate charges may be returned to the customer or credited to the
customer’s account based upon the findings that made at the hearing. If the
city finds that the customer owes the city any money, the customer shall pay
the amount due within the time ordered by the city. If the amount is not paid,
sewer service shall be discontinued pursuant to the 15-day notice set out in
division (B)(2) above.
      (7)   Final bills are due and payable upon receipt. After 30 days, the
account shall be rebilled. If the account is not paid after an additional 60
days, the account shall be turned over to a collection agency or, at its
option, the city may file, perfect, and foreclose upon a lien filed against the
real property for which the service was furnished pursuant to O.R.S. 223.505
through 223.650. In addition, the city may seek a personal judgment against the
property owner and/or the user.
   (C)   (1)   Notices required to be given by the city will normally be given
in writing and may be delivered personally or mailed to the address for which
the sewer service is rendered and to the last known address for the property
owner.
      (2)   Notice from a customer or customer’s agent shall be given to the
city in writing presented at City Hall.
   (D)   Service may be discontinued for the following reasons.
      (1)   Nonpayment of bill assessments. Sewer service may be discontinued
if sewer assessments are not paid as required or if there is a failure to make
payments as required under a repayment agreement.
      (2)   Nonpayment of bill. Sewer service may be discontinued if the sewer
bill is not paid in accordance with procedures as listed in division (A) above.
      (3)   Noncompliance. The city may, unless otherwise provided, discontinue
sewer service for noncompliance with any of these regulations any time after
five days of giving of written notice to the user and the property owner of the
city’s intention to discontinue service. If such noncompliance affects matters
of health or safety or other conditions that warrant such action, the city may
discontinue sewer service immediately.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.170) (Ord. 69, passed - -1974; Ord. 69 B, passed - -1976;
Ord. 69-C, passed - -1980; Ord. 183, passed - -1995; Ord. 223, passed - -2001;
Ord. 246, passed - -2009)
SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
§ 51.30 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the system development charge for sanitary sewer service is
to impose an equitable portion of the cost of the construction of the sanitary
wastewater collection and treatment system upon those developments that will
utilize the existing system.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.010) (Ord. 191, passed - -1995)
§ 51.31 SCOPE.
   The system development charges imposed by this subchapter are separate from
and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise
provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. A systems development
charge is to be considered in the nature of a charge for service rendered, a
service hookup charge, or a charge for services to be rendered.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.020) (Ord. 191, passed - -1995)
§ 51.32 METHODOLOGY OF ESTABLISHING SDCs.
   (A)   The city has contracted for a system development charge study, which
was completed in May 1999 and is hereby adopted by the Council as the System
Development Charge (SDC) Methodology.
   (B)   The following summary of that methodology is utilized in establishing
the SDC for sanitary sewer service in the city.
      (1)   The total cost of the wastewater collection and treatment system
was approximately $450,150 in 1977.
      (2)   The total assignable cost for the existing wastewater collection
and treatment system is $135,000. The total cost to existing users is $74,250.
The total growth component is $60,750.
      (3)   The estimated total assignable cost for the wastewater collection
and treatment system capital improvement program is $1,155,524. The total cost
to existing users will be $725,669.07. The total growth component will be
$429,854.93.
      (4)   The 1998 population for the city was 695, with 271 equivalent
dwelling units (EDUs). The estimated city population for 2020 is 1,232, with
562 EDUs. The added services over the next 20 years are estimated to be 291
EDUs.
      (5)   Based upon the foregoing, the reimbursement fee is set at $209 per
EDU and the improvement fee is set at $1,477.17 per EDU. (This totals $1,686.17
per EDU.) The reimbursement fees and improvement fees may be modified by the
City Council by resolution.
      (6)   The improvement fee shall be subject to a credit for qualified
public improvements as provided in O.R.S. 223.304. The amount of any credit
shall be determined prior to final plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.030)
§ 51.33 SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   Any system development charges collected shall be placed in the city’s
Sewer Development Fund. Such fees may only be used for capital improvements as
defined by O.R.S. 223.299.
   (B)   An administrative review procedure is established to allow any citizen
or other interested person to challenge an expenditure of said development
charge revenues. A written request for explanation of expenditure of a system
development charge revenue shall be filed with the City Recorder. A copy of the
expenditure, if appropriate, shall be provided to the investigator. A formal
challenge of the decision of the City Council shall be reviewed only as
provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to O.R.S. 34.100 and not otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.050) (Ord. 191, passed - -1995)
IRRIGATION WATER
§ 51.45 IRRIGATION WATER ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED.
   The city does establish an Irrigation Water Account for the purpose of
paying in whole or part the cost of paying for irrigation water, debt service
on bonds, ditch and pressurized system maintenance and repairs, materials and
labor for operation of the pressurized irrigation system, and for the operation
cost of providing irrigation water.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.010) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983; Ord. 136, passed - -1984)
§ 51.46 AMOUNT OF IRRIGATION CHARGE.
   The Irrigation Water Account may be funded in part or wholly by imposing on
all lots in the city, except those owned by the state, county, and the city, an
annual charge for such service as set by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.020) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983; Ord. 136, passed - -1984;
Ord. 258, passed - -2018)
§ 51.47 BILLING OF IRRIGATION WATER CHARGE.
   The irrigation water charge shall be billed and collected by the County
Assessor or, at the option of the city, may be collected by billing direct from
the city. All annual amounts billed for water shall be due within 30 days of
billing unless the property owner or tenant within 30 days makes an application
with the city for payment of such annual amount in 12 equal monthly
installments. The city shall have the right to establish an amount for handling
charge in all cases where there is an election to pay in 12 equal monthly
payments. Such handling charge to be determined upon motion of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.030) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983; Ord. 136, passed - -1984)
§ 51.48 WHEN CHARGES BECOME LIENS.
   Irrigation water charges and sewer service charges shall be a lien against
the property served from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger
or other records of the city pertaining to its water and sewer system and such
ledger records or other records shall remain accessible for inspection by
anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the
property. Whenever a bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid 90 days
after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in the
manner provided for by O.R.S. 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law
or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.040) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.49 CHANGES OF RATES.
   The Common Council of the city shall have the power and authority to alter
or change any rates for irrigation water service and to make any and all
decisions, rules, and regulations not in conflict with the ordinances of the
city which shall, in their judgment, be essential to the efficient operation of
the irrigation system.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.050) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.50 IRRIGATION SEASON.
   Notice of the commencement of irrigation season and the termination thereof
shall be given annually by the City Recorder by publication of notice in a
newspaper published in the county promptly upon a determination of each of such
dates. No water shall be used for irrigation or sprinkling of lawns, gardens,
landscaping, or tracts excepting during the irrigation season. The Common
Council may establish hours for the use of water for irrigation of lawns and
other irrigation purposes to conserve the water supply or to furnish ample
pressure.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.060) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.51 WATER USE CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   All real property owners within the city limits of the city that are
entitled to receive irrigation water provided by the city shall irrigate the
entirety of the irrigable portion of the property thereof and maintain a
beneficial crop as defined under state and federal law on at least one occasion
before July 1 of each year.
   (B)   The owner of the property subject to this section shall personally
certify by signature to the city on a form to be provided by the city that the
irrigable portion of the subject property has been irrigated on at least one
occasion since the July 1 reporting deadline for the previous year.
   (C)   If an owner of the property subject to this section fails to file the
certification as provided in this section, by July 1 of the reporting year, the
city, may authorize any city employee or hire a contractor to enter the real
property that has not been certified and cause a beneficial crop to be planted
if necessary and/or cause the property to be irrigated and a certificate of
same to be entered upon the certification record to be administered by the
city. The city shall charge the property and property owner the actual cost of
city staff time and materials plus a service charge of $500 per lot. The
amounts due shall become a lien on the property and a personal obligation of
the property owner.
   (D)   On or before May 1 (except 1993) of each irrigation season, the City
Recorder shall mail to each property owner of record with real property located
within the city limits of the city that is entitled to receive city irrigation,
at the owner’s last known address, a certification of irrigation water usage
that is to be filed by the real property owner.
   (E)   A city official, at his or her option, may certify that a tract of
real property has been irrigated although the owner has failed to file a
certification, if the official has personal knowledge that the property has
been irrigated at least once during the irrigation season.
   (F)   If the property owner allows the water rights to be abandoned as a
result of the failure to use the irrigation water as required under this
subchapter, the owner shall be required to pay all costs resulting from the
abandonment and shall pay a fee to the city of $2,500 per lot. All such costs
and fees shall be a lien on the real property as well as a personal obligation
of the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.070) (Ord. 179, passed - -1993)
§ 51.52 APPLICATION AND INSPECTION OF WATER CONNECTION.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall make any connection to the
pressurized irrigation system of the city without first making an application
and securing a permit.
   (B)   The application for an irrigation system connection shall be made in
writing in the form prescribed by the officials of the city.
   (C)   If the application for connection to irrigation system is approved by
City Recorder and the fees paid as provided, the city shall issue an irrigation
water connection permit specifying the location where said connection shall be
made.
   (D)   (1)   The city shall be given reasonable notice to allow inspection of
an irrigation water connection before completion and while the connection is
still uncovered.
      (2)   All work in connecting to the pressurized irrigation system is to
be done in accordance with the specifications contained in the permit, and the
manner of connection shall be subject to the approval of the city official
designated to inspect the work.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.080) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.53 INSPECTIONS.
   The city’s authorized representative shall have free access at all times to
any and all parts of the premises to which water may be delivered for the
purpose of inspecting connections, conditions of pipes and fixtures, and the
manner and extent to which water is being used.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.090) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.54 UNLAWFUL TO TURN ON WATER.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or use water from the city’s
pressurized irrigation system if the same has been turned off by the city until
the same shall again be turned on by the city’s authorized representative, and
water shall not be turned on unless and until the deposit on hand amounts to
the amount due for irrigation charges and payment of a reconnection fee as may
be established by Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.100) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.55 SUSPENSION OF RIGHTS.
   The Council may suspend the right to irrigate or sprinkle whenever, in the
opinion of the Council, a public emergency may require suspension.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.110) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.56 WATER TO BE TURNED OFF FOR NONPAYMENT OR NONCOMPLIANCE DELINQUENCY
CHARGES.
   (A)   On the failure of any owner or consumer to comply with the rules and
regulations provided herein or on the failure to pay the irrigation fees and
charges established by this subchapter, or that may be established as a
condition to the use of irrigation water, the irrigation water supply of any
owner or consumer may be cut off by the authorized representative or other
person designated by the Common Council of the city without notice, until such
time as payment is made of the amount due, together with any additional sums as
a penalty for the expense of turning off the water.
   (B)   All delinquent charges shall become a lien against the property where
said services are furnished. Said lien is to be enforced in the same manner as
other city liens.
   (C)   No person shall use water from the city’s system for irrigation or
sprinkling of lawns, gardens, landscaping, or tracts without first having paid
to the city recorder the annual irrigation charge. Having a hose or other
irrigation or sprinkling device attached to a water outlet shall be deemed
conclusive evidence of use of water for irrigation purposes. When, in the
judgment of the authorized city representatives or proper city officials, it
may be necessary to restrict the use of water for irrigation purposes, the city
may require that no hose shall be used for irrigation or sprinkling purposes
without a nozzle attached and no hose larger than three-fourths inch or with an
opening of more than one-half inch shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.120) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.57 WASTEWATER AND USE OF WATER DURING DESIGNATED PERIOD.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall use irrigation water at any day or hour other
than authorized by motion or resolution by City Council of the city which
motion or resolution shall be adopted prior to or during the irrigation season
setting the day and hours for use of irrigation water within the city.
      (2)   Notice of the days and hours for use of irrigation water shall be
sent to all irrigation water users at least ten days in advance of setting or
changing of irrigation days and hours.
   (B)   No person shall permit water used for irrigation to flow into or upon
a public way or upon premises not under his or her control. For the purpose of
this section, PERMIT shall require a finding that the person was “grossly
negligent” in allowing water to flow into or upon a public way or upon premises
not under his or her control.
   (C)   No person shall permit or allow water to run to waste through any
faucet or fixture.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties provided for herein, if the city finds
any premises where there are defective, broken, or leaking pipes causing water
to run in an unrestricted or uncontrolled manner, or any waste of water as set
forth herein, or any use of irrigation water on a day or hours not authorized
by the City Council, the water to such premises may be turned off by an
authorized representative of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.130) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983; Ord. 161, passed - -1989)
§ 51.58 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.
   The city may shut off water from the mains at any time without notice for
repairs or other necessary purposes, and the city shall not be responsible for
any damage resulting to any owners or patrons’ irrigation systems, tanks,
boilers, or other properties, and no liability shall exist on the part of the
city for any damage resulting from the breaking of any mains, pipes, service
pipes, and no deduction shall be made for any time that the mains or service
pipes may be out of use or service discontinued on the account of such
breaking.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.140) (Ord. 128, passed - -1983)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm,
association, or corporation to violate or refuse to comply with any provision
of §§
51.01 to
51.18; or without authority from the city to open any manhole or sewage lift
station or to enter into, or interfere or tamper with any sewer, manhole sewage
pond; or to break or violate any rules or regulations adopted by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council relative to connecting to the sewer system or
prohibiting the depositing in, or disposal of damaging substances through the
city sewerage system.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of any of the offenses listed in division
(B)(2) above or pleading guilty thereto may be punished by a fine not to exceed
$300 or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment, and any firm, association, or corporation found
guilty of any such offense may be punished by fine not to exceed $300.
      (3)   A violation which continues from day to day shall constitute a
separate violation each day, and the foregoing fine may be assessable for each
day during which the violation occurs.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.180)
   (C)   Each and every violation of the provisions of §§
51.45 to
51.58 is declared to be an unlawful act. Any person, firm, or corporation who
violates, disobeys, or neglects any of the provisions of §§
51.45 to
51.58 shall, upon conviction in the City Municipal Court, be fined an amount
not to exceed $500 for each infraction.
(Prior Code, § 13.12.150)
(Ord. 69, passed - -1974; Ord. 69 A, passed - -1976; Ord. 128, passed - -1983;
Ord. 247, passed - -2012)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
52.01   General provisions
   
52.02   Franchise and exemptions
   
52.03   Rate regulation and determination
   
52.04   Public responsibility
   
52.05   Administration and enforcement
§ 52.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Short title. This chapter shall be known as the “solid waste
management ordinance.”
   (B)   Purposes, policy, and scope. It is declared to be the public policy of
the city to regulate solid waste management to:
      (1)   Ensure safe, efficient, economical, and comprehensive solid waste
service;
      (2)   Ensure fair and equitable consumer rates and to prohibit rate
preference or other practices that might be discriminatory;
      (3)   Conserve energy and material resources, reduce solid wastes, and
promote material and energy recovery in all forms;
      (4)   Provide for technologically and economically feasible resource
recovery by and through the franchise on a first option basis;
      (5)   Eliminate overlapping service and thereby to increase efficiency
and to decrease truck noise, street wear, energy waste, air pollution, and
public inconvenience;
      (6)   Protect public health and the environment;
      (7)   Provide public service standards; and
      (8)   Provide a basis and incentive for investment in solid waste
equipment, facilities, sites, and technology.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Metolius.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Metolius.
      FRANCHISEE. The person or persons granted by §
52.02(C) or a subsequent ordinance or a subcontractor to such person or
persons.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste:
         (a)   Defined as hazardous waste by or pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 459;
         (b)   Defined as hazardous waste by another governmental unit having
jurisdiction; or
         (c)   Found to be HAZARDOUS to service workers, to service equipment,
or to the public by the franchisee.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust,
firm, estate, joint venture, or other private legal entity, or any public
agency.
      RESOURCE RECOVERY. The process of obtaining useful material or energy
resources from solid waste, including reuse, recycling, and other materials
recovery or energy recovery of or from solid waste.
      SERVICE. The collection, transportation, or disposal of or resource
recovery from solid waste.
      SOLID WASTE. All solid waste or semi-solid waste, including, without
limitation, garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, ashes or swill, newsprint, or
waste paper, corrugated or cardboard, grass clippings, compost, residential,
commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional wastes, discarded home
or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture, vehicle parts or tires,
vegetable or animal wastes, and other wastes.
      SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The prevention of or reduction of solid waste,
management of service, and facilities and equipment necessary or convenient to
such activities.
      WASTE.
         (a)   Material that is no longer directly useable by the source,
generator, or producer of the material, which material is to be disposed of or
to be resource recovered by another person.
         (b)   The fact that all or any part of the material may have value and
thus be recovered does not remove them from this definition.
         (c)   The fact that the source, generator, or producer of materials
has separated or segregated such material from other WASTE does not remove the
materials from this definition.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.010) (Ord. 170, passed - -1990)
§ 52.02 FRANCHISE AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Persons and practices exempt from franchise. Nothing in this chapter
requires a franchise from the following persons for the following businesses or
practices:
      (1)   The collection, transportation, and reuse of repairable or
cleanable discards by a private charitable organization regularly engaged in
such business or activity;
      (2)   The collection, transportation, and reuse or recycling of totally
source separated materials or operation of a charitable, benevolent, or
fraternal organization which organization was not organized for any solid waste
management purpose and which organization is using the activity for
fundraising, including, without limitation, scouts and churches;
      (3)   The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage
containers under O.R.S. Chapter 459 and that portion thereof commonly known as
the “Bottle Bill;”
      (4)   The generator or producer who transports and disposes of waste
created as an incidental art of regularly carrying on the business or service
of auto wrecking, to the extent licensed by the state; demolition, land
clearing, or construction; janitorial service; gardening; park maintenance or
landscaping service; street sweeping; auto body recovery; or septic tank
pumping or sludge collection. JANITORIAL SERVICE does not include removal of
accumulated or stored wastes;
      (5)   The transportation by a person of solid waste generated or produced
by such person to a disposal site, resource recovery site, or market. In the
case of a non-owner occupied property, the waste is generated or produced and
is owned by the occupant and not by the landlord, property owner, or
association of property owners, or the agent of such landlord, property owner,
or association;
      (6)   The purchase of totally source separated solid waste for fair
market value;
      (7)   The providing of service for hazardous wastes; or
      (8)   Any other practice, business, or activity which is withdrawn by the
Council by resolution.
   (B)   Practices prohibited without a franchise. Unless exempted in division
(A) above or franchised pursuant to division (D) below, no person shall:
      (1)   Solicit customers for service;
      (2)   Advertise the providing of service; or
      (3)   Provide service in the city.
   (C)   Grant of nonexclusive franchise. There is granted to Oliver and
Janelle Orcutt, dba Madras Sanitary Service, the nonexclusive right, privilege,
and franchise to provide service within the city limited as of the date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter and any area that may hereafter be annexed
to the city.
   (D)   Franchise term and termination.
      (1)   The rights, privileges, and franchise herein granted shall begin on
July 1, 2001, and shall be continued for a period of seven years except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   Should franchisee fail, neglect, or refuse to fulfill any or
all of the stipulations and terms of this agreement, then city shall have the
right to cancel this agreement and franchise providing, however, that before
any such cancellation, the Council shall send by registered mail certified to
franchisee’s last known address, a written notice setting forth wherein he or
she has failed in his or her duties as provided in this chapter and fixing a
time of not less than ten days after the date of such notice when the matter
will be heard before the Council.
         (b)   At such hearing, the franchisee shall have the right to be
present in person and he or she may present such witnesses and evidence, as may
be proper concerning the matter. The city in like manner, may also present such
proper evidence, as it may deem advisable. All witnesses shall be heard under
oath and may be cross-examined and the findings of the Council thereon shall be
conclusive.
      (3)   This franchise may be renewed by the city and franchise holder upon
agreement between the city and licensee upon the same terms and conditions or
such other conditions as may be required by the city. Such renewal of the
franchise shall be approved by the Council and a memorandum of such renewal
executed by the city and licensee.
      (4)   Both parties shall have the right to cancel this agreement upon 30
days’ written notice to the other party.
   (E)   Franchise fee. In consideration of the franchise granted by this
chapter, the franchisee shall semiannually pay the city a fee of 3% of the
gross revenue received from the service under this franchise within the city.
Payment shall be made on or before January 1 and July 1 of each year to the
City Recorder. The franchise fee may be modified at any time by the city upon
60 days’ notice to franchise.
   (F)   Franchisee responsibility.
      (1)   The franchisee shall:
         (a)   Dispose of solid waste at the site approved by local government
unit having jurisdiction of resource recovered wastes, both in compliance with
O.R.S. Chapter 459, all applicable administrative rules, and with this chapter;
         (b)   Save and hold harmless and indemnify city from any or all
liability that might occur as a result of franchisee’s performance under this
agreement and franchisee shall be insured in the following amounts:
            1.   Compensation insurance in compliance with all workers’
compensation insurance safety laws of the state and amendments thereto;
            2.   Bodily injury, liability insurance, with limits of $100,000
each person and $500,000 each occurrence;
            3.   Property damage liability insurance with limits of $100,000
each accident and $500,000 aggregate; and
            4.   Included within such coverage as set forth in divisions (F)(1)
(b)1. through (F)(1)(b)3. above, there shall be a save harmless clause in favor
of the city, protecting the city from any injuries, property damage, or any
other liabilities arising in any way from the operation under this franchise.
         (c)   Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, file with the City Recorder a written acceptance of
this franchise by endorsing acceptance on a copy of this chapter;
         (d)   Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities,
personnel, and finances to provide all types of necessary service or
subcontract with others to provide such service;
         (e)   Respond to any complaint on service;
         (f)   Provide a performance bond in the amount of $5,000 with a surety
licensed to do business in the state conditioned upon the full and faithful
performance of this agreement and franchise and this chapter. In the event that
the City Council finds that the franchisee has adequate experience and
otherwise meets the requirements to guarantee service, it may waive, by
resolution, all or part of the bond requirements and may attach any necessary
condition to the waiver; and
         (g)   Make a minimum of once-a-week collections of garbage and refuse
and remove all garbage and refuse which shall be offered for removal, such
collection and removal shall comply with O.R.S. Chapter 459, all applicable
administrative rules, and this chapter.
      (2)   The franchisee is not required to store, collect, transport,
transfer, dispose of, or resource recover any hazardous waste provided.
      (3)   The franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of
the services, where the franchisee does not have the necessary equipment or
service. Such a subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee of total
responsibility for providing the service and from compliance with this chapter.
      (4)   The franchisee shall not:
         (a)   Give any rate preference to any person, locality, or type of
solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of, or resource recovered.
This division (F)(4)(a) shall not prohibit uniform classes of rates based upon
length of haul, type or quality of solid waste handled, and location of
customers so long as such rates are reasonably based upon cost of the
particular service and are approved by the Council, nor shall it prevent any
person from volunteering service at reduced cost for a charitable, community,
civic, or benevolent purpose; or
         (b)   Transfer this franchise or portion thereof to other persons
without prior written approval of the Council. The Council may attach whatever
reasonable conditions necessary to guarantee maintenance of service and
compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Suspension, modification, or revocation of franchise.
      (1)   Failure to provide necessary service or otherwise comply with
provision of this chapter after written notice and a reasonable opportunity to
comply shall be grounds for modification, suspension, or revocation of the
franchise.
      (2)   After written notice from the city that such grounds exist, the
franchisee shall have at least ten days from the date of mailing of the notice
in which to comply or request a public hearing before the Council.
      (3)   At a public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons
shall have an opportunity to present oral, written, or documentary evidence to
the Council.
      (4)   If the franchisee fails to comply within the time specified, or, if
an order of the Council is entered upon the basis of findings at the public
hearing, the council may suspend, modify, or revoke the franchise or make such
action contingent upon continued noncompliance.
   (H)   Termination of service. The franchisee shall not terminate service to
all or a portion of his or her customers unless:
      (1)   The street or road access is blocked and there is no alternate
route and provided that the city shall not be liable for such blocking of
access;
      (2)   Excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly
hazardous to persons providing service or such termination is caused by
accidents or casualties caused by an act of God, public enemy, or vandalism;
      (3)   A customer has not complied with §
52.04 or has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after 15
days’ written notice to pay;
      (4)   Ninety days’ written notice of intent to terminate is given to the
Council and written approval is obtained from the Council; or
      (5)   Ordered by a legislative, administrative, or judicial body having
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.020) (Ord. 170, passed - -1990; Ord. 225, passed - -2001)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.03 RATE REGULATION AND DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Reasonable rates for service shall be those contained in the document
marked Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and on
file in the City Recorder’s office, and by this reference incorporated in this
chapter.
   (B)    Changes in rates shall be made by resolution and order of the Council
amending Exhibit A and shall be reasonable.
   (C)   An emergency or interim rate for a new or altered service may be
adopted by written resolution of the City Council, valid for a stated period.
If a governmental unit has raised the cost of providing service or there has
been a substantial increase in cost to franchisee, an interim rate may be
adopted.
   (D)   Nonscheduled services may be provided at the reasonable cost of
providing the service.
   (E)   If approved in the rate schedule, franchisee may charge a starting
charge for a new service and restart charge to any customer who has been
previously terminated for failure to pay for service.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.030) (Ord. 170, passed - -1990; Ord. 225, passed - -2001)
§ 52.04 PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITY.
   In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with O.R.S. Chapter 459 and
other applicable laws and regulations:
   (A)   No person shall place hazardous waste for collection or disposal by a
franchisee without notice to the manager or office of franchisee. This shall
not apply to minor quantities of wastes generated at or by a single-family
residential unit;
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall place material in or remove material from
a solid waste collection container without permission of the owner of the
container. For the purpose this section, a franchisee is the OWNER of
containers supplied by the franchisee;
   (C)   No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for
collection and resource recovery by a franchisee or a person exempted by §
52.02(A) and operating solely within the exemption;
   (D)   No person shall install an under-ground solid waste container for
storage and collection after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter. A franchisee is not required to service an underground container
unless the person responsible for it places the can above ground prior to the
time of collection;
   (E)   Each customer shall provide safe access to the solid waste container
of wastes without risk or hazard to franchisee’s employees, the public, or
franchisee;
   (F)   No container designed for mechanical pickup shall exceed safe loading
weights or volumes as established by the franchisee to protect service workers,
the customer, the public, and the collection equipment;
   (G)   No container designed for manual pickup shall exceed 32 gallons in
size or 60 pounds in loaded weight. Such containers shall be made of metal or
be rigid, fireproof, rodent proof, and not subject to cracking or splitting,
round tapered at the bottom, and have proper handholds and bales;
   (H)   Unless special service or service equipment is provided by the
collector for handling unconfined waste, materials such as rubbish and refuse,
brush, leaves, tree cutting, and other debris for manual pickup and collection
shall be in securely tied bundles, or in any box, sack, or other receptacles
and solid waste so bundled, tied, or contained shall not exceed 60 pounds in
weight;
   (I)   Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special
type of service requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee
may require a contract with the customer as necessary to finance and assure
amortization of such equipment. The purpose of this provision is to assure that
such equipment not become a charge against other ratepayers who are not
benefitted;
   (J)   Stationary compacting devices for solid wastes shall comply with
federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection to user;
   (K)   Any vehicle used by a person to transport solid waste shall be so
loaded and operated as to prevent the wastes from dropping, sifting, leaking,
blowing, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle onto the public rights-of-way
or adjacent lands;
   (L)   No person shall block access to any container or drop box or roll off
box supplied by franchisee. Franchisee may charge extra for return service to
such blocked container or drop box or roll off box;
   (M)   Every person who generates or produces wastes shall remove or have
removed all putrescible wastes at least every seven days. More frequent removal
may be required where facility of service involves the public health. All
wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards,
nuisances, or pollution;
   (N)   All garbage and putrescible materials shall be stored in cans supplied
by the generator or producer or in containers supplied by the franchisee. When
cans are used, they shall be covered except during loading and emptying;
   (O)   The producer or generator of waste shall clean both cans and
containers and shall keep the area around such cans or containers free of
accumulated wastes. The franchisee shall provide periodic maintenance to
containers supplied by franchisee;
   (P)   No person shall burn, dump, collect, remove, or in any other manner
dispose of solid waste upon any street, alley, public place, or private
property within the city except as provided in this chapter; and
   (Q)   No person shall bury, burn, or dump solid wastes upon any street,
alley, or public place except as burning may be permitted by other ordinances
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.040) (Ord. 170, passed - -1990; Ord. 225, passed - -2001)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Appeals. Any action or determination by franchisee under or pursuant
to this chapter may be appealed to the City Council.
   (B)   City enforcement. The city shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter by administrative, civil, or criminal action or any combination as
necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. The Council may take such
legislative action as is necessary to support the chapter and the franchise
granted. The franchisee may enforce payment or protect its rights by
appropriate civil action.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.050) (Ord. 170, passed - -1990; Ord. 225, passed - -2001)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Adoption of state provisions
Involuntary Impoundment of Vehicles
   
70.15   Purpose
   
70.16   Policy
   
70.17   Notice
   
70.18   Hearing
   
70.19   Release of vehicle
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS.
   The Common Council for the city adopts by reference the following chapters
of the Oregon Revised Statutes: O.R.S. Chapters 801, 802, 803, 805, 806, 807,
809, 810, 811, 813, 814, 816, 818, 819, 820, 821, and 822.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.010) (Ord. 189, passed - -1995)
INVOLUNTARY IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 70.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter provides procedures for the involuntary
impoundment of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 10.080.010)
§ 70.16 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to impound vehicles, as allowed under O.R.S.
809.720, involving the following violations of the Motor Vehicle Code:
   (A)   Driving while license suspended or revoked (O.R.S. 811.175 or
811.182);
   (B)   Driving while under the influence of intoxicants (O.R.S. 813.010);
   (C)   Operating without driving privileges or in violation of license
restrictions; and/or
   (D)   Driving uninsured (O.R.S. 806.010).
(Prior Code, § 10.080.020)
§ 70.17 NOTICE.
   (A)   Written notice shall be provided to the owners of the vehicle and any
lessors or security interest holders (as shown in ODOT records) by certified
mail within 48 hours (not including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) after the
vehicle is taken into custody and impounded.
   (B)   The notice shall state:
      (1)   The vehicle has been taken into custody and removed, and the law
enforcement agency authorizing the impoundment;
      (2)   The identity, location, and contact information for the tow company
that removed the vehicle;
      (3)   The location of the vehicle;
      (4)   The statute, ordinance, or rule under which the vehicle was taken
into custody;
      (5)   The vehicle is subject to the towing and storage charges specified
on Exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived;
      (6)   The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody;
      (7)   The vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of
the towing and storage charges, and the vehicle and its contents will be sold
by the tow operator to cover the charges if the charges are not paid;
      (8)   The owner, possessor, or person having an interest in the vehicle
and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of
taking the vehicle into custody and its removal, and to contest the
reasonableness of the charges;
      (9)   A hearing must be requested to the city within five calendar days
after the date that the notice is mailed as evidenced by the postmark (not
including Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays); and
      (10)   The vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by
presentation to the appropriate authority of satisfactory proof of ownership or
right to possession, and payment of the charges, or deposit of bond or cash
security equal to the charges.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.030)
§ 70.18 HEARING.
   (A)   Any person entitled to lawful possession of the impounded vehicle may
request a hearing to contest the impoundment or the amount of the charges. The
request must be made within five calendar days after the date the notice is
mailed, as evidenced by the postmark (not including Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays). A hearing shall held by the municipal judge or his or her designee,
and shall be scheduled four calendar days after the request is received,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, unless a postponement is requested
by the person requesting the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be provided
to the person requesting the hearing and to any other lessors or security
interest holders shown in ODOT records. The impounding police officer shall
have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle was being operated in violation
of the laws specified in §
70.16.
   (B)   The hearing officer may be an officer, official, or employee in the
impounding authority, but shall not have participated in any investigation or
other action related to taking into custody and removing the subject vehicle.
If the hearings officer finds that the impoundment was improper, the hearing
officer shall order the vehicle released to the person entitled to possession,
and shall enter a finding that the owner or person entitled to possession is
not liable for any towing or storage costs resulting from the impoundment. The
hearing officer shall further order that any towing and storage charges be paid
by the impounding police agency. The determination of the hearing officer shall
be final and not subject to appeal.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.040)
§ 70.19 RELEASE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   The city shall authorize release of an impounded vehicle upon payment
of the towing and storage costs to a person entitled to lawful possession, upon
compliance with the following:
      (1)   Submission of proof that a person with valid driving privileges
will be operating the vehicle;
      (2)   Submission of proof of compliance with financial responsibility
requirements for the vehicle; and
      (3)   Payment to the police agency of an administrative fee as set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall not be applied to a security
interest holder. Division (A)(3) above shall not apply to a towing operator who
is foreclosing its lien under O.R.S. 87.152.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.050) (Ord. 231, passed - -2004)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
92.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Conditions for keeping livestock
   
90.02   Conditional use permitted
   
90.03   Prohibited animals
   
90.04   Livestock at large prohibited; police authorized to seize; tampering
with fences prohibited
Dogs
   
90.15   Dogs running at large prohibited
   
90.16   Dogs which are nuisances
   
90.17   Dog licenses
   
90.18   Seizing certain dogs
   
90.19   Killing certain dogs
   
90.20   Impoundment of dogs
   
90.21   Pound regulations
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 CONDITIONS FOR KEEPING LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep cattle, horses,
swine, sheep, goats, or other livestock within the city, except as otherwise
provided by conditional use.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation owning or in possession of property
within the city may apply for a conditional use permit to allow the keeping of
livestock on his or her property.
   (B)   The application and procedure shall conform to that contained in §§
152.235 to
152.239 and the following provisions.
      (1)   The number of cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, or other
livestock shall be limited to not more than one animal occupying each
contiguous 5,000 square feet of property owned or possessed by each person,
firm, or corporation in said city.
      (2)   The livestock shall be properly fenced in to keep the livestock
from leaving the applicant’s property.
      (3)   The property upon which the livestock is kept shall be maintained
in such a manner and cleaned so as not to create offensive odors.
      (4)   The city may, in its discretion, waive any fees associated with any
conditional use permit applied for under this chapter. The city shall waive
fees associated with educational programs designed to provide experience
related to care and raising of livestock.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.011) (Ord. 47B, passed - -1981; Ord. 201.5, passed - -1996)
§ 90.03 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep roosters
within the city. However, with the written consent of the City Council, a
person may keep, for a period of no more than 18 months, up to two roosters as
companion animals, provided the person submits in advance a letter from a
licensed counselor, psychologist, or psychiatrist that explains the nature of
the disability, the reasons for this form of companion animal, and the extent
of the need. The person may reapply for consent to keep the companion rooster.
In addition, with the written consent of the City Council, a person, under the
age of 20, may keep no more than two roosters as 4-H animals. Any roosters kept
as companion animals or 4-H animals must be equipped with an anticrow device
and the owner must comply with any additional conditions required by the City
Council.
   (B)   The City Council may, at any time, revoke the consent if it
determines, in its sole discretion, that the roosters are disruptive to the
neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.014) (Ord. 251, passed - -2015; Ord. 252, passed - -2016)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 LIVESTOCK AT LARGE PROHIBITED; POLICE AUTHORIZED TO SEIZE; TAMPERING
WITH FENCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, or
poultry to run at large in the city or to negligently allow cattle and horses
to run at large in the city by reason of negligence in failing to maintain the
fences herein provided so as to allow said animals to be at large, and it
further is unlawful to leave any gate in said fence to remain open so that said
animals shall run at large; any such animals running at large in any public
place in the city shall be impounded in the manner provided in division (B)
below. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of
the streets, parks, or parking places of the city for the purpose of grazing or
feeding.
   (B)   The members of the Police Department or any other persons in the city
are authorized to take said animal into their possession and comply with O.R.S.
607.303 et seq. for the redemption or sale thereof.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to deliberately open a gate in said
fences, dismantle said fences, or in any otherwise not specifically herein
stated manner assist another to so do for the purpose of allowing said animals
to run at large in the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.020) (Ord. 47B, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.15 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow a dog owned by him or her or under his or her control
to be at large. A dog off or outside the premises of the owner or custodian,
and not restrained by a rope, line, leash, chain, or other similar means, or
not under the immediate control, restraint, or command of the owner or
custodian, shall be considered AT LARGE.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.010) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978; Ord. 110, passed - -1981)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 DOGS WHICH ARE NUISANCES.
   (A)   A dog is a NUISANCE if it:
      (1)   Howls or barks in such a manner as to deprive any person of peace
and quiet;
      (2)   Roams about the city;
      (3)   Trespasses on property not owned by or under the control or custody
of the owner or custodian of the dog;
      (4)   Bites a person;
      (5)   Shows a propensity to bite persons;
      (6)   Habitually chases vehicles or persons; or
      (7)   Injures or kills an animal or fowl belonging to a person other than
the owner or custodian of the dog.
   (B)   A dog which is such a nuisance may be impounded and its owner or
custodian fined in an amount authorized for a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.020) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978)
§ 90.17 DOG LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses required. A dog shall be licensed according to the laws of
the state, and no person shall own or have custody of a dog not so licensed.
   (B)   Impounding of unlicensed dogs. A dog not licensed according to the
laws of the state may be impounded, and no dog impounded under the authority of
this chapter shall be released from the pound until so licensed.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.030) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978)
§ 90.18 SEIZING CERTAIN DOGS.
   A dog found biting a person or showing a propensity to bite persons may be
summarily seized by any person and promptly delivered to the Chief of Police
for impounding.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.040) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978; Ord. 110, passed - -1981)
§ 90.19 KILLING CERTAIN DOGS.
   A dog which is rabid may be summarily killed by any person.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.050) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978)
§ 90.20 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or dog control officer may impound a dog that is
in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or dog control officer may issue either a citation
or complaint to the owner or custodian of a dog violating this chapter.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or dog control officer shall impound a dog if the
owner of the dog has not posted bail or paid a fine for a violation of this
chapter imposed by the Municipal Judge. For any dog so seized, the notice and
disposition of the dog shall be in the same manner as provided in §
90.99(C).
   (D)   Any person whose property has been trespassed upon by a dog in
violation of this chapter may immediately apprehend that dog upon his or her
premises and hold it until delivery to a dog control officer or to the Chief of
Police. Any person who so impounds a dog must immediately notify the dog
control officer or Chief of Police of such impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.060) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978; Ord. 110, passed - -1981)
§ 90.21 POUND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a dog is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, in case the owner or custodian of the dog is known to the Chief of
Police, he or she shall immediately give written notice of the impounding by
personal service upon the owner or custodian, and if the owner or custodian
does not, within five days after the date of service of the notice, claim the
dog and pay a redemption fee required by the County Dog Pound, the dog may be
humanely killed or disposed of to a person agreeing to provide it a suitable
home.
   (B)   In case the owner or custodian of the dog is not known to the Chief of
Police, if at the expiration of ten days after it has been impounded at the
County Dog Pound, its owner or custodian has failed to claim it and pay a
redemption fee required by the County Dog Pound, it may be humanely killed or
disposed of to a person agreeing to provide it a suitable home.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.070) (Ord. 87, passed - -1978; Ord. 110, passed - -1981)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
90.01 to 90.04 shall be fined not more than $25 for the first offense and not
more than $50 for the second and subsequent offenses; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.030)
   (C)   Violation of §§
90.15 to 90.21 is punishable by a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50
for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.080)
(Ord. 47B, passed - -1981; Ord. 87, passed - -1978; Ord. 110, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
Fire Code
   
91.01   Adoption of Uniform Fire Code
   
91.02   Adoption of additional rules
Open Burning
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Permit required
   
91.17   Permits not necessary
   
91.18   Location restricted
   
91.19   Attendance of open fires
   
91.20   Chief of Police may prohibit outdoor burning
 
   
91.99   Penalty
FIRE CODE
§ 91.01 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
   The Uniform Fire Code as promulgated by the Fire Marshal pursuant to O.R.S.
476.030 is adopted in its entirety for application within the confines of the
city by the County Rural Fire Protection District.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.010) (Ord. 192, passed - -1995)
§ 91.02 ADOPTION OF ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The Common Council for the city also adopts by reference any additional
rules promulgated by the County Rural Fire Protection District for application
within the confines of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.020) (Ord. 192, passed - -1995)
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED INCINERATOR. An incinerator made of noncombustible material with a
wire mesh cover, placed not less than 15 feet from any building or other
structure, and having an area about the trash burner cleared of brush, grass,
rubbish, and other combustible material for a distance of not less than three
feet.
   CITY. The City of Metolius.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.010) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969; Ord. 109, passed - -1981)
§ 91.16 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize
any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street, alley,
road, or other public ground, or private land, within the city boundaries,
without a permit or other proper authorization. During construction or
demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish shall be
disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity without
having obtained a permit or other proper authorization.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.020) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 PERMITS NOT NECESSARY.
   Permits will not be necessary for the burning of trash or other combustible
material in approved incinerators; provided that the Chief of Police may
prohibit the burning of trash or other combustible material in approved
incinerators when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.030) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969; Ord. 109, passed - -1981)
§ 91.18 LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize
any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private or public land unless
the location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision
is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure;
provided, however, this section does not pertain to fires contained in approved
incinerators.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.040) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 ATTENDANCE OF OPEN FIRES.
   Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be constantly attended by a competent
person until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose
connected to the water supply, or other fire-extinguishing equipment readily
available for use.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.050) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 CHIEF OF POLICE MAY PROHIBIT OUTDOOR BURNING.
   The Chief of Police may grant a permit to burn rubbish and other combustible
materials, subject to such restrictions and safeguards as are necessary to
protect persons and property from the hazards of fire, or the Chief of Police
may prohibit any and all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous to persons or
property.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.060) (Ord. 59, passed - -1969; Ord. 109, passed - -1981)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
91.15 to 91.20 or failing to comply therewith, shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment in city jail for not
more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.070)
(Ord. 59, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Nuisances affecting public health
   
92.03   Nuisances affecting public safety
   
92.04   Nuisances affecting public peace
   
92.05   Unenumerated nuisances
   
92.06   Abatement procedure
   
92.07   Summary abatement
Discarded Vehicles
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Declaration of public nuisance
   
92.22   Prohibited action
   
92.23   Police duty
   
92.24   Entry upon private property
   
92.25   Hearing by City Council
   
92.26   Abatement by city and appraisal
   
92.27   Low-value vehicle
   
92.28   Public sale notice
   
92.29   Public sale
   
92.30   Redemption before sale
   
92.31   Assessment of costs
 
   
92.99   Penalty
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or the
supervision of any construction project.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE.
      (1)   The owner;
      (2)   The person in charge of property, as defined in this section; and
      (3)   The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a
nuisance as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of this city.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A building, way, place, or accommodation, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the general public.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.010) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981)
§ 92.02 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH.
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit, on property owned or controlled by
him or her, a nuisance affecting public health.
   (B)   The following are NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH and may be abated
as provided in this chapter:
      (1)   Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city,
except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects
in accordance with the State Health Division regulations;
      (2)   Accumulations of debris, rubbish, garbage, manure, and other refuse
that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the
city;
      (3)   Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and
other insect pests;
      (4)   Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream, or drainage
ditch by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances placed in or near the
water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water;
      (5)   Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption;
      (6)   Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an
offensive odor, or which are in an unsanitary condition;
      (7)   Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises; and
      (8)   Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition, or
which cause an offensive odor.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.020) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   Creating a hazard. No person shall create a hazard by:
      (1)   Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a
container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity
and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which
cannot be easily opened from the inside; or
      (2)   Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon
which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth
of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more, fail or refuse to
cover or fence it with a suitable protective construction.
   (B)   Attractive nuisances.
      (1)   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon:
         (a)   Unguarded machinery, equipment, or other devices which are
attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children;
         (b)   Lumber, logs, or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be
attractive, dangerous, and accessible to children; or
         (c)   An open pit, quarry, cistern, or other excavation without
safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.
      (2)   This division (B) shall not apply to authorized construction
projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing
children.
   (C)   Noxious vegetation.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definition
applies unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         NOXIOUS VEGETATION.
            1.   Does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural
crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard or a fire or traffic hazard
within the meaning of division (b) of this definition.
            2.   Does include, at any time between May 15 and September 30 of
any year:
               a.   Weeds more than ten inches high;
               b.   Grass more than ten inches high and not within the
exception stated in division 1. of this definition;
               c.   Poison oak;
               d.   Poison ivy;
               e.   Blackberry bushes that extend into a public thoroughfare or
across a property line;
               f.   Sagebrush; or
               g.   Vegetation that is:
                  i.   A health hazard;
                  ii.   A fire hazard because it is near other combustibles; or
                  iii.   A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a
public thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.
      (2)   Between May 15 and September 30 of any year, no owner or person in
charge of property may allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the
right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property. It shall be the
duty of an owner or person in charge of property to cut down or to destroy
grass, shrubbery, brush, bushes, weeds, or other noxious vegetation as often as
needed to prevent them from becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard,
or, in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from
going to seed.
      (3)   Between April 1 and May 15 of each year, the City Recorder may
cause to be published three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city a copy of division (C)(2) above as a notice to all owners and persons in
charge of property of their duty to keep their property free from noxious
vegetation. The notice shall state that the city is willing to abate such a
nuisance on any particular parcel of property at the request of the owner or
person in charge of the property for a fee sufficient to cover the city’s costs
of the abatement. The notice shall also state that, even in the absence of such
requests, the city intends to abate all such nuisances ten or more days after
the final publication of the notice and to charge the cost of doing so on any
particular parcel of property to the owner thereof, the person in charge
thereof, or the property itself.
      (4)   If the notice provided for in division (C)(3) above is used, it
shall be in lieu of the notice required in §
92.07(A).
   (D)   Scattering rubbish. No person shall deposit upon public or private
property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, or any substance that
would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the
cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to injure a person,
animal, or vehicle traveling upon a public way.
   (E)   Trees.
      (1)   No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street
or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on his or her property to
interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or
person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to
keep all trees and bushes on his or her premises, including the adjoining
parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the
sidewalk and not less than ten feet above the roadway.
      (2)   No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a
dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property
on or near the property.
   (F)   Fences.
      (1)   No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or
maintain a barbed wire fence thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part
of a fence along a sidewalk or public way except with a permit as required by §
152.153; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing at least
six feet in height.
      (2)   No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain,
or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the
adjoining property line of another person.
   (G)   Surface waters, drainage.
      (1)   No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall
suffer or permit rainwater, ice, or snow to fall from the building or structure
onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.
      (2)   The owner or person in charge of property shall install and
maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so
that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not
carried across or upon the sidewalk.
   (H)   Derelict buildings.
      (1)   No owner or person in charge of property shall allow there to be a
nuisance building on his or her property.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, a NUISANCE BUILDING is any
structure or portion thereof which, because of damage, structural weakness, or
deterioration, dilapidation by reason of age, or for lack or want of
maintenance or proper repair, is structurally unsound or has a possibility of
its partial or entire collapse.
      (3)   The city code enforcement office is responsible for identifying
structures that violate this division (H) and issuing abatement notices or
citations under this chapter. The owner or person in charge of the property is
responsible for providing evidence that a building identified by the code
enforcement officer is not a nuisance and may do so as allowed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.030) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981; Ord. 262, passed 6-3-2019)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE.
   (A)   Radio and television interference.
      (1)   No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical, or other
device, apparatus, instrument, or machine that causes reasonably preventable
interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television
receiver of good engineering design.
      (2)   This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved, and
operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission.
   (B)   Junk.
      (1)   The term JUNK, as used in this section, means and includes all old
or discarded items, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, motor
vehicle parts, machinery, machinery parts, appliances or parts of appliances,
iron or other metal, glass, paper, old lumber, old wood (other than stacked
firewood), or other waste or discarded material.
      (2)   No person, or the agent or employee of any person, shall deposit or
keep any accumulation of junk out of doors on any street, lot, or premises
within the city, or in a building in the city which is not wholly enclosed by
sight screening material, in a manner which is deleterious to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or which is unsightly or creates an offensive odor,
or which interferes with the enjoyment of or reduces the value of property
within the city.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed
junkyard or automobile wrecking house which conforms to the requirements of the
ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.040) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981; Ord. 141, passed - -1985)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 UNENUMERATED NUISANCES.
   (A)   The acts, conditions, or objects specifically enumerated and defined
in §§
92.02 to
92.04 are declared public nuisances, and such acts, conditions, or objects may
be abated by any of the procedures set forth in §§
92.06 and
92.07.
   (B)   In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated within this
chapter, every other thing, substance, or act which is determined by the
Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare
of the city is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.050) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981)
§ 92.06 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice.
      (1)   Upon determination by the Chief of Police or the Council that a
nuisance exists, the Chief of Police or the Council shall cause a notice to be
posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person
responsible to abate the nuisance.
      (2)   At the time of posting, the City Recorder shall cause a copy of the
notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the
person responsible at his or her last known address.
      (3)   The notice to abate shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which the nuisance exists;
         (b)   A direction to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date
of the notice;
         (c)   A description of the nuisance;
         (d)   A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the city may
abate the nuisance, and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person
responsible;
         (e)   A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant
imposition of a fine; and
         (f)   A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to
abate by giving notice to the City Recorder within ten days from the date of
the notice.
      (4)   If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice
shall be sent to the owner stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the
person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.
      (5)   Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and
mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the
mailing and posting, respectively.
      (6)   An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not
make the notice void, and in such case, the posted notice shall be sufficient.
   (B)   Abatement by the person responsible.
      (1)   Within ten days after the posting and mailing of such notice, as
provided in division (A) above, the person responsible shall remove the
nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.
      (2)   A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall
file with the City Recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis
for protesting.
      (3)   The statement shall be referred to the City Council as a part of
its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for
consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard
by the Council. The Council shall determine whether or not a nuisance in fact
exists, and the determination shall be required only in those cases where a
written statement has been filed as provided.
      (4)   If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the
person responsible shall, within ten days after the Council’s determination,
abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Joint responsibility. If more than one person is a person responsible,
they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the
costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance.
   (D)   Abatement by the city.
      (1)   If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by
the person responsible, the Council may cause the nuisance to be abated.
      (2)   The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the
right at responsible times to enter into or upon property to investigate or
cause the removal of a nuisance.
      (3)   The City Recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense
incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisance and shall include
therein a charge of $10 or 10% of those expenses, whichever is greater, for
administrative overhead.
   (E)   Assessment of costs.
      (1)   The City Recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage
prepaid, shall forward to the owner and the person responsible a notice
stating:
         (a)   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative
overhead;
         (b)   The cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;
and
         (c)   If the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of
the abatement as indicated, he or she may file a notice of objection with the
City Recorder not more than ten days from the date of the notice.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of ten days after the date of the notice, the
Council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the
objections to the costs assessed.
      (3)   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the
date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined by
the Council, shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the
docket of city liens. Upon the entry being made, it shall constitute a lien
upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.
      (4)   The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum.
The interest shall begin to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the
lien docket.
      (5)   An error in the name of the owner or the person responsible shall
not void the assessment, nor shall a failure to receive the notice of the
proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid
lien against the property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.060) (Ord. 182, passed - -1994; Ord. 114, passed - -1981)
§ 92.07 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition
to procedure provided by other ordinances; and the Chief of the Fire
Department, the Chief of Police, or any other city official may proceed
summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and
which imminently endangers human life or property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.070) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981)
DISCARDED VEHICLES
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. Any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.
   COSTS. The expense of removing, storing, or selling a junked vehicle.
   DISCARDED VEHICLES. Major parts thereof, including, but not limited to,
bodies, engines, transmissions, and rear ends.
      (1)   For the purpose of this definition, DISCARDED means any vehicle,
licensed or unlicensed, that is in one or more of the following conditions:
         (a)   Inoperative;
         (b)   Wrecked;
         (c)   Dismantled;
         (d)   Partially dismantled;
         (e)   Abandoned; or
         (f)   Junked.
      (2)   No person shall store or permit the storing of a DISCARDED VEHICLE
on any private property for more than 72 hours unless it is completely enclosed
within a building or in a space entirely enclosed by a solid, fence, hedge, or
screen not less than six feet in height or unless it is in connection with a
business dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, owner, or person having possession, control, or title of property
where a vehicle is located.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VEHICLE OWNER. An individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated
association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or any
interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.010) (Ord. III, passed - -1981; Ord. III A, passed - -1988)
§ 92.21 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The open accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle is found to create
a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight,
deterioration, and unsightliness, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards,
to constitute an attractive nuisance causing a hazard to the health and safety
of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious
to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of a
discarded vehicle on private or public property is declared to constitute a
public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.020) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.22 PROHIBITED ACTION.
   No person shall store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle upon
private property within the city unless the vehicle is completely enclosed
within a building or unless it is in connection with a business enterprise
dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.030) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 POLICE DUTY.
   (A)   Whenever a discarded vehicle is found upon private property, the Chief
of Police shall:
      (1)   Make an investigation to discover the owner of the vehicle and the
person in charge of the property upon which the vehicle is located and give
written notice to him or her by personal service or by registered or certified
mail that the vehicle is in violation of this subchapter; and
      (2)   If the owner of the vehicle is not found, place a notice upon the
windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen.
   (B)   The notice shall state that a certain discarded vehicle is in
violation of this subchapter and that, within 15 days of the day of sending or
posting the notice:
      (1)   The vehicle must be removed from the city or to the storage yard of
a business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the
city; or
      (2)   Be completely enclosed within a building.
   (C)   The notice shall also state that the alternative to compliance with
division (B) above is to petition the City Recorder and request appearance in
writing before the City Council within ten days of sending or posting the
notice and show cause why the vehicle should not be immediately abated as
provided in this subchapter.
   (D)   The notice shall also state that failure to comply with this
subchapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle and charge the cost
against the property.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.040) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.24 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police is authorized at all reasonable times to
enter upon private property and examine any vehicle for the purpose of
determining whether or not it is in a discarded condition.
      (2)   However, before entering upon private property, the Chief shall
obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court
authorizing his or her entry for the purpose of inspection, except when an
emergency exists.
   (B)   No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this subchapter
until an affidavit has been filed with the Municipal Court, showing probable
cause for the inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed
inspection, citing this subchapter as the basis for the inspection, whether it
is an inspection instituted by complaint, or other specific or general
information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is
situated.
   (C)   No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent the Chief of
Police from entering upon private premises and inspecting any vehicle when an
emergency exists or the Chief exhibits a warrant authorizing entry.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.050) Ord. 111, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Following a request, the Council shall fix a time for a hearing to
show cause why a vehicle should not be immediately abated. It shall receive the
evidence and testimony of the Chief of Police and other interested persons
concerning the existence, location, and condition of the vehicle. After the
hearing, the Council may authorize and order the vehicle removed by the city in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Council shall make its order in the form of a resolution which
declares the vehicle to be a public nuisance. The resolution may order the
removal of more than one vehicle and may consolidate the hearings and orders
relating to more than one vehicle. The persons receiving the notice specified
in §
92.23 shall be sent copies of the resolution of the Council.
   (C)   The Council may impose conditions and take such other action as it
considers appropriate under the circumstances in order to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle
when, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. It shall refuse to order
the removal of the vehicle when the vehicle, in the opinion of the Council, is
not subject to the provisions of this subchapter. The Council shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence in the conduct of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.060) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.26 ABATEMENT BY CITY AND APPRAISAL.
   (A)   Ten days after giving the notice required in §
92.23, or ten days after adoption of a resolution declaring a vehicle to be a
public nuisance as required in §
92.25, the city will be considered to have acquired jurisdiction to abate the
nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or authorized
independent contractors. No person shall interfere with, hinder, or refuse to
allow authorized persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of
removing a vehicle under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   After removing the vehicle, the city shall cause it to be appraised.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.070) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.27 LOW-VALUE VEHICLE.
   (A)   If the vehicle is appraised at $300 or less, the Chief of Police shall
file with the Motor Vehicles Division an affidavit describing the vehicle,
including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value
of the vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be junked and dismantled. The
Chief of Police may, without notice and public auction, dispose of the vehicle
and execute a certificate of sale.
   (B)   The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the City
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.080) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.28 PUBLIC SALE NOTICE.
   (A)   If the vehicle is appraised over $300, the Chief of Police shall
publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of sale
which shall state:
      (1)   The sale is of discarded property in possession by the city;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license
number, identification number, and any other information which will aid in
accurately identifying the vehicle;
      (3)   The terms of the sale; and
      (4)   The date, time, and place of the sale.
   (B)   The notice of sale shall be published two times. The first publication
shall be made not less than 15 days prior to the date of the proposed sale, and
the second shall be made not less than eight days prior to the date of the
proposed sale.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.090) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.29 PUBLIC SALE.
   (A)   If a vehicle is appraised over $300, the Chief of Police shall hold a
sale at the time and place appointed, within view of the vehicle to be sold.
   (B)   The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. However, if
no bids are entered, or those bids which are entered are less than the costs
incurred by the city, the Chief of Police may enter a bid on behalf of the city
in an amount equal to the costs.
   (C)   At the time of payment of the purchase price, the Chief of Police
shall execute a certificate of sale, in duplicate, the original of which shall
be delivered to the purchaser, and a copy filed with the City Recorder.
   (D)   The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the City
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.100) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.30 REDEMPTION BEFORE SALE.
   (A)   A vehicle impounded under the provisions of this subchapter may be
redeemed by its owner, or by the person in charge of the property from which
the vehicle was removed, before a sale or disposition has taken place, by
applying to the Police Department. He or she shall:
      (1)   Submit evidence of ownership or interest in the vehicle,
satisfactory to the Chief of Police, that the claim is rightful;
      (2)   Pay the costs owing at the time the placation to redeem is made;
and
      (3)   Give evidence that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not
be resumed.
   (B)   Upon compliance with division (A) above, the Chief of Police shall
execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.110) (Ord. III, passed - -1981)
§ 92.31 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   After disposing of the discarded vehicle and deducting the money, if
any, received from any sale of the vehicle from the costs, the City Recorder
shall give notice as specified in §
92.23 to the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was
removed:
      (1)   Of the unpaid costs of abatement;
      (2)   The cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against
the real property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice; and
      (3)   If the person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the
abatement indicated, he or she may file a written notice of objection with the
City Recorder within 20 days from the date of the notice.
   (B)   Within 40 days after the date of the notice, objections to the
proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the Council.
   (C)   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the
date of the notice, an assessment of the costs shall be made by resolution of
the Council, entered in the docket of city liens, and, upon the entry’s being
made, shall constitute a lien upon the real property from which the nuisance
was removed or abated.
   (D)   The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum.
Interest shall accrue from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien
docket.
   (E)   An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not
void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed
assessment render the assessment void. The assessment shall remain a valid lien
against the property.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.120) (Ord. 111, passed - -1981)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §§
92.01 through
92.07, or an order issued under authority of §§
92.01 through
92.07, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   Each day’s violation of a provision of §§
92.01 through
92.07 constitutes a separate offense.
      (3)   The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating §§
92.01 through
92.07, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not
relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance. However, abatement of a
nuisance within the time limits required by §§
92.01 through
92.07 will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of a fine under
division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.080) (Ord. 114, passed - -1981)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
111.   SOCIAL GAMING
      
112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Purpose of licenses and regulations
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Application and fee required; approval; issuance
   
110.04   License not transferable
   
110.05   Fee for multiple businesses
   
110.06   Contents for license; display
   
110.07   Liability
   
110.08   License fees
   
110.09   Expiration of licenses; collection of fees
   
110.10   License fees to be deposited in General Fund
   
110.11   License fees payable in advance, changeable by city
   
110.12   Revocation and suspension of license; appeal
   
110.14   Suing to enforce collection of license fees
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 PURPOSE OF LICENSES AND REGULATIONS.
   In order that business, manufacturing pursuits, trades, professions, and
callings may be carried on and conducted in the city in a profitable, safe, and
peaceful manner, it is necessary that the same be licensed and regulated and
safeguarded and that the city provide police and fire protection, street
maintenance, street lighting, and other services. It is necessary that license
fees in such regulation will defray the costs of such police and fire
protection and costs of other necessary and vital municipal services.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.010) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to engage
in or carry on any business, trade, profession, or calling, or the transaction
or carrying on of which a license is or shall be required herein, without first
taking out or procuring the license required for such business, trade,
profession, or calling. No business shall engage in any activity that does not
comply with local, state, or federal law, and the city shall not issue a
business license to a business that is engaged in activity that does not comply
with local, state, or federal law.
   (B)   BUSINESS, TRADE, PROFESSION, OR CALLING, for the purpose of this
section, shall be defined as:
      (1)   The sale of goods, wares, or merchandise; or the rendering or
offering to render any and all types of services, professional or otherwise, to
the public generally; or the engaging in the manufacturing, distribution, or
leasing of goods, wares, or merchandise; or the renting of apartments, hotel
rooms, tourist home or house, motor courts, trailer camps, or cabins; or the
engaging in all types of mercantile, commercial contracting, industrial,
manufacturing, or construction occupations, carried on for profit, whether or
not a profit is actually made, or not-for-profit from or involving a business
address within the city. This shall not include ordinary labor for hire;
      (2)   Any person, firm, company, or corporation who carries goods, wares,
or merchandise from place to place, or from house to house, selling or offering
the same for sale generally on a regular basis of once or more during each six-
week period of the year, except a resident merchant who, while maintaining a
permanent place of business within the city, distributes goods from house to
house;
      (3)   One who brings a stock of goods, wares, merchandise, or musical
instruments into the city, and who sells or offers to sell the same at retail
without making the same a permanent and continuous business within the city, or
who advertises that he or she is bringing to the city for sale any stock of
goods, wares, or merchandise on a regular basis of once or more during each
six-week period of the year; and/or
      (4)   Any person, firm, company, or corporation who engages in
construction activities of all types within the city as a general contractor
and maintains a permanent place of business out of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.020) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968; Ord. 249, passed - -2013)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION AND FEE REQUIRED; APPROVAL; ISSUANCE.
   No license shall be issued to any person, firm, company, or corporation
except upon written application, and the amount required for said license shall
accompany the application, to the City Recorder, and upon approval of said
application by City Council, the City Recorder shall issue a license to the
person, firm, company, or corporation applying therefor, according to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.030) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.04 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every such license shall specify by name the person, firm, company, or
corporation to whom it shall be issued, and shall designate the particular
place at which the business shall be carried on. No such license granted or
issued under any of the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise, shall be in
any way or manner assignable or transferable, or authorize any person other
than is therein mentioned or named to do business, or authorize any other
business than is therein mentioned or named to be done or transacted, or the
business therein mentioned or at any other place than is herein mentioned or
named.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.040) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.05 FEE FOR MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.
   Where more than one business, trade, profession, calling, or employment
requiring a license as herein provided, is or shall be carried on or prosecuted
by any person, firm, company, or corporation, such person, firm, company, or
corporation shall pay the highest license fee herein levied for any two of the
businesses in which they are so engaged.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.050) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.06 CONTENTS FOR LICENSE; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Each license issued as provided in this chapter shall contain the
name, residence, and particular place of business of the licensee; the
particular business, trade, profession, or calling, the transaction of which is
therein licensed; the date of the issuance and expiration of said license; and
the amount paid for said license.
   (B)   Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall at all
times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office, store, or place of
business of said licensee.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.060) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 LIABILITY.
   In any action brought under or arising out of the provisions of this
chapter, the fact that the party, firm, or corporation thereto represented
himself, herself, or itself as engaged in any business or calling, for the
transaction of which a license is required, or that such party advertises and/
or exhibits a sign indicating such business or calling, shall be conclusive
evidence of the liability of such party, firm, or corporation for the license.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.070) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.08 LICENSE FEES.
   Every person, firm, company, or corporation, before engaging in or pursuing
any business, trade, profession, vocation, or calling or other commercial
activity within the city shall obtain a license to do so, as provided in this
chapter, and make an initial and yearly payment to the City Recorder therefor
of $20.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.080) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968; Ord. 105, passed - -1981;
Ord. 154, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES; COLLECTION OF FEES.
   All licenses issued as provided in this chapter shall expire June 30 of each
year. The full amount of such annual license fee shall be collected for all
licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter between July 1 and
September 30. Three-fourths of said license fee shall be collected on all
licenses issued between October 1 and December 31. One-half of said license fee
shall be collected on all licenses issued between January 1 and March 31. One-
fourth of said license fee shall be collected on all licenses issued between
April 1 and June 30 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.090) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.10 LICENSE FEES TO BE DEPOSITED IN GENERAL FUND.
   All license fees and moneys collected under and by virtue of this chapter
shall be deposited and placed in the General Fund of the city, and the same
shall be disbursed only upon order of the Common Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.100) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.11 LICENSE FEES PAYABLE IN ADVANCE, CHANGEABLE BY CITY.
   Nothing herein contained shall be taken or construed as vesting any right in
the licensee as a contract obligation on the part of the city as to the amount
of character of license hereunder, and such license fees may be increased or
decreased in any or all instances at any time by said city, and any business,
trade, profession, or occupation herein scheduled may be reclassified or
subclassified at any time, and all license fees herein levied shall be due and
payable in advance.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.110) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.12 LICENSE FEES ARE IN ADDITION TO OTHER TAXES.
   The license fees levied and fixed by this chapter shall be in addition to
the general ad valorem taxes now hereafter fixed or levied pursuant to law or
to any other license or tax levied by any other taxing authority.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.120) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.13 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
   (A)   Investigation. The Chief of Police, the Health Officer, their
deputies, and/or any other duly authorized official of the city are hereby
directed and empowered to investigate and examine all places of business
licensed or subject to license under the terms of this chapter at any and all
reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether such place of business
is safe, sanitary, and suitable for the business licensed or for which
application for license is made.
   (B)   Revocation of license. If the Recorder determines that a licensed
business is violating city ordinances, state law, or federal law, the Recorder
shall notify the licensee in writing that the license is to be revoked. The
notice shall be given at least 30 days before the revocation. If the violation
ends within the 30 days, the Recorder may discontinue the revocation
proceedings. A notice of revocation shall state the reason for the revocation
and inform the licensee of the provisions for appeal in division (D) below.
   (C)   Suspension of license. If a licensed business presents an immediate
danger to persons or property, the Recorder may suspend the license for the
business at once. The suspension takes effect immediately upon notice of the
suspension’s being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the
licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application. The notice
shall be mailed to the licensee, state the reason for the suspension, and
inform the licensee of the provisions for appeal under division (D) below. The
Recorder may continue a suspension so long as the reason for the suspension
exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension is made
under division (D) below.
   (D)   Appeal.
      (1)   An applicant whose application for a license has been denied, or a
licensee whose license has been denied renewal, has been suspended, or is to be
revoked, may, within 30 days after the notice of denial, suspension, or
revocation is mailed, appeal in writing to the Council.
      (2)   The appeal shall state:
         (a)   The name and address of the appellant;
         (b)   The nature of the determination being appealed;
         (c)   The reason the determination is incorrect; and
         (d)   What the correct determination of the appeal should be.
      (3)   An appellant who fails to file the statement within the time
permitted waives objections, and the appeal shall be dismissed. If a notice of
revocation is appealed, the revocation does not take effect until final
determination of the appeal. The Council shall hear and determine the appeal on
the basis of the written statement and any additional evidence it considers
appropriate. The appellant shall be given written notice of the hearing on the
appeal 14 days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the appellant may present
testimony and oral argument, personally or by counsel, and any additional
evidence. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply, and the
decision of the Council after the hearing is final.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.140) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968; Ord. 105, passed - -1981)
§ 110.14 SUING TO ENFORCE COLLECTION OF LICENSE FEES.
   In addition to the penalty provided for in §
110.99, and as separate and distinct remedies, the city may sue in any court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain judgment and enforce collection therefor by
execution for any license fees due under this chapter and may also sue out an
injunction as against any person, firm, or corporation conducting any business,
trade, profession, calling, or occupation herein scheduled and specified until
such license fees shall have been fully paid.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.150) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   A person, firm, company, or corporation who, within the limits of this city,
engages in any business, trade, calling, or employment for gain, without first
obtaining a license as required by this chapter, or who fails to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, shall be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $100, for each violation. If a license has been issued,
it may be canceled and the fee forfeited; and in default of the payment of such
fine as may be levied, he, she, or they shall be imprisoned for a period of one
day for each $2 of the unpaid fine.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.130) (Ord. 56, passed - -1968; Ord. 105, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 111: SOCIAL GAMING
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   License investigation
   
111.04   License fee
   
111.05   Annual fees for nonprofit organizations
   
111.06   Criteria for grant or denial of application
   
111.07   License not transferable
   
111.08   Responsibility of the licensee
   
111.09   Regulations
   
111.10   Suspension and revocation of license; basis
   
111.11   Revocation of license; procedure
   
111.12   Suspension of license; procedure
   
111.13   Appeal
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTEST OF CHANCE. Any contest, game, gaming scheme, or gaming device in
which the outcome depends in a material degree on an element of chance,
notwithstanding that skill of the contestants also may be a factor.
   GAMBLING. When a person stakes or risks something of value on the outcome of
a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under his or her control
or influence or on an agreement or understanding that he or she or someone else
will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. GAMBLING
does not include:
      (1)   Social games; or
      (2)   Bona fide business transactions valid under the law of contracts
for the purchase or sale at a future date of securities or commodities, and
agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance, including,
but not limited to, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life, health, or
accident insurance.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any device, machine, paraphernalia, or equipment that is
used or usable in the playing phases of unlawful gambling, whether it consists
of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing of a
machine. Amusement devices which do not return to the operator or player
anything but free additional games or play shall not be considered to be
GAMBLING DEVICES.
   SOCIAL GAME. A game involving the playing of cards only, which does not
include lotteries, between players in a private business, private club, or
place of public business or public accommodations where no house player, house
bank, or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of
the SOCIAL GAME.
   SOCIAL GAMING TABLE. Any table used or intended to be used as a card table
for the playing of social games only and the use of which is available to the
public. This definition shall apply to any bona fide nonprofit society, club,
or fraternal organization as defined in §
111.05.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.010) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No business or other entity or organization shall allow any social game on
its premises without first applying for and obtaining a social gaming license
from the Council. The grant of a social gaming license by the Council shall
authorize the operation of only one social gaming table by a business, unless
the Council expressly authorizes the operation of additional tables.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.020) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 LICENSE INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Before a license for social gaming may be granted by the Council, an
applicant must submit to the City Recorder the following information and allow
an investigation to be made thereon: the true names, dates of birth, Social
Security numbers, and addresses of all persons financially interested in the
business and/or of all persons who are either on the board of directors of or
hold offices in the other entity or organization.
   (B)   As part of the application for a social gaming license, the applicant
must pay to the City Recorder a nonrefundable fee of $25 or the actual cost to
the city of the investigation, whichever is greater.
   (C)   (1)   The grantee of a social gaming license must notify the City
Recorder within ten days of any change in the persons financially interested in
the business or in the names of any persons who are either on the board of
directors of or hold offices in the other entity or organization and request a
renewal of its license.
      (2)   At the time of such request, the applicant shall submit the
information required by division (A) above and investigation fees as required
by division (B) above.
   (D)   The term PERSON FINANCIALLY INTERESTED IN THE BUSINESS shall include
all persons who share in the profits of the business where the social gaming
activity is located, on the basis of gross or net revenue, including landlords,
lessors, lessees, and the owner or owners of the building, fixtures, or
equipment used in the social game.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.030) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   For each business or other entity or organization licensed, except as
provided for in §
111.05, an annual fee of $250 shall be required.
   (B)   This fee shall be required in addition to any investigation fees
required by §
111.03.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.040) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.05 ANNUAL FEES FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   A nonprofit society, club, or fraternal organization, having adopted
bylaws and having duly elected directors and members, may be granted a social
game license at an annual fee of $25 if:
      (1)   The tables are for the exclusive use of members of the society,
club, or fraternal organization;
      (2)   No charge is made for participation;
      (3)   The conduct of a cardroom is not the primary reason for existence
of the society, club, or fraternal organization; and
      (4)   The society, club, or fraternal organization has been in continuous
existence, actively conducting its affairs in the city for a period of two
years immediately preceding application for a license.
   (B)   The annual fee is payable on or before July 1 of each year. The annual
fee shall be prorated for new applicants for the period of January 1 to June 31
to one-half the annual fee.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.050) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.06 CRITERIA FOR GRANT OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   A license shall not be granted to an application if:
   (A)   Any person financially interested in the business has been convicted
of a felony within the last ten years;
   (B)   Any person financially interested in the business has been convicted
of five or more misdemeanors, the last of which was within the last five years;
   (C)   Any person financially interested in the business has been convicted
of or has forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling within the last five
years;
   (D)   Any person financially interested in the business has, within the last
five years, been directly or indirectly involved in a forfeiture proceeding
regarding a gambling device, as defined by state law, where such gambling
device has been ordered destroyed;
   (E)   Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or
any information requested is omitted from the application;
   (F)   Any person financially interested in the business has had a license in
his or her name revoked or suspended three or more times by the Oregon Liquor
Control Commission, the last of which was in the last five years;
   (G)   Any person financially interested in the business or that person’s
employee has violated any provision of this chapter; or
   (H)   Any person financially interested in the business has committed any
other conduct involving moral turpitude within the last five years.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.060) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.07 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license shall be assignable or transferable.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.070) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.08 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE LICENSEE.
   Where a social game is allowed, the license grantee shall have the duty to
supervise the games and see that they are played strictly in accordance with
this chapter and state law.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.080) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.09 REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate a social game, and no business shall allow the
operation of a social game in violation of any of the following regulations and
rules.
   (A)   There shall be a limit of any bet of $5 and a three-raise limit on any
social game. No backup bets shall be allowed.
   (B)   Social games conducted or operated in the city under the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of state law and the code and
ordinances of the city.
   (C)   All rooms where a social game is permitted shall be open to police
inspection during the hours of operation. Doors leading into the room must
remain unlocked during the hours of operation. Social game licenses shall be
available for inspection during the hours of operation.
   (D)   No license grantee shall participate in a social game or procure
players, back a social game, farm out a social game, assign or sublet a social
game otherwise lawfully permitted on the premises in which the license grantee
has an interest or works other than allow or designate a person to operate the
social game activity as that term is defined in §
111.01.
   (E)   Social games shall be arranged so they cannot be seen from the street
or sidewalk.
   (F)   No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to participate
in a social game or to enter or remain upon the premises where a social game is
being operated.
   (G)   No charge shall be collected from a player for the privilege of
participating in a game.
   (H)   No participant in a social game shall be charged a price for any
consumer goods that is higher or lower than the price charged nonparticipants.
   (I)   No person shall extend credit to any participant in a social game.
   (J)   In the game of 21 (Black Jack), no person may be denied the right to
deal. If a person is denied the right to deal, it shall be grounds for
immediate suspension of a license.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.090) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.10 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; BASIS.
   The City Recorder shall temporarily suspend any social game license if:
   (A)   Any person financially interested in the business has been previously
convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person financially interested in the business has been convicted
of five or more misdemeanors;
   (C)   Any person financially interested in the business has been convicted
of or forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling;
   (D)   Any person financially interested in the business has been directly or
indirectly involved in a forfeiture proceeding regarding a gambling device
where such gambling device has been ordered destroyed or a bond has been
forfeited in lieu of the gambling device being destroyed;
   (E)   Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or
any information requested is omitted from the application;
   (F)   Any person financially interested in the business has had a license in
his or her name revoked or suspended three or more times by the Oregon Liquor
Control Commission;
   (G)   Any person financially interested in the business or any employee
violates any provision of this chapter; or
   (H)   Any person financially interested in the business commits any other
conduct involving moral turpitude.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.120) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE.
   The City Recorder, upon determining that a licensed activity, establishment,
or device is in violation of this chapter, other city ordinances, or state or
federal law, shall notify the licensee in writing that the license is to be
revoked. The violations need not lead to a conviction, but must establish a
reasonable doubt about the licensee’s ability to perform the licensed activity
without danger to property or public health or safety. The notice shall be
given at least 30 days before the revocation. If the violation ends within 30
days, the City Recorder may discontinue the revocation proceedings. A notice of
the revocation shall state the reason for the revocation and inform the
licensee of the appeal provisions of §
111.13.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.120) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.12 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE.
   Upon determining that a licensed activity or device presents an immediate
danger to persons or property, the City Recorder may suspend the license for
the activity or device. The suspension shall take effect immediately on notice
being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business
address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license that is being
suspended. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee and state the reason for
the suspension and inform the licensee of the provisions for appeal under §
111.13. The City Recorder may continue suspension as long as the reason for the
suspension exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension
is made under §
111.13.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.130) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
§ 111.13 APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant whose application to the City Council for a license has
been denied or a license grantee whose license has been denied renewal, or has
been suspended or is to be revoked may appeal in writing to the Council within
30 days after the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation is mailed. The
appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the appellant;
      (2)   The nature of the determination being appealed; and
      (3)   The reason the determination of the appeal should be.
   (B)   An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time
permitted waives his or her objections and the appeal shall be dismissed. If a
notice of revocation is appealed, the revocation does not take effect until
final determination of the appeal. The Council shall hear and determine the
appeal on the basis of the written statement and such additional evidence as it
considers appropriate. The appellant shall be provided at least 14 days’
written notice of a hearing on the appeal.
   (C)   At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument,
personally or by counsel, and any additional evidence. The rules of evidence as
used by courts of law do not apply, and the decision of the Council after the
hearing is final.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.140) (Ord. 151, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Definition
   
112.03   Prohibited acts
   
112.04   Consent to enter onto real property; exemption
   
112.05   Registration statement
   
112.06   Registration fee
   
112.07   Issuance of certificate of registration; revocation
   
112.08   Form of certificate of registration; term
   
112.09   “No solicitation” sign
   
112.10   Evidentiary matters
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds it necessary and desirable to regulate
solicitation in order to provide an effective opportunity for the occupants of
residential property to protect themselves from the unwanted disruption of the
peaceful and quiet enjoyment of their property and right to privacy caused by
solicitors and to provide a means by which those solicitors who choose to
intrude upon and disrupt that quiet enjoyment of property can be held
accountable for such violations. The City Council has also been advised that,
based upon actual experiences in the city and in the opinion of crime
prevention specialists nationwide, there is a direct connection between
residential burglaries and unscrupulous solicitors.
   (B)   The creation of a registration requirement will enable city officials
and citizens of the city to become informed concerning the individuals and the
organizations who choose to solicit in the city. This chapter also provides a
mechanism to identify and discourage those whom would use solicitation as a
front for criminal activity.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.010) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOLICIT and SOLICITATION. The entry onto real property used for residential
purposes by a person for the purpose of communicating with an occupant of the
property, whether the communication is verbal, visual, or in writing.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.020) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., local time, without the
consent of the occupant to do so;
   (B)   Solicit without first having obtained a registration certificate
pursuant to §
112.07, if required by that section;
   (C)   Violate the terms of a registration certificate issued pursuant to §
112.07;
   (D)   Solicit after a registration certificate has been revoked pursuant to
§
112.07;
   (E)   Allow, suffer, or permit any person soliciting on his or her behalf or
under his or her direction to commit any act prohibited by this section;
   (F)   Provide false or fraudulent information on a registration statement;
   (G)   Leave written materials upon real property where a sign conforming to
the requirements of §
112.08 is posted;
   (H)   Solicit upon real property where a sign conforming to the requirements
of §
112.09 is posted; or
   (I)   Allow, suffer, or permit any person to solicit on his or her behalf
after a registration certificate has been revoked, pursuant to §
112.07.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.030) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 CONSENT TO ENTER ONTO REAL PROPERTY; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of §
112.03(A), (G), or (H) that the person charged with the violation or crime had
received actual or constructive consent of the occupant prior to entering the
real property. Constructive consent to enter real property may be implied from
the circumstances of each instance, the relationship of the parties and actual
or implied contractual relationships.
   (B)   The occupant of real property shall be considered to have given
constructive consent to enter real property for the purpose of solicitation
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., local time, if he or she has not
posted a “no solicitation” sign pursuant to §
112.09.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the entry into
a structure located on real property. The right to enter any structure must be
otherwise provided for by law.
   (D)   Officers, employees, or agents of a governmental entity while
performing activities within the scope of their office, employment, or agency
are exempt from the requirements of §§
112.03 through
112.10.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.040) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.05 REGISTRATION STATEMENT.
   (A)   All persons desiring to solicit at five or more dwelling units in the
city during any eight-hour period shall file with the City Recorder a
registration statement, on forms provided by the City Recorder, containing the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit;
      (2)   Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership,
corporation, or association and:
         (a)   If a natural person, the business or residence address and
telephone number of the person;
         (b)   If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner;
         (c)   If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it
is organized under the laws of the state or is a foreign corporation, and must
show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the
individual in charge of the city area office of such corporation and the
registered agent of the corporation, and the names of all officers and
directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the
place of incorporation; and
         (d)   If an association, the registration statement shall show the
association’s principal business address and telephone number, if any, and
shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone
numbers of all members of the association, unless they exceed ten in number, in
which case, the application shall so state and the person registering may
alternatively list the names and principal business or residence addresses and
telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association.
If the association is part of a multistate organization or association, the
mailing address and business location of its central office shall be given, in
addition to the mailing address and business location of its city area office.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the organization if the person
registering is a partnership, association, or corporation and an explanation
from all persons of the intended purpose of the solicitation;
      (4)   The names, mailing address, and telephone number of all individuals
who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation and the number of
persons who will be actually involved in the solicitation activity. One of the
named individuals shall be designated to receive any notice or communication
from the city or the public concerning the solicitation activities;
      (5)   The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving
the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion;
      (6)   A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is
to be accomplished and the approximate locations and dates on which those
locations will be visited;
      (7)   The names of any other cities in which the person registering has
solicited within the past five years, but in the event that the person
registering has solicited in more than five other cities, the person
registering may list the five cities located closest to the city;
      (8)   A statement that if a certificate of registration is granted, such
certificate will not be used as or represented to be an endorsement by the city
or any of its officers or employees;
      (9)   The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, corporation,
or any current agent or employee engaging in the solicitation who has signed a
consent decree or order in the last five years or who has been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past five years,
and the nature of the offense or consent decree or order, the state where the
conviction or consent decree or order occurred and the year of such conviction
or consent decree or order;
      (10)   An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable
to provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is not
available; and
      (11)   The registration statement must be signed by the applicant, if the
person registering is an individual; if the person registering is a
partnership, but a partner; if a person registering is a corporation or an
association, by an officer. The individual signing the registration statement
shall sign the statement and swear before a state notary that he or she has
carefully read the registration statement and that all the information
contained therein is true and correct.
   (B)   Registration statement and information submitted with the registration
statement are public records available for public inspection during normal city
business hours.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.050) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.06 REGISTRATION FEE.
   Every registration statement shall be accompanied by a registration fee of
$25 to compensate the city for the cost of administering this registration
program, and such fee will not be refunded if a certificate of registration is
not issued.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.060) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.07 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   After a review of the registration statement to determine its
compliance with §
112.05 and within ten working days of the receipt of the registration
statement, the City Recorder shall either issue a certificate of registration,
in the form provided by §
112.08, or notify the person registering that the registration statement does
not comply with the requirements of §
112.05 and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been
furnished that is required before a certificate of registration can be issued.
If the person registering is engaged in an activity for which a business
license is required by this code, proof of a valid business license shall be
furnished prior to the issuance of the certificate.
   (B)   (1)   A certificate of registration shall be revoked by the City
Recorder if a registered person or one or more solicitors engaged on behalf of
that person are convicted or plead guilty or no contest to a cumulative minimum
of three violations of §
112.03 occurring within any 30-calendar day period in connection with or on
behalf of the solicitation of the registered person. A certified copy of the
Municipal Court record of plea or conviction is conclusive proof that a
violation has occurred.
      (2)   The period of revocation shall be for 60 calendar days, during
which the person may not receive a certificate of registration. Within five
working days of receipt of notification that a registered person has been
convicted, pled guilty or no contest to the third violation, the City Recorder
shall notify the person designated in the registration statement to receive
notice of the action to revoke in writing five days prior to the effective date
of the revocation.
      (3)   The person may appeal the Recorder’s decision to the City Council
by filing a notice of appeal with the City Recorder within ten days of the
effective date of the revocation. During the pendency of the appeal, the order
to revoke is stayed.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.070) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.08 FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; TERM.
   (A)   The City Recorder shall prescribe the form of the certificate of
registration. Each such certificate shall have the following printed
prominently thereon: “The issuance of this certificate of registration is not
an endorsement by the City of Metolius or any of its officers or employees.”
Each certificate of registration shall bear a registration number which is the
same as the file containing the registration statement filed by registrant.
   (B)   Every certificate of registration issued by the City Recorder shall
contain a termination date upon which the certificate shall expire, which date
shall be the termination of the solicitation period specified in the
registration statement or one year from the date of issuance, whichever is
less.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.080) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.09 “NO SOLICITATION” SIGNS.
   (A)   If an occupant of real property chooses to not invite solicitors onto
his or her property, the occupant may post a “no solicitation” sign pursuant to
this section. The effect of the posting of such a sign is to express the
refusal of the occupant to grant consent to any person to enter his or her real
property to solicit, except to those persons exempt from these provisions by §
112.04(D).
   (B)   Signs posted pursuant to this section shall be posted on or near the
boundaries of the property at the normal points of entry, and:
      (1)   Signs must be no smaller than six inches in height and eight inches
in width; and
      (2)   Signs must contain the words “no solicitation” and the reference
“Section 112.03 of the Metolius Municipal Code” in characters no less than one-
half inch in height.
   (C)   For real property possessing no apparent barriers to entry at the
boundaries of the property which limit access to the primary entrance of a
structure located on the property, placement of the sign at the primary
entrance to the structure constitutes compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.090) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.10 EVIDENTIARY MATTERS.
   (A)   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of §
112.03(G) if written material is found on real property upon which a sign
conforming to the requirements of §
112.09 has been posted. The person responsible for such written material shall
be the person identified in the written material as its proponent, sponsor,
distributor, or potential beneficiary of the communication conveyed.
   (B)   For the purpose of §
112.03(E) and (I), if a person solicits on behalf of a person registered
pursuant to §
112.05, it is presumed that the person registered allowed, suffered, or
permitted the solicitations.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.100) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
112.03(A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), or (G) is punishable as a civil infraction,
with a fine not exceeding $100.
      (2)   Violation of §
112.03(H) is punishable as a criminal trespass in the second degree.
      (3)   Violation of §
112.03(I) is a class C misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.030) (Ord. 155, passed - -1988)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Adoption of state provisions
Curfew
   
130.15   Minors on streets at night
   
130.16   Permitting minors to violate curfew
   
130.17   Detaining minor
   
130.18   Delinquent or mendicant minors
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 ADOPTION OF STATE PROVISIONS.
   The Common Council for the city adopts by reference the following chapters
of the Oregon Revised Statutes: O.R.S. Chapters 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 137,
138, 142, 144, 146, 147, 151, 153, 156, 157, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
169, 419A, 419B, 419C, 471, and 475.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.010) (Ord. 188, passed - -1995)
CURFEW
§ 130.15 MINORS ON STREETS AT NIGHT.
   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be or remain upon any
street or alley or other public place in the city between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 4:00 a.m., unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian,
or other person having custody of such minor, or unless in the performance of
duty directed by such parent or guardian or other person having custody, or
unless such person is in lawful employment making it necessary to be in such
places after 10:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.010) (Ord. 175, passed - -1991; Ord. 193, passed - -1995)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.16 PERMITTING MINORS TO VIOLATE CURFEW.
   It is unlawful for anyone having the legal care and custody of any person,
as described in §
130.15, to allow or permit such minor to go or be upon any public street,
alley, or other public place in the city in the night time as restricted in §
130.15, except in case of necessity.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.020) (Ord. 175, passed - -1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.17 DETAINING MINOR.
   Every member of the police force while on duty is authorized to detain any
such minor willfully violating the provisions of §
130.15 until the parent or guardian of the minor shall take him or her into
custody, but such officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of the minor,
communicate with the parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.030) (Ord. 175, passed - -1991)
§ 130.18 DELINQUENT OR MENDICANT MINORS.
   If it shall appear that any minor taken into custody for a violation of §
130.15 is growing up in mendicancy or vagrancy, or is incorrigible, for lack of
a proper parental care or has no home, proper proceedings shall be taken to
have such minor placed in the care of a state institution as provided by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.040) (Ord. 175, passed - -1991)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   LAND DIVISIONS
      
152.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Specialty Codes
   
150.01   Adoption of codes
   
150.02   Local interpretation
   
150.03   Fees
   
150.04   Investigative authority and corrective action
   
150.05   Restrictions
Building Numbering System
   
150.20   Established
   
150.21   Odd and even numbers
   
150.22   Base line for numbering streets
   
150.23   Numbering by blocks
   
150.24   Duty and time limit for numbering
   
150.25   Requirements for numbers on structures
   
150.26   Violations
 
   
150.99   Penalty
SPECIALTY CODES
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   The city adopts the following codes by reference, and each code is
incorporated and made a part of subchapter, except as specifically provided by
this section. All codes, rules, and regulations referenced in this subchapter
are as of June 30, 1998:
   (A)   The State 1996 Edition Structural Specialty Code (UBC as state
amended);
   (B)   The State 1996 Edition Mechanical Specialty Code (UBC as state
amended);
   (C)   The State 1996 Edition One and Two Family Dwelling Specialty Code;
   (D)   The State 1997 Edition Manufactured Dwelling and Cabana Installation
Standards;
   (E)   Manufactured Dwelling and Manufactured Dwelling Accessory Building or
Structure Standards;
   (F)   Manufactured Dwelling Heat-Producing Appliances (O.A.R. 918 Division
520);
   (G)   The State 1996 Edition Manufactured Dwelling Park Rules; and
   (H)   The State 1993 Edition Recreational Parks and Camps.
(Prior Code, 15.04.010) (Ord. 214, passed - -1998)
§ 150.02 LOCAL INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The City Board of Appeals shall be the City Council, which shall have
no authority to waive requirements of a specialty code.
   (B)   A person affected by a ruling of the building official may appeal the
ruling to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the ruling with further appeal
to the appropriate state specialty code. A person dissatisfied with the
decision of the Board of Appeals may seek review with the Administrator of the
State Building Codes Agency within 30 days of the decision of the Board of
Appeals.
   (C)   The city recognizes that a person may request a ruling from the
Administrator of the State Building Codes Agency prior to submitting an
application to the city for a permit or after withdrawing a previously
submitted application.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.020) (Ord. 214, passed - -1998)
§ 150.03 FEES.
   (A)   Value or valuation of a building or structure shall be determined as
established by Structural Specialty Code as adopted by division (B) below.
   (B)   Permit, plan checking, investigation, and other fees charged by the
building official shall be as established in the special codes as adopted by
this section as follows:
      (1)   The 1996 Uniform Building Code, § 107;
      (2)   The 1996 Uniform Mechanical Code;
      (3)   The 1996 One and Two Family Dwelling, and state adopted fee
schedules;
      (4)   The 1997 Manufactured Dwelling, Cabana, Accessory, and Appliances
(Installations);
      (5)   The 1996 Manufactured Dwelling Parks; and
      (6)   The 1993 Recreational Parks and Camps.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.030) (Ord. 214, passed - -1998)
§ 150.04 INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY AND CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   In addition to any authority and power granted to the building official or
delegated inspector under the specialty codes adopted by this subchapter,
except where inconsistent with other provisions of the law, the building
official or delegated inspector may enforce the provisions of the specialty
codes against any person regardless of whether a permit, certificate, license,
or other indicia of authority has been issued. The building official or
delegated inspector may investigate, order corrective action, and, if an
immediate hazard to health and safety is imminent, issue an order to stop all
or any work under the applicable specialty code.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.040) (Ord. 214, passed - -1998)
§ 150.05 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish,
equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, mechanical system,
or equipment, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of a
specialty code or other regulation established by this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to construct
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, or demolish, set up, use,
occupy, or maintain any manufactured dwelling, accessory structure or
appliances, manufactured dwelling park, or recreational park, or camp, or cause
or permit the same to be done in violation of this specialty code or other
regulation established by this subchapter.
   (C)   The provisions and penalties herein are in addition to those remedies
established for trades licensing under O.R.S. Chapters 446, 447, 455 and more
specifically O.R.S. 446.990, 447.160, and 455.895 (penalty provisions).
(Prior Code, § 15.04.050) (Ord. 214, passed - -1998) Penalty, see §
150.99
BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
§ 150.20 ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a uniform system of numbering all houses, stores,
establishments, and other buildings, excepting minor sheds and outbuildings now
situated or which may hereafter be erected within the city limits of the city,
which for convenience are hereafter designated as STRUCTURES. Pursuant to such
system, the numbers shall be placed near the main entrance of each structure,
and in accordance with the map and plat now on file in the office of the City
Recorder, which shall be known as the “Official Numbering Map of the City of
Metolius.”
(Prior Code, § 15.08.010) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969)
§ 150.21 ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.
   Numbers on all structures on the north side of streets extending east and
west, and on all structures on the west side of streets extending north and
south, shall be odd numbers commencing with the numbers 101; and numbers on all
structures on the south side of streets extending east and west, and on all
structures on the east side of streets extending north and south, shall be even
numbers commencing with the numbers 100.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.020) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969)
§ 150.22 BASE LINES FOR NUMBERING STREETS.
   (A)   Washington Avenue in the city shall be the base line for commencing to
number all streets extending east and west; and Dover Lane shall be the base
line for commencing to number all streets extending north and south.
   (B)   All numbering east or west of Washington Avenue shall be designated
“East” or “West,” as the case may be. All numbering north of Dover Lane shall
be designated “North,” and all numbering south of Dover Lane shall be
designated “South.”
(Prior Code, § 15.08.030) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969)
§ 150.23 NUMBERING BY BLOCKS.
   (A)   The numbering shall be fixed by blocks, and in the cases where the
properties are not platted in blocks, the confines of a block shall be fixed by
the council. Each block shall be allowed 100 numbers, with 50 to each side of a
street in the block.
   (B)   The numbers shall be assigned to structures on a frontage basis
proportionate to the length of the block, and in the event a question arises as
to the proper number for a particular structure, the question shall be decided
by the Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.040) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969)
§ 150.24 DUTY AND TIME LIMIT FOR NUMBERING.
   It shall be the duty of every PERSON (which term shall be construed to
include persons, firms, and corporations) owning, occupying, or controlling any
structure within the city to obtain from the Recorder the correct number for
such structure and to number the same in accordance with provisions hereof, the
same to be done within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance codified in
this subchapter, or within 30 days after the erection of any structure which
may be constructed after passage of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.050) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.25 REQUIREMENTS FOR NUMBERS ON STRUCTURES.
   (A)   All numbers shall be placed on the front of each structure as near the
main entrance as possible, in such manner as to be easily seen and read from
the public way.
   (B)   All numbers shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height
for the number proper and shall be distinctly legible.
   (C)   The Council shall adopt a type of number which it deems suitable for
the purpose of securing uniformity of numbers and may approve such other types
of numbers as from time to time are necessary.
   (D)   The numbers shall be attached to all structures by a competent person
or persons selected by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.060) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.26 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obtain a number or to
place the same on any structure owned, occupied, or controlled by such person,
in the manner provided in §§
150.20 to 150.25; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person to remove,
alter, or deface any number, or to substitute any other number therefor.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.070) (Ord. 58, passed - -1969) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
150.05(A) and (B) is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation.
In the case of a continuing violation, every day’s continuance of the violation
is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.050)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.20 to 150.26 shall, upon conviction thereof in the Recorder’s Court for
said city, be punished by a fine of not more than $10, or by imprisonment in
the city jail for not more than five days.
(Prior Code, § 15.08.070)
(Ord. 58, passed - -1969; Ord. 214, passed - -1998)
 
CHAPTER 151: LAND DIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Adoption
   
151.02   Purposes and objectives
   
151.03   Short title and revision policy
   
151.04   Advisory role of the city/Planning Commission
   
151.05   Relationship to the comprehensive plan
   
151.06   Relationship to the comprehensive plan map
   
151.07   Relationship to the zoning ordinance
   
151.08   Construction and definitions
Procedural Requirements for Subdivisions
   
151.20   Powers of the Planning Commission
   
151.21   Application
   
151.22   Subdivisions and partitions
   
151.23   Tentative plans for subdivisions and partitions
   
151.24   Subdivision and partitions; final plat
Design and Improvement Standards
   
151.35   Public works standards and improvements generally
   
151.36   Transportation standards
   
151.37   Vehicular access and circulation
   
151.38   Pedestrian access and circulation
   
151.39   Street trees
   
151.40   Open space
   
151.41   Sanitary sewer service and water service improvements
   
151.42   Surface water management
   
151.43   Utilities
   
151.44   Fire protection
   
151.45   Streetlights
Penalties and Enforcement
   
151.60   Violation of chapter
   
151.61   Enforcement
   
151.62   Compliance with state real estate regulations
   
151.63   Certification conflicts
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 ADOPTION.
   There is adopted, as provided in this chapter, a land division ordinance for
the city, a municipal corporation of the state.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.010)
§ 151.02 PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   This subchapter is adopted to preserve, protect, and promote the
public health, safety, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare.
   (B)   More specifically, this subchapter is adopted in order to achieve the
following objectives:
      (1)   To aid in the implementation of the comprehensive plan of the city,
as adopted by the City Council on November 13, 1978, and subsequent revisions;
      (2)   To accommodate new development in a manner which creates livable
neighborhoods, orderly development and coordinated development with public
facilities which will preserve and enhance the city’s living environment and
will create new beauty through skilled subdivision design;
      (3)   To provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and
other utilities and facilities which may be required by conditions of an urban
environment;
      (4)   To provide streets of adequate capacity for anticipated traffic
which would utilize them, and to ensure their design to promote safe vehicular
and pedestrian traffic circulation system; and
      (5)   To establish procedures, as provided in this code and O.R.S.
Chapter 92, for partitioning and subdividing lands within the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.020)
§ 151.03 SHORT TITLE AND REVISION POLICY.
   This chapter shall be known as the land division ordinance of the city and
shall be reviewed on a biennial basis and, if necessary, revised to keep it
consistent with legislative changes or the changing needs and desires of the
citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.030)
§ 151.04 ADVISORY ROLE OF THE CITY/PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission of the city is charged by this chapter with the duty
of making recommendations and reports to the Council on the design and
improvements of proposed land divisions. The Commission shall have such
additional powers and duties with respect to land division, the maps thereof,
and the procedure relating thereto, as are prescribed by O.R.S. Chapter 92, by
this chapter, or as Council may thereafter direct.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.040)
§ 151.05 RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   A subdivision plat shall conform to the policies of the comprehensive plan
and elements thereof as adopted by the City Council, with respect to the type
and intensity of land use, residential densities and distributions, locations
and sizes of public areas, rights-of-way, and improvement of streets.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.050) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP.
   A subdivision plat shall conform with all applicable plans for the location
and improvement of transportation facilities, parks, and other public
facilities, as shown on the comprehensive plan map, as adopted by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.060) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 RELATIONSHIP TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE.
   A subdivision plat shall conform, in all respects, to applicable regulations
of the zoning ordinance, as adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08 CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words in this chapter, and the construction of the words
in provisions thereof, shall be as follows.
   (A)   Construction. The following rules of construction shall apply unless
inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this chapter.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
      (2)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used
in the plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The word SHALL is mandatory. The word MAY is permissive.
      (4)   The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
      (5)   In the event there is any conflict or inconsistency between the
heading of a subchapter, section, or division of this chapter and the context
thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of such context.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ACCESS or ACCESS WAY. Any way or means by which pedestrians and/or
vehicles shall have safe and adequate and usable ingress and egress to/from a
property; the right to cross between public and private property, allowing
pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
      ALLEY. A public way, permanently dedicated, or reserved as a secondary
means of access to abutting property. An ALLEY is not a street as defined in
this section.
      BLOCK. A contiguous series of lots bounded on all sides by streets,
railroad rights-of-way, or pedestrian access ways.
      BUILDING LINE. A dashed or solid line on a site plan drawing or plot plan
drawing indicating the location of buildings or structures on the property and
the distance from the property lines as required by this chapter.
      CITY. The City of Metolius, Oregon.
      COMMISSION. The Planning Commission duly appointed by the Mayor.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan adopted by the Commission and Council
providing the objectives and policy guidelines for the growth and development
of the city, including amendments thereto.
      CONTIGUOUS. Two or more parcels or units of land, including water, under
a single ownership which are not separated by an intervening parcel of land
under separate ownership, including limited access right-of-way, which would
deny access between the two parcels under single ownership.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Metolius, Oregon.
      CURB LINE. The line dividing the roadway from a planting strip or
footway.
      DESIGN. The design of any street or alley, alignments, grade, or width,
alignment of width of easements and rights-of-way for drainage or irrigation
purposes and sanitary facilities.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
      EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a parcel of land or portion thereof
for specific purposes, where ownership of the land or portion thereof is not
transferred.
      FUTURE STREET. A proposed right-of-way (i.e., street or alley) as may be
designed by the Planning Commission or other such agency, or authority as
provided for herein, which street is necessary for the future subdivision of
property shown on the subdivision plats and/or maps, but that the present
dedication and construction of such street is not warranted.
      LEGAL DESCRIPTION. The method by which the outer boundaries of a site or
premises and all appurtenant easements and applicable restrictions or covenants
are described or established by reference to established points, monuments, and
the like.
      LOT. A single unit of land created by a subdivision plat filed in the
office of the County Clerk, in conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92. The term LOT
does not include condominiums as used under O.R.S. 91.505 through 91.675, Unit
Ownership Law.
      LOT AREA. The total area of the lot measured in the horizontal plane
within the lot boundary lines exclusive of public or private streets, but
inclusive of any lawful easement providing access to other properties.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the
bisecting points of the front and rear lot lines.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on and with access
on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
      LOT, FLAG. A lot or parcel which has the buildable area located away from
the public right-of-way and is connected to it through a corridor of minimum or
less frontage.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot or parcel other than a corner lot or reverse corner
lot.
      LOT, KEY. The first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether or
not separated by an alley.
      LOT LINE. Any line bounding a lot as defined in this section.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The line on a lot abutting a street, other than an
alley. Corner lots have two FRONT LOT LINES.
      LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite form the front lot line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line which is not a front line or a rear
lot line.
      LOT, REVERSE CORNER. A corner lot which rears upon the side yard of
another lot.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the widest point of the lot.
      MAJOR PARTITION. To partition a parcel of land into two or three parcels
which includes the creation of a road or street.
      MINIMUM STREET STANDARD. The standard which must be met by a street
before it may be used in a subdivision or partition or is accepted for
dedication to the city. City STREET STANDARDS shall apply to public and private
streets.
      MINOR PARTITION. To partition a unit of land into two or three parcels
that does not include the creation of a street.
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, LOT, PARCEL, OR USE. A lawful existing
structure, lot, parcel, or use at the time this chapter or any amendment
thereto becomes effective which does not conform to the requirements of the
land division ordinance or zone in which it is now located.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The comprehensive plan map as adopted by the City Council.
      OWNER. The owner of record of real property as shown on tax rolls of the
county or deed records of the county, or person who is purchasing property
under contract. When land is being sold on contract, a development application
must be signed by the deed holder/seller as well as the contract buyer, since
the contract buyer has no ownership interest in the land until the contract is
fully paid and a new deed is recorded.
      PARCEL. A tract of land as created by a partitioning of land.
      PARKING SPACE. A rectangular area not less than 20 feet long and ten feet
wide, together with maneuvering and access space required for a standard
American automobile to park within the rectangle.
      PARTITION LAND. To divide an area or tract of land into two or three
parcels, in conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92, when such area or tract exists
as a unit of contiguous land under a single ownership. PARTITION LAND does not
include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures, division of land
resulting from creation of cemetery lots; and PARTITION does not include any
adjustment of a lot line by relocation of a common boundary where an additional
parcel is not created and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the
adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot or parcel size established by
applicable zoning ordinance.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of way for pedestrian traffic; may include trails
and pathways that provide direct and convenient pedestrian connections between
long blocks.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, both public and private,
association, and club.
      PLAT. A map, diagram, drawing, or replat containing all descriptions,
locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning
a land partition or subdivision as specified by this chapter.
      PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Refers to Metolius Public
Works Standards.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the boundary lines of an alley, easement,
street, or highway.
      ROADWAY. The portions of the right-of-way lines of any public way, other
than an alley, used or intended to be used for vehicular traffic, including
public ways designated as roads, highways, lanes, places, circles, avenues, or
by other similar designations.
      STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of
any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
connected in some manner and which requires location on the ground, or which is
attached to something having a location on the ground.
      SUBDIVISION and SUBDIVIDE LANDS. To divide an area or tract of land into
four or more lots, in conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92, when such area or
tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single
ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person who undertakes the subdivision of an area of land
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development.
      SUBDIVISION. An act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land, in
conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.080)
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.20 POWERS OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Subject to final review and approval by the Council, the Commission shall
undertake the initial review of tentative and final subdivision and
application, supporting documents, and partitioning maps, and make
recommendations to the Council as provided herein. The Commission shall perform
other such duties as the Council may from time to time direct or which is
otherwise specified by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.010) (Ord. 91, passed - -1978; Ord. 242, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 151.21 APPLICATION.
   Where required in this chapter, applications shall be submitted on the
appropriate form and in the manner required by the city. Before any application
shall be considered by the city, the application shall be complete as required
by the city. The city shall advise applicants of incomplete applications within
30 days of receipt.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.015) (Ord. 242, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 151.22 SUBDIVISIONS AND PARTITIONS.
   (A)   All subdivisions and major partitions as defined in this chapter shall
require a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Upon reviewing an application for a subdivision or partition, the
Commission shall recommend in writing to the Council that it either approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application based upon the criteria in
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(8) below, each of which the applicant shall have
specifically referenced. Detailed responses will be provided to the Council by
the Commission with their recommendation.
      (1)   Compliance with zoning and other ordinances. The proposed
preliminary plat shall comply with all of the applicable code sections and
other applicable ordinances and regulations. At a minimum, the provisions of
this chapter, the provisions of the underlying zoning district, and the
provisions of the planned unit development ordinance, when applicable, shall
apply. Where a variance is necessary to receive preliminary plat approval, the
application shall also comply with the relevant sections of §§
152.220 to
152.224.
      (2)   Plat name. The proposed plat name is not already recorded for
another subdivision and satisfies the provision of O.R.S. Chapter 92.
      (3)   Transportation plan. The proposed streets, roads, sidewalks,
bicycle lanes, pathways, utilities, and surface water management facilities
conform to the capital improvement plan and are laid out so as to transition to
the plats of subdivisions and maps of major partitions already approved for
adjoining property. All proposed public improvements and dedications are
identified on the preliminary plat.
      (4)   Common areas. All proposed common areas and improvements (e.g.,
open space, recreation areas, and the like) are identified as tracts on the
preliminary plat.
      (5)   Block and lot standards. All proposed blocks (i.e., one or more
lots bound by public streets), lots, and parcels conform to the specific
requirements below.
         (a)   All lots and parcels shall comply with the lot area, setback
(i.e., existing structures), and dimensional requirements of the applicable
zone, except as provided in division (B)(5)(b) below.
         (b)   No lot or parcel shall be less than 7,500 square feet. Every lot
shall have a front lot line length of a minimum of 75 feet and lot depth of a
minimum of 100 feet. Every block shall have a minimum length, on the longest
side, of 600 feet between street rights-of-way.
         (c)   Setbacks (i.e., for existing structures) shall be as required by
the applicable land use zone.
         (d)   Each lot and parcel shall conform to the standards of §
151.37.
         (e)   In conformance with the Uniform Fire Code, a 20-foot width fire
apparatus access drive shall be provided to serve all portions of a building
that are located more than 150 feet from a public right-of-way.
         (f)   The minimum right-of-way to be dedicated to the public for a
street shall be 60 feet but may be greater as required by the city.
         (g)   Common drives to serve more than one lot or parcel may be
required for traffic safety and access management.
      (6)   Conditions of approval. The city may attach such conditions as are
necessary to carry out provisions of this code, and other applicable ordinances
and regulations, and may require reserve strips be granted to the city for the
purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties.
      (7)   Future re-division plan. The purpose of this division (B)(7) is to
provide guidelines for future re-division. When subdividing or partitioning
tracts into large lots or parcels, the newly created lot(s) and parcel(s) shall
be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future re-division in
accordance with the requirements of the land use district and this code. A re-
division plan shall be submitted which identifies:
         (a)   Potential future lot division(s) in conformance with the housing
density standards of the underlying zoning district;
         (b)   Potential street right-of-way alignments to serve future
development of the property and connect to adjacent properties, including
existing or planned rights-of-way consistent with §
151.36(H); and
         (c)   A disclaimer that the plan is a conceptual plan intended to show
potential future development. It shall not be binding on the city or adjacent
property owners, except as may be required through conditions of land division
approval. For example, street improvements within the plan area may be required
in the future to provide needed circulation.
      (8)   Compliance. All submittals shall demonstrate compliance with the
following development and design standards: §§
151.35, 16.20.020,
151.37,
151.40,
151.41,
151.42,
151.43,
151.44,
151.45, and 16.12.120.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.020) (Ord. 242, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.23 TENTATIVE PLANS FOR SUBDIVISION AND PARTITIONS.
   (A)   Initial submission. Fifteen copies of a tentative map and a statement
of any proposed subdivision and/or partition shall be submitted to the City
Recorder together with a fee based on the city’s adopted fee schedule.
   (B)   Preliminary review.
      (1)   The City Recorder, with the City Planner’s concurrence, shall
determine whether the application is complete within 30 days after receipt. If
the application is not complete, the City Recorder shall request the additional
information required from the applicant in writing, and the applicant shall
have up to 180 days to either provide the same or state in writing his or her
refusal to provide the requested information. After 180 days, a new application
shall be submitted if the applicant still wishes to divide the property.
      (2)   Once the application is deemed to be complete, the City Recorder
shall transmit one copy of the tentative map and application materials to the
city departments, Planning Commission members, and other public officials as
necessary. Each city department, upon receipt of a copy of the tentative map,
shall examine the map for conformance with requirements coming within the
authoritative scope of the department; and, within seven days after receipt
thereof, shall make a written report to the City Recorder that states whether
or not the application conforms to city requirements, and why. The City Planner
shall prepare a written report on the plat for submission to the Commission.
The report shall include information on compliance with city ordinances and
standards, including land division and zoning ordinances and city standards for
streets, alleys, pedestrian and bicycle ways, sewers, water mains, surface
water management, private utilities, parks and open space, and tree protection,
together with any other data as appears pertinent to the Commission’s review of
the plat.
      (3)   Copies of the complete land division application shall be submitted
to following additional officials, and they will be given 30 days to review the
plan and submit comments:
         (a)   The County Surveyor and the County Assessor;
         (b)   The irrigation district, if the property is within the district;
         (c)   The school district, if there is indication of school district
interest in property development in the area;
         (d)   City’s engineering consultant/contractor, as applicable;
         (e)   Oregon Department of Transportation; and
         (f)   Jefferson County Rural Fire Protection District.
   (C)   Tentative map scale. Tentative maps shall be to a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet or less; except tracts over 100 acres, which may be to a scale
of one inch equals 200 feet and shall be clearly and legibly reproduced.
   (D)   Information on tentative map. The tentative map shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision’s or partition’s name, date, north point,
scale, and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the
proposed subdivision or partition;
      (2)   Name and address of recorded owner or owners (i.e., in the deed
records) of the proposed subdivision or partition;
      (3)   Name and address of the subdivider;
      (4)   Name, business address, and registration number of the licensed
surveyor (licensed in the state) who prepared the map of the proposed
subdivision or partition;
      (5)   The locations, names, widths, approximate radii of curves, and
grades of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and
easements in the proposed subdivision or partition and along the boundaries
thereof, and the names of adjoining platted subdivisions and portions of the
subdivisions as shall be necessary to show the alignment and future extension
of the streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways therein with the streets and alleys
in the proposed subdivision;
      (6)   Names of the recorded owners of all contiguous and adjacent land
within 200 feet;
      (7)   The approximate location and character of all existing and proposed
easements and public facilities, and public parks and open spaces in the
subdivision, partition, or adjacent thereto;
      (8)   Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot and
each to be numbered;
      (9)   Proposed setback lines;
      (10)   The outline of all existing buildings and their use, showing those
which will remain;
      (11)   The location and size of all existing trees that have a diameter
of four inches (as measured four feet above grade), showing those which will
remain and those that will be removed, consistent with this chapter;
      (12)   Contour lines shall be provided. If the slope of the ground is
less than 10%, contour lines at two-foot intervals shall be required. If the
slope is over 10%, contour lines at five-foot intervals shall be provided;
      (13)   City boundary lines crossing or bounding the subdivision or
partition;
      (14)   Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation of storm
water overflow and the location, width, high water elevation flood flow, and
direction of flow of watercourses;
      (15)   Any areas proposed to be cut or filled or otherwise graded or
protected from flooding;
      (16)   If impractical to show on the tentative map, a key map showing the
location of the tract in relationship to section and township lines and to
adjacent property and major physical features, such as streets, railroads, and
watercourses; and
      (17)   All areas to be reserved as common private or public open space,
such as pedestrian ways, recreation facilities, landscaping, entryway
monuments, surface water management facilities, and other common areas.
   (E)   Information on statement. A written statement to accompany the map
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A general explanation of the subdivision or partition and proposed
public improvements including water and sewer facilities, surface water
management facilities, and public parks and open spaces proposed to be
installed;
      (2)   An explanation of how the application complies with the applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance and land division ordinance, including
applicable provisions of §§
151.35 to
151.45. Where deviations from city ordinances are requested, a statement shall
be provided which demonstrates compliance with the applicable provisions of §
152.224;
      (3)   Public areas and private common areas proposed, if any;
      (4)   A tree protection and/or planting proposed, if any;
      (5)   A preliminary draft of restrictive covenants proposed, if any;
      (6)   Possible future re-division plan, if any; and
      (7)   Any other information, plans, or studies deemed necessary by the
city to describe the proposal and demonstrate compliance with the applicable
approval criteria.
   (F)   Planning Commission review and Council approval of tentative
subdivision or partition map.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in
conformance with §
152.019 to determine the need and whether the tentative map is in conformity
with the provisions of law and of this chapter. Planning Commission
recommendation to the Council, to approve, to approve with conditions or
modifications, or to disapprove the proposed subdivision plan, shall be made
within 60 days from the time the application is deemed complete.
      (2)   City Council shall take action so that the final decision on the
tentative plat, including any appeals to City Council, shall be made not later
than 120 days from the time the application is deemed complete. Approval of the
tentative map shall require the commission’s approval of the final plat if
there is no change in the plan of subdivision or partition as shown on the
preliminary plat and there is full compliance with all conditions of tentative
plan approval and all requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on three
copies of the tentative map. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one
shall be transmitted to the City Engineer, and the other retained by the City
Recorder together with a memorandum setting forth the action of the Planning
Commission and all the findings of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.030) (Ord. 242, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 151.24 SUBDIVISION AND PARTITIONS; FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Submission of final plat (map). The applicant shall cause the proposed
subdivision or partition, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map
thereof prepared in conformance with the tentative map as approved or
conditionally approved. A tracing and five blue line or black line prints of
the final map shall be submitted to the City Recorder, together with a fee in
accordance with the city’s fee schedule, within one year after approval or
conditional approval. The tracing and prints are in addition to those required
by Oregon Statutes. An extension of time for filing of the final map may be
granted by the City Council provided written application is made by the
applicant within one year after action on the tentative map.
   (B)   Supplemental data. At the time of the submission of the final map, the
subdivider shall also submit the following:
      (1)   A preliminary title report issued by a recognized title insurance
company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent
is necessary and their interest in the premises;
      (2)   Sheets and drawings showing the following:
         (a)   Traverse data, including the coordinates of the boundary of the
subdivision and ties to section corners, donation land claim corners, if any,
or triangulation systems, showing the error of closure, if any;
         (b)   The computation of all distances, angles, and courses shown on
the final map;
         (c)   Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent
subdivisions, street corners, and state highway stationing; and
         (d)   Coordinates of all block corners and all street center points.
      (3)   A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision or
partition; and
      (4)   Electronic copy of the survey with coordinates of all lot corners
set at the time, if available.
   (C)   Form of final map. The final subdivision/partition map shall be
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state laws,
including, but not limited to, O.R.S. 92.080. All tracings required shall be in
accordance with state standards, including, but not limited to, O.R.S. 92.120.
   (D)   Information on final map. The final map shall, in addition to other
information required by law, show the following:
      (1)   The date, scale, north point (generally pointing up), legend, and
controlling topography (i.e., creeks, highways, railroads, and the like);
      (2)   Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the
plat by distances and bearings, and referenced to a field book or map as
follows:
         (a)   All stakes, monuments, or other evidence found on the ground and
used to establish the initial point of the subdivision boundary, and to
otherwise determine the boundaries of the subdivision;
         (b)   Adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions and partitions;
         (c)   Whenever there has been established or adopted a system of
coordinates, ties into this system, but in the absence of such a system,
township, and section, and donation land claim lines within or adjacent to the
plat;
         (d)   Whenever the city has established the centerline of a street
adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision/partition, the location of this
line and monuments found or reset; and
         (e)   All other monuments found or established in making the survey of
the subdivision/partition, are required to be installed by the provisions of
this chapter.
      (3)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines, and centerline of
streets, and lot and block lines with dimensions, bearings, or deflection
angles and radii, arcs, points of curvature, and tangent bearings. Tract
boundary and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest ten seconds with
basis of bearings. All distances shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth
foot. Error of closure shall be within the limit of one foot in 10,000 feet;
      (4)   The center and side lines of all streets, the width of the portion
being dedicated, the width of existing rights-of-way, and the widths of each
side of the centerline, indicating thereon the radius and center angle. Block
corner curb data to be shown separately;
      (5)   All easements clearly labeled and identified and, if clearly of
record, the recorded reference. If any easement is not definitely located of
record, a statement of the easement. Easements shall be denoted by fine dotted
lines. The widths of the easement and the lengths and bearings of the lines
thereof, and sufficient ties thereto, to definitely locate the easement with
respect to the subdivision/partition must be shown. If the easement is being
dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s
certificate of dedication;
      (6)   Lot or parcel numbers beginning with the number “1” in each block
and numbered consecutively in a clockwise direction, unless in conflict with
adjoining subdivisions or partitions;
      (7)   Block numbers beginning with the number “1” and continuing
consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision/
partition. The numbers shall be solid and have sufficient size and thickness to
stand out and shall be solid and have sufficient size and thickness to stand
out and shall be so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block numbers in an
addition to a subdivision of the same name shall be a continuation of the
numbering in the original subdivision/partition; and
      (8)   Appropriate words, symbols, or legends distinguishing lots intended
for sale from land parcels to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private,
with all dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined in every
case.
   (E)   Certifications. The following certifications shall appear on the final
map as submitted. The certificates may be combined where appropriate:
      (1)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
recorded title interest in the land subdivided or partitioned, consenting to
the preparation and recording of the map; provided, however, that the
signatures of parties owning the following types of interests may be omitted if
their names and the nature of their interests are set forth on the map:
         (a)   Rights-of-way, easements, and other interest; and
         (b)   Rights-of-way, easements, or reversions which by reason of
changed conditions, long disuse, or laches, appear to be no longer of practical
use or value, where release thereof is impossible or impractical to obtain. Any
subdivision/partition map, including land originally patented by the United
States or the state, under patent reserving interest to either or both of these
entities, may be recorded under the provision of this chapter without the
consent of the United States or the state thereto, or to dedication made
thereon if the interest reserved is not inconsistent with the use for which the
land is being subdivided or partitioned.
      (2)   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, offering for
dedication all parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any
public use; except those lots or parcels other than streets, which are intended
for the exclusive use of the lot or parcel owners in the subdivision/partition,
their licensees, visitors, tenants, and servants;
      (3)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by the surveyor responsible
for the survey and final map, the signature of each surveyor to be accompanied
by his or her seal; and
      (4)   Provision for additional certificates and acknowledgments required
by law.
   (F)   Approval by City Engineer/engineering consultant.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the final plat and accompanying data, the City
Engineer or city’s engineering consultant shall review the final plat and
documents to determine that the plat conforms with the approved tentative plan,
and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this
chapter.
      (2)   The City Engineer/engineering consultant shall examine the plat for
compliance with requirements for accuracy and completeness and shall collect
such fees as are provided by this chapter. He or she may make checks in the
field to verify that the plat is sufficiently correct on the grounds, and he or
she may enter the property for this purpose.
      (3)   If the City Engineer/engineering consultant determines that there
has not been full conformity, he or she shall advise the subdivider/partitioner
of the changes or additions that must be made and afford the subdivider/
partitioner 60 days to make such changes or additions.
      (4)   If the City Engineer/engineering consultant determines that full
conformity has been made, he or she shall so certify. If full conformity has
not been made within 60 days, the city may require that the applicant submit a
new final plat and application fee.
   (G)   Final approval of the Commission. Upon return of the final map by the
City Engineer/engineering consultant, the Planning Commission shall examine the
same in detail to determine whether the map conforms with the tentative map and
with all changes permitted and all requirements imposed as a condition of its
acceptance. If the Planning Commission does not recommend approval of the map,
the city shall advise the subdivider/partitioner in writing of the changes or
additions that must be made for this purpose and shall afford him or her 60
days to make the same. If The Planning Commission determines that the map
conforms to all requirements, the city shall approve the same; but before
certifying its approval thereon, it shall require the subdivider/partitioner to
file the agreement and bond, or make the deposit required in division (H) and
(I) below; and when the agreement and bond have been filed, and approved as
prescribed, the Planning Commission approval shall be endorsed upon the map by
execution of the appropriate certificates as prescribed by law. If full
conformity has not been made within 60 days, the city shall deny the final plat
and require the applicant to submit a new final plat application with the fee.
   (H)   Agreement for improvements. Before Planning Commission approval is
certified on the final map, the subdivider/partitioner shall either install
required improvements or shall execute and file with the City Recorder an
agreement between himself or herself and the city, specifying the period within
which he or she or agent or contractor shall complete all improvement work
required by or pursuant to this chapter; and providing that if he or she shall
fail to complete the work within the period, the city may complete the same and
recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider/partitioner. The
agreement shall also provide for reimbursement of the city by the subdivider/
partitioner for the cost of inspection by the City Engineer. The agreement may
also provide for the construction of the improvements in units, for an
extension of time under conditions therein specified, and for the termination
of the agreement upon the completion, and proceedings under an assessment
district act for the construction of improvements deemed by the city to be at
least the equivalent of the improvements specified in the agreement and
required to be constructed by the subdivider/partitioner. The agreement shall
be recorded in the county deed records.
   (I)   Bond.
      (1)   The subdivider/partitioner shall file with the agreement, to assure
his or her full and faithful performance thereof, bonding or other performance
guarantee that is determined to be acceptable to the city as follows:
         (a)   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the state; or
         (b)   Cash, or line of credit from a bank.
      (2)   The amount of the bond or other surety shall be a sum determined by
the City Engineer/consultant and approved by the City Council. The amount shall
be sufficient to cover the city’s cost of improvements, engineering,
inspection, and incidental expenses, and to cover replacement and repair of
existing streets and other public improvements damaged in the development of
the subdivision/major partition. The bond or other surety must be approved by
the City Attorney as to form.
      (3)   In the event the subdivider/partitioner fails to complete all
improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the
city has to complete same, or if the subdivider/partitioner fails to reimburse
the city for the cost of inspection, engineering, and incidental expenses, and
to cover cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other
improvement damages in the development of the subdivision, the city shall call
on the surety for reimbursement or shall appropriate from any cash deposit
funds for reimbursements. In any such case, if the amount of surety bond or
cash deposit exceeds all cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider/
partitioner shall be liable to the city for the difference.
   (J)   Filing of final plat. Approval of the final plat by the City Council,
as provided in this chapter, shall be conditioned on its prompt recording with
the county. The subdivider/partitioner shall, without delay, submit the final
plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the
final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 30 days
after the last required approving signature has been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.040) (Ord. 242, passed 5-7-2007)
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 151.35 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide planning and
design standards for public and private transportation facilities, utilities,
and other public improvements required, and development. All public
improvements shall be in conformance with the city’s Public Works Standards.
   (B)   When standards apply. Unless otherwise provided, the standard
specifications for construction, reconstruction, or repair of transportation
facilities, utilities, and other public improvements within the city shall
occur in accordance with the standards of this subchapter. No development may
occur unless the public works related to development comply with the public
works requirements established in this subchapter.
   (C)   Standard specifications. The city established written standard
construction specifications consistent with the design standards of this
subchapter and application of engineering principles. They are incorporated in
this code by reference to Public Works Standards and Specifications.
   (D)   Conditions of development approval. No development may occur unless
required public works are in place or guaranteed, in conformance with the
provisions of this code. Improvements required as a condition of development
approval, when not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, shall be roughly
proportional to the impact of development. Written findings in the development
approval shall indicate how the required improvements are roughly proportional
to their impact.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.010) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.36 TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Development standards. No development shall occur unless the
development has frontage or approved access to a public street, in conformance
with the provisions of §
151.37, and the following standards are met.
      (1)   Streets within or adjacent to a development shall be improved in
accordance with Public Works Standards and Specifications and the provisions of
this section.
      (2)   Development of new streets, and additional street width or
improvements planned as a portion of an existing street, shall be improved in
accordance with the Public Works Standards and Specifications, and public
streets shall be dedicated to the applicable city, county, or state
jurisdiction.
      (3)   New streets, driveways, and aprons shall be paved with hard surface
according to the city’s Public Works Standards and Specifications.
      (4)   The city may accept a future improvement guarantee (e.g., owner
agrees not to remonstrate (object) against the formation of a local improvement
district in the future) in lieu of street improvements if one or more of the
following conditions exist.
         (a)   A partial improvement may create a potential safety hazard to
motorists or pedestrians.
         (b)   Due to the developed condition of adjacent properties, it is
unlikely that street improvements would be extended in the foreseeable future,
and the improvement associated with the project under review does not, by
itself, provide increased street safety or capacity, or improved pedestrian
circulation.
         (c)   The improvement would be in conflict with an adopted capital
improvement plan.
         (d)   The improvement is associated with an approved land partition on
property zoned residential and the proposed land partition does not create any
new streets. In this case, sidewalk improvements may be required prior to
issuance of building permits.
   (B)   Variances. Variances of the Public Works Standards and Specifications
may be granted in accordance with §
152.224.
   (C)   Creation of rights-of-way for streets and related purposes. Streets
shall be created through the approval and recording of a final subdivision or
major partition plat; except the city may approve the creation of a street by
acceptance of a deed, provided that the street is deemed essential by the City
Council, and the deeded right-of-way conforms to the standards of this section.
All deeds of dedication shall be in a form prescribed by the City Engineer and
shall name “the city” as grantee.
   (D)   Creation of access easements. The city may approve an access easement
established by deed when the easement is necessary to provide for access and
circulation in conformance with §
151.37. Access easements shall be created and maintained in accordance with the
Uniform Fire Code § 10.207.
   (E)   Street location and width. Except as noted below, the location and
width of all streets shall conform to the Public Works Standards and
Specifications, as applicable, and approved street plan or subdivision/major
partition plat. Street location, width, and grade shall be determined in
relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public
convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of land
to be served by such streets. Where the location of a street is not shown in an
existing street plan or specific area plan, the location of streets in a
development shall provide for the continuance and connection of existing
streets in the surrounding areas, in conformance with division (H) below.
   (F)   Minimum rights-of-way and street sections. Street rights-of-way and
improvements shall be the widths in the Public Works Standards and
Specifications. A variance shall be required to vary the standards. Where a
range of width is indicated, the width shall be determined by the decision-
making authority based upon the following factors:
      (1)   Street classification in accordance to Public Works Standards and
Specifications;
      (2)   Anticipated traffic generation;
      (3)   On-street parking needs;
      (4)   Sidewalk and bikeway requirements based on anticipated level of
use;
      (5)   Requirements for placement of utilities;
      (6)   Street lighting;
      (7)   Minimize drainage, slope, and sensitive lands impacts, as
identified by the Public Works Standard and Specifications;
      (8)   Street tree location, as provided for in Public Works Standards and
Specifications—Street Trees;
      (9)   Protection of significant trees;
      (10)   Safety and comfort for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
      (11)   Need for street furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting, bus
shelters, and the like), when applicable; and
      (12)   Access needs for emergency vehicles.
                                Within Roadway Area            Planting
        Average                         Meridian On-           Strip/
        Daily   Right- Pavement Motor   and/or   Street        Drainage Sidewalks
Type of Trips   of-Way Width    Vehicle Center   Parking  Curb Swale    (on Both
Street* (ADT)   Width          Travel  Turn     (When        (on Both Sides)
                              Lanes   Lane     Allowed)      Sides)    
                                                             
                                      Within Roadway Area                Planting
              Average                         Meridian On-               Strip/
              Daily   Right- Pavement Motor   and/or   Street            Drainage Sidewalks
Type of       Trips   of-Way Width    Vehicle Center   Parking  Curb     Swale    (on Both
Street*       (ADT)   Width          Travel  Turn     (When            (on Both Sides)
                                    Lanes   Lane     Allowed)          Sides)    
                                                                       

                             6' - 10'
                             paved
Access ways           10' -  width,
and Multi-Use NA      18'    2' - 4'  NA      NA       None     None     None     None
Paths                        strips
                             on both
                             sides
                             Gravel
                             alleys
                             with 3"
                             of 1.5"
Alleys        NA      16'    minus    NA      NA       None     None     None     None
                             and 2"
                             of 3/4"
                             minus
                             rock
Arterial
Streets       1,000 - 60'    28'      12'     Per ODOT Per ODOT 16"      7' - 8'  5' - 10'
i.e.,         3,000                           Standard Standard Standard
Jefferson Ave
Collector     1,500 -
Streets       5,000
 Residential:
  Butte Ave           60'    28' -    12'     NA       Parallel 12"      7' - 8'  5' - 8'
                             36'
  Washington          60'    28' -    12'     NA       Parallel 12"      None
  Ave                        36'
 New                  60' -                                     12"
 collector            64'    38'      12'     NA       Parallel Standard 7' - 8'  5' - 8'
 streets
Commercial    1,500 -
Streets       5,000
 New                         26' -                     Parallel 12"
 commercial           60'    28'      12'              parking  Standard 7' - 8'  5' - 10'
 streets                                               only
County        1,500 -
Collector     5,000
Streets
 Dover Lane           60'    25'      12.5'   NA       Parallel None     None     None
 Ninth Street         60'    22'      11'     NA       Parallel None     None     None
Local         Less
Residential   than
Streets       1,500
 Existing
 streets (as          60'    24'      12'     NA       Parallel Optional None
 of 2006)
 New local            60' -                            Parallel 12"
 residential          64'    38'      12'     NA       parking  Standard 6' - 7'  5' - 6'
 streets                                               only
Notes to Table:
*   (A)   Hardscape planting strip with tree wells may be used in commercial and mixed-use
development areas where on-street parking is required.
(B)   Five-foot sidewalk may be installed in residential areas; five to ten foot sidewalk
may be installed in commercial areas.
(C)   Bike lanes are generally not needed on low volume (less than 3,000 ADT) and/or low
travel speed (less than 25 mph) streets (bikes can share the travel lanes with motor
vehicles).
(D)   Option for residential street with 24 feet of pavement width and five-foot wide
sidewalks or pathways, separated from roadway by drainage swale (no curbs). Sidewalks may
not be required on sum existing local streets when existing and future traffic volumes are
low, e.g., less than 500 ADT or ten dwellings.
(E)   Multi-use path subject to conditional use permit with site plan approval.
 
   (G)   Traffic signals and traffic calming features. Special paving may be
used to slow traffic in neighborhoods and areas with high pedestrian traffic.
   (H)   Future street plan and extension of streets.
      (1)   A future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction
with an application for a subdivision or major partition in order to facilitate
orderly development of the street system and comply with the Public Works
Standard and Specifications. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and
proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and
shall include other parcels within 400 feet surrounding and adjacent to the
proposed land division. The street plan is intended to show potential future
street extensions with future development.
      (2)   Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the parcel or
tract to be developed, when the Commission determines that the extension is
necessary to give street access to, or permit a satisfactory future division
of, adjoining land; and as necessary to continue the city’s street grid, in
conformance with the block standards in division (H)(5) below. The point where
these stub streets temporarily end shall conform to all of divisions (H)(2)(a)
to (H)(2)(c) below.
         (a)   These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties
are not considered to be cul-de-sacs (dead-end streets) since they are intended
to continue as through streets when the adjoining property is developed.
         (b)   A temporary barricade (e.g., fence, bollards, boulders, or
similar vehicle barrier) shall be constructed at the end of the street by the
subdivider/major partitioner and shall not be removed until authorized by the
city or other applicable agency with jurisdiction over the street. The cost of
the barricade shall be included in the street construction cost.
         (c)   Temporary turnarounds (e.g., hammerhead or bulb-shaped
configuration) that meet the requirements of the Fire District shall be
constructed for stub streets over 150 feet in length.
   (I)   Street alignment and connections.
      (1)   Blocks abutting a collector street and having their long side
adjacent to the collector street, shall be only one half block in width and
lots in such a half block shall face the local residential street, not the
collector street. Spacing between street intersections on collector streets and
arterial streets shall be at least 660 feet in length and 276 feet in width, as
measured from the centerline of the street, except spacing between street
intersection of any half block, abutting a collector street, shall be at least
660 feet in length and 160 feet in width, as measured from the centerline of
the streets.
      (2)    Spacing between local street intersections shall be at least 660
feet in length and 276 feet in width, as measured from centerline of the
streets, except where more closely spaced intersections are designed to provide
an open space, pocket park, common area, or similar public amenity subject to
site plan review and approval.
      (3)   All streets and alleys that abut a development site shall be
extended within the site to provide through circulation unless prevented by
environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or
compliance with other standards in this code. This exception applies when it is
not possible to redesign or reconfigure the street pattern to provide required
extensions. Land is considered topographically constrained if the slope is
greater then 15% for a distance of 250 feet or more. In the case of
environmental or topographical constraints, the mere presence of a constraint
is not sufficient to show that a street connection is not possible. The
applicant must show why the environmental or topographic constraint precludes
some reasonable street connection.
      (4)   Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to provide
direct access to existing or planned commercial services and neighborhood
facilities, such as schools, shopping areas, and parks.
      (5)   In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation
throughout the city, the maximum block length in new subdivision shall conform
to the provisions of §
151.37(J).
   (J)   Sidewalks, planter trips/swales, trails. Sidewalks, planter strips/
swales, and multi-use trails shall be installed in new subdivision and major
partitions, in conformance with the standards in Public Works Standards and
Specifications and adopted street plans. Maintenance of city owned sidewalks,
curbs, and multi-use trails in the continuing obligation of the city, except
the cost of repairs to damage caused by others shall be their responsibility
when known, and maintenance of city-owned planter strips/swales and privately-
owned sidewalks, planter strips/swales, and multi-use trails is the continuing
obligation of the adjacent property owner and shall based on standards set by
the city.
   (K)   Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out as to intersect at an
angle as near to a right angle as practicable, except where topography requires
a lesser angle or where a reduced angle is necessary to provide an open space,
pocket park, common area, or similar neighborhood amenity. In addition, the
following standards shall apply.
      (1)   Streets shall have at least 20 feet of tangent adjacent to the
right-of-way intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance.
      (2)   Local street intersections shall meet requirements of Public Works
Standards and Specifications.
      (3)   Intersections with arterial streets and collector streets shall
meet requirements of Public Works Standards and Specifications.
   (L)   Existing right-of-way. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to or
within a tract are led than the current standard width, additional rights-of-
way shall be provided at the time of subdivision, major partition, or other
development, subject to the provisions of §
151.35(D).
   (M)   Cul-de-sacs. A permanent dead-end street shall be no more than 200
feet long, shall not provide access to more than five dwelling units, and shall
only be used when the applicant demonstrates that environmental or
topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with
other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation:
      (1)   All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a circular turnaround.
Circular turnarounds shall have a radius of no less than 30 feet, and not more
than a radius of 40 feet (i.e., from center to edge of pavement); except that
turnarounds may be larger when they contain a landscaped island or landscaped
parking bay in their center. When an island or parking bay is provided, there
shall be a fire apparatus lane of 20 feet in width; and
      (2)   The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline
of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest
point of the pavement.
   (N)   Grades and curves. Grades shall not exceed 10% on any street (except
that local or residential access streets may have segments with grades up to
15% for distances of no greater than 250 feet), and:
      (1)   Centerline radii shall not be less than 700 feet on arterials, 500
feet on major collectors, 350 feet on minor collectors, or 100 feet on other
streets; and
      (2)   Streets intersection with a collector or greater functional
classification street, or streets intended to be ported with a sign or
signalization, shall provide a landing averaging 5% or less. Landings are that
portion of the street within 20 feet of the edge of the intersecting street at
full improvement.
   (O)   Curbs, curb cuts, ramps, and driveway approaches. Concrete curbs, curb
cuts, wheelchair, bicycle ramps, and driveway approaches shall be constructed
in accordance with standards specified in Public Works Standards and
Specifications.
   (P)   Streets adjacent to railroad right-of-way. Wherever the proposed
development contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, site plan
review and approval shall be required. New railroad crossings and modifications
to existing crossing are subject to review and approval by the Oregon
Department of Transportation.
   (Q)   Accesses with different classifications. If lot has access to two
streets with different classifications, primary access shall be from the lower
classification street.
   (R)   Alleys, public and private. Alleys shall be extended within new
development and conform to the standards in Public Works Standards and
Specifications. While alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, the corners of necessary alley intersections shall have radius of
not less than 12 feet.
   (S)   Private streets. Private streets shall not be used to avoid
connections with public streets. Gated communities (i.e., where a gate limits
access to a development from a public street) are prohibited. Design and
construction standards for private streets shall be the same as for public
streets.
   (T)   Street names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets in the county except for extensions
of existing streets. Street names, signs, and numbers shall conform to the
established pattern in the surrounding area, except as required by emergency
service providers.
   (U)   Survey monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to
acceptance by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s
registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the city that
all boundary and interior monuments shall be reestablished and protected.
   (V)   Street signs. The city, county, or state with jurisdiction shall
install all signs for traffic control and street names. The cost of signs
required for new development shall be the responsibility of the developer.
Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs
and other signs may be required.
   (W)   Mailboxes. Plans for mailboxes to be used and their location shall be
approved by the United States Postal Service.
   (X)   Street light standards. Streetlights shall be installed in accordance
with city standards.
   (Y)   Street cross-sections. The final lift of asphalt or concrete pavement
shall be placed on all new constructed public roadways prior to final city
acceptance of the roadway and within one year of the conditional acceptance of
the roadway unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. The final lift
shall also be placed no later than when 50% of the structures in the new
development are completed or one year from the commencement of initial
construction of the development, whichever is less. The construction standards
shall meet the requirements of Public Works Standards and Specifications.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.020) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.37 VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
   (A)   Intent to purpose.
      (1)   The intent of this section is to manage vehicle access to
development through a connected street system, while preserving the flow of
traffic in terms of safety, roadway capacity, and efficiency. Access shall be
managed to maintain an adequate “level of service” and to maintain the
“functional classification” of roadways as consistent with the Public Works
Standards and Specifications. Major roadways, including highways, arterials,
and collectors, serve as the primary system for moving people and goods. Access
management is a primary concern on these roads. Local streets and alleys
provide access to individual properties. If vehicular access and circulation
are not properly designed, these roadways will be unable to accommodate the
needs of development and serve their transportation function. This section
attempts to balance the right of reasonable access to private property with the
right of the citizens of the city and the state to safe and efficient travel.
It also requires all development to construct planned streets and to extend
local streets.
      (2)   To achieve this policy intent, state and local roadways have been
categorized in the Public Works Standards and Specifications by function and
classified for access purposes based upon their level of importance function.
Regulations have been applied to these roadways for the purpose of reducing
traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage attributable to access
systems, and to thereby improve the safety and operation of the roadway
network. This will protect the substantial public investment in the existing
transportation system and reduce the need for expensive remedial measures.
These regulations also further the orderly layout and use of land, protect
community character, and conserve natural resources by promoting well-designed
road and access systems and discouraging the unplanned division of land.
   (B)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private
streets within the city and to all properties that abut these streets.
   (C)   Access permit required. Access to a public street requires an access
permit in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Permits for access to city streets shall be subject to review and
approval by the city based on the standards contained in this section, and the
provisions of §
151.36. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, or it
may be attached to a land use decision notice or building permit as a condition
of approval; and
      (2)   Permits for access to county highways shall be subject to review
and approval by the county, except where the county has delegated this
responsibility to the city, in which case the city shall determine whether
access is granted based on adopted county standards.
   (D)   Traffic study requirements. The city of other agency with access
jurisdiction may require a traffic study prepared by a qualified unbiased
professional to determine access, circulation, and other transportation
requirements.
   (E)   Conditions of approval. The city or other agency with access permit
jurisdiction may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or
other vehicle access points, development of a frontage street, installation of
traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an
access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and
highway system.
   (F)   Access options. When vehicle access is required for development,
access shall be provided by one of the following methods.
      (1)   Option one. Access is from an existing or proposed alley.
      (2)   Option two. Access is from public street adjacent to the
development parcel. If practicable, the owner/developer may be required to
close or consolidate an existing driveway access as a condition of approving a
new access. Street accesses shall comply with the access spacing standards in
division (G) below.
      (3)   Double-frontage lots. When a lot has frontage onto two or more
streets, access shall be provided first from the street with the lowest
classification. For example, access shall be provided from a local street
before a collector or arterial street. Except for corner lots, the creation of
new double-frontage lots shall be prohibited in residential zones, unless
topographic or physical constraints require the formation of such lots. When
double-frontage lots are permitted in residential zones, a landscape buffer
with trees and/or shrubs and ground cover not less than 20 feet wide shall be
provided between the back-yard fence/wall and the sidewalk or street;
maintenance shall be assured by the owner through appropriate conditions of
approval (e.g., recorded covenant, deed restriction, and the like).
   (G)   Number of access points. The number of street access points for
multiple-family, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional developments
shall be minimized to protect the function, safety, and operation of the street
(s) and sidewalk(s) for all users. Shared access may be required, in
conformance with division (H) below, in order to minimize the number of access
points.
   (H)   Shared driveways. The city shall require shared driveways as a
condition of land division or site plan review, as applicable, for traffic
safety and access management purposes in accordance with the following
standards.
      (1)   Shared driveways and frontage streets may be required to
consolidate access onto a collector or arterial street. When shared driveways
or frontage streets are required, they shall be stubbed to adjacent developable
parcels to indicate future extension. STUB means that a driveway or street
temporarily end at the property line but may be extended in the future as the
adjacent parcel develops. DEVELOPABLE means that a parcel is either vacant or
it is likely to receive additional development (i.e., due to infill or
redevelopment potential).
      (2)   Access easements (i.e., for the benefit of affected properties)
shall be recorded for all shared driveways, including pathways, at the time of
final plat approval or as a condition of site development approval.
      (3)   Shared driveways and frontage lots are not required when existing
development patterns or physical constraints (e.g., topography, parcel
configuration, and similar conditions) prevent extending the street/driveway in
the future.
   (I)   Street connectivity and formation of blocks required. In order to
promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city,
land divisions and large site development shall produce complete blocks bounded
by a connecting network of public and/or private streets, in accordance with
the following standards (except as otherwise permitted as a result of site plan
review and approval).
      (1)   Block length and width. The minimum block length and width shall
not be less than:
         (a)   Residential zone: 600 feet minimum in length and 216 feet
minimum in width (including 16-foot-wide alley). Each lot shall be a minimum of
75 feet wide on the street front, and a minimum of 100 feet deep between street
and alley. Blocks shall be made up of a minimum total of 16 lots. Larger blocks
(increased by multiples of two lots on each long street-side) may be permitted
as a result of site plan review and approval;
         (b)   Main Street Commercial zone: 300 feet minimum in length and 216
feet minimum in width (including 16-foot-wide alley). Each lot shall be a
minimum of 25 feet wide on the street front, and a minimum of 100 feet deep
between street and alley. Blocks shall be made up of a minimum total of 24
lots. Larger blocks increased by multiples of four lots on each long street-
side) may be permitted as a result of site plan review and approval; and
         (c)   Industrial zone: 600 feet minimum in length.
      (2)   Exception. Exceptions to the above standards may be permitted as a
result of site plan review and approval, or when a pedestrian access way is
provided at or near mid-block, in conformance with the provisions of §
151.38, or when the existence of a railroad right-of-way precludes a street
connection from the block being made.
   (J)   Driveway openings. Driveway openings and curb cuts shall be the
minimum width necessary to provide the required number of vehicle travel lanes
(12 feet for each travel lane). The following standards (i.e., as measured
where the front property line meets the sidewalk or right-of-way) are required
to provide adequate site access, minimize surface water runoff, and avoid
conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians.
      (1)   Single-family, two-family, and three-family uses shall have a
minimum driveway opening width of 12 feet, and a maximum width of 36 feet.
      (2)   Multiple-family uses with between four and seven dwelling units
shall have a minimum driveway opening width of 24 feet.
      (3)   Multiple-family uses with more than eight dwelling units, and off-
street parking areas with 16 or more parking spaces shall have a minimum
driveway opening width of 24 feet, and a maximum width of 30 feet. These
dimensions may be increased if the city determines that more than two lanes are
required based on the number of trips generated or the need for turning lanes.
      (4)   Access widths for all other uses shall be based on 12 feet of width
for every travel lane, except that driveways providing direct access to parking
spaces shall conform to the parking area standards in §
152.182.
      (5)   Driveway aprons are required and shall be constructed of concrete
or asphalt and shall be installed from the property line to the edge of the
paved (proposed or existing) surface, as shown below in Figure 16.12.030K.
Driveway aprons shall conform to ADA standards for sidewalks and pathways.
   (K)   Fire access and parking area turnaround. A fire equipment access drive
shall be provided for any portion of an exterior wall of the first store of a
building that is located more than 150 feet from an existing public street or
approved fire equipment access drive. Parking areas shall provide adequate
aisles or turnaround areas for service and delivery vehicles so that all
vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. For requirements related to
cul-de-sacs, please refer to §
151.36.
   (L)   Vertical clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turnaround
areas, and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches
for their entire length and width.
   (M)   Construction. The following development and maintenance standards
shall apply to all driveways and private streets.
      (1)   Surface options. Driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds
shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable surfacing, or a durable
non-paving material may be used to reduce surface water runoff and protect
water quality.
      (2)   Surface water management. When a paved surface is used, all
driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds shall drain into roadside
swales or other retention areas to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto
streets and abutting property.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.030) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.38 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
   All new developments that are subject to site development review shall
comply with the following standards to promote non-motorized transportation
alternatives and ensure safe and convenient pedestrian access and circulation.
   (A)   Safe, direct, and convenient pathways. Pathways within developments
shall provide safe, reasonably direct, and convenient connections between
primary building entrances and all adjacent streets.
      (1)   Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) shall be
designed consistent with the Public Works Standards and Specifications.
      (2)   If the streets within the subdivision or neighborhood are lighted,
the city may also require lighting for pathways.
      (3)   The city may require landscaping within the pathway easement/right-
of-way for screening and the privacy of adjoining properties.
   (B)   Design and construction. Pathways shall conform to all of the
following standards.
      (1)   Vehicle/pathway separation. Where a pathway is along the side of a
driveway or street (public or private), it shall be raised six inches and
curbed, or separated from the driveway/street by a five-foot minimum strip with
bollards, a landscape berm, or other physical barrier. If a raised path is
used, the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with curb ramps.
      (2)   Housing/pathway separation. Pedestrian pathways shall be separated
a minimum of five feet from residential living areas on the ground-floor,
except at building entrances. Separation is measured from the pathway edge to
the closest dwelling unit. The separation area shall be landscaped to provide
buffering. Pathway/building separation may be required for commercial,
industrial, public, or institutional uses.
      (3)   Crosswalks. Where pathways cross a parking area or street
(“crosswalk”), it shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials,
humps/raised crossings, or painted striping. An example of contrasting paving
material is the use of a concrete crosswalk across an asphalt driveway. If
painted striping is used, it shall consist of thermoplastic striping or similar
type of durable application.
      (4)   Pathway/multi-use path surface. Pathway surfaces shall be concrete,
asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface approved by the city,
at least six feet wide, and shall conform to ADA requirements. Multi-use paths
shall be designed consistent with the Public Works Standards and Specifications
and constructed of asphalt or concrete.
      (5)   Accessible routes. Pathways shall comply with the Federal Americans
with Disabilities Act, which requires accessible routes of travel.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.040) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.39 STREET TREES.
   Street trees shall be planted for all developments that are subject to land
division or site plan review. Planting of trees on unimproved streets shall be
deferred until the construction of sidewalks.
   (A)   Growth characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on growth
characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead
clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. The
following should guide tree selection:
      (1)   Provide a broad canopy where shade is desired;
      (2)   Use low-growing trees for spaces under utility wires;
      (3)   Select trees which can be “limbed-up” where vision clearance is a
concern;
      (4)   Use narrow or columnar trees where awnings or other building
features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between buildings
and the street;
      (5)   Use species with similar grown characteristics on the same block
for design continuity;
      (6)   Avoid using trees that are susceptible to insect damage and avoid
using trees that produce excessive seeds or fruit;
      (7)   Select trees that are well-adapted to the environment, including
soil, wind, sun exposure, and exhaust. Drought-resistant trees should be used
in areas with sandy or rocky soil;
      (8)   Select trees for their seasonal color, as desired; and
      (9)   Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun.
   (B)   Caliper size. The minimum caliper size at planting shall be two
inches, based on the American Association of Nurserymen Standards.
   (C)   Spacing and location. Street trees shall be planted within planting
strips. Street tree spacing shall be based upon the type of tree(s) selected
and the canopy size at maturity. In general, at least one tree shall be planted
for each lot, and shall be spaced no more than 30 feet apart (e.g., for species
with a 30-foot spread), except where planting a tree would conflict with
existing trees, retaining walls, utilities, and similar physical barriers.
   (D)   Soil preparation, planting, and care. The developer shall be
responsible for planting street trees, including soil preparation, ground cover
material, staking, and temporary irrigation. The property owner shall be
responsible for tree care (pruning, watering, fertilization, and replacement as
necessary).
   (E)   Assurances. The city shall require the developer to provide a
performance and maintenance bond in an amount determined by the City Engineer,
to ensure the planting of the tree(s) and care during the first two years after
planting. Species must be approved by Public Works Department prior to
planting.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.050) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.40 OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Open space standard. Subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall set aside and dedicate open space. The Planning Commission shall
recommend, with final approval by the City Council, if a subdivision/developer
shall:
      (1)   Set aside and dedicate to the public for park and recreation
purposes, not less than 8% of the gross area of said development if the land to
be dedicated is suitable and adaptable for such purposes and is generally
located in an area planned for parks; or
      (2)   In lieu of setting aside land, pay into Park Acquisition and
Development Fund a sum of money equal to the fair market value of the land that
would have been donated under division (A)(1) above. For the purpose of
determining the fair market value, the latest value of the land as unplatted
and without improvements as shown on the County Assessor’s tax roll shall be
used. The sum so contributed shall be made for neighborhood or community
facilities within the area of the community that will reasonably benefit the
contributing subdivision.
   (B)   Recording of open space. The open space shall be recorded with the
final subdivision plat or separate legal instrument in accordance with
following methods:
      (1)   By dedication to the city as publicly owned open space. Open space
proposed for dedication to the city must be acceptable to the City Council with
regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition
(i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level one environmental
assessment), and budgetary and maintenance terms; or
      (2)   As privately owned open space, by leasing or conveying title
(including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association, or other
legal entity, with the city retaining the development rights to the property.
The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include
provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, and the like) acceptable
to the City Council.
   (C)   Expenditure of funds. Funds contributed in lieu of park land shall be
credited to a park acquisition and development fund and shall be deposited with
the City Treasurer. Such funds may be expended only on order of the City
Council for the purpose of acquiring, developing new parks, or maintaining
existing parks for recreation purposes.
   (D)   Additional open space. If the developer is required to reserve
additional land area in excess of the area in division (A) above for a park,
playground, or other public use, the land shall be acquired by the appropriate
public agency within 12 months following final plat approval, at a price agreed
upon prior to approval of the plat, or the reservation shall be released to the
property owner.
   (E)   System development charge credit. Dedication of land to the city for
public use areas shall be eligible as a credit toward any system development
charge for parks as may be adopted by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.060)
§ 151.41 SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER SERVICE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Sewer and water systems required. All subdivisions and major
partitions must be provided with a sanitary sewer collection system and water
delivery system which are connected to the city municipal systems. Sanitary
sewers and water mains shall be installed to serve each new development and to
connect developments to existing mains in accordance with Public Works
Standards and Specifications.
Where the City Engineer/engineering consultant determines they are applicable,
stubs for future extensions shall be provided.
   (B)   Sewer and water plan approval. Development permits for sewer and water
improvements shall not be issued until the City Engineer/engineering consultant
has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with Public
Works Standards and Specifications and irrigation district standards.
   (C)   Over-sizing. Proposed sewer and water systems shall be sized to
accommodate additional development within the area as projected by the
comprehensive plan. The over-sizing shall be eligible for system development
charge credits, as may be adopted by City Council.
   (D)   Permits denied. The city may deny or approve with conditions
development permits (e.g., as to development timing) where a deficiency exists
in the existing water or sewer system which cannot be rectified by the
development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to public health
or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal
standards pertaining to operation of domestic water and sewerage treatment
systems. Building moratoriums shall conform to the criteria and procedures
contained in O.R.S. 197.505.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.070)
§ 151.42 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   General provisions. The City shall issue a development permit only
where adequate provisions for storm water and floodwater runoff have been made
as determined by the City Engineer/engineering consultant. The city may require
the applicant to submit a drainage study prepared by a qualified professional
to be submitted with a land division application. A study shall be required for
developments greater than one acre.
   (B)   Accommodation of upstream drainage. Culverts and other drainage
facilities shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the
entire upstream drainage area in its current state, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
City Engineer/engineering consultant.
   (C)   Effect on downstream drainage. Where it is anticipated by the city
that the additional runoff resulting from permits will overload an existing
drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of permits until provisions
have been made for improvements of the potential condition or until provisions
have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the development in
accordance with city standards, and any applicable statutory requirements for
development moratoria.
   (D)   Easements. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage
way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and
maintenance in its current state.
   (E)   Street drainage. Streets shall be designed in such manner as to
provide storm water drainage from the center of the street to swales, drainage
ditches or other such means as the city shall approve. In no case shall storm
water be designated to drain from a development onto a street or adjacent lots,
except through an approved drainage way within an approved right-of-way or
easement.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.080) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.43 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Underground utilities. All utility lines, including, but not limited
to, those required for electric, communication, lighting, and cable television
services and related facilities, shall be placed underground, except for
surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes, and meter
cabinets which may be placed aboveground, temporary utility service facilities
during construction, and high capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts
or above. The following additional standards apply to all new subdivisions and
major partitions, in order to facilitate underground placement of utilities.
      (1)   The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the
serving utility to provide the underground services. Above-ground equipment
shall not obstruct vision clearance areas for vehicular traffic (§
151.37).
      (2)   The city reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-
mounted facilities.
      (3)   All new underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and water
mains installed in streets by the developer, shall be constructed prior to the
surfacing of the streets.
      (4)   Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid
disturbing the street or alley improvements when service connections are made.
   (B)   Easements. Easements shall be provided for all underground utility
facilities on the recorded plat.
   (C)   Exception to underground utility requirement. The standard applies
only to proposed subdivisions and major partitions. An exception to the
underground requirement may be granted when the applicant demonstrates that
physical constraints, such as sensitive lands, or existing development
conditions, preclude underground utilities.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.090) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.44 FIRE PROTECTION.
   Fire hydrants shall be placed in the subdivision as directed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.100) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.45 STREETLIGHTS.
   All subdivisions or major partitions shall install streetlights as directed
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.110) Penalty, see §
151.99
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.60 VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   An offer to sell, contract to sell, sale, or deed of conveyance of a
subdivision or major or minor partition or any part thereof, before a final
plat thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter has been
duly recorded, shall be a civil violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.010)
§ 151.61 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the City Council to notify the City
Attorney of any violation of this chapter and to sign any necessary complaints.
Alternatively, the Council may refer the complaint to the Planning Commission
with a request to provide recommended abatement measures to Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.020)
§ 151.62 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REAL ESTATE REGULATIONS.
   Prior to the sale of or contract to sell any lot within the subdivision, a
final subdivision plat shall be recorded and the subdivider/partitioner shall
file a “Notice to Intent” with the State Real Estate Commission, in conformance
with O.R.S. 92.345.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.030)
§ 151.63 CERTIFICATION CONFLICTS.
   When any provision of state law or of this chapter requires the execution of
any certificate or affidavit on the performance of any act by a person in his
or her official capacity who is also a subdivider, partitioner, or any agent or
employee thereof, such certificate or affidavit shall be executed, or such act
shall be performed by some other person duly qualified therefore and designated
so to act by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.040)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation, upon violation of this
chapter, shall be subject to fines, civil proceedings, or mediation as
determined by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.16.010)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Interpretation
   
152.004   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.015   Compliance with provisions of this chapter
   
152.016   Building permits and occupancy permits
   
152.017   Appeals
   
152.018   Filing fees
   
152.019   Public hearings
   
152.020   Authorization of similar uses
   
152.021   Proposed amendments
   
152.022   Final action
   
152.023   Abatement
Zoning Districts Established
   
152.035   Establishment of land use zones
   
152.036   Location of zones
   
152.037   Zoning map
Residential (R-1, R-2, and R-3) Zone
   
152.050   Purpose
   
152.051   Permitted land uses
   
152.052   Building setbacks
   
152.053   Lot area and dimensions
   
152.054   Building height
   
152.055   Building orientation
   
152.056   Architectural standards
   
152.057   Special standards for certain uses
   
152.058   Manufactured Home Residential (R-2) zone
   
152.059   Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) zone
Commercial (C-1) Zone
   
152.070   Purpose
   
152.071   Occupancy permit required
   
152.072   Permitted land uses
   
152.073   Conditional uses
   
152.074   Lot requirements
   
152.075   Building setbacks
   
152.076   Building orientation
   
152.077   Height restrictions
   
152.078   Pedestrian amenities
   
152.079   Special standards for certain uses
   
152.080   Off-street parking requirements
   
152.081   Sanitation regulations
   
152.082   Water regulations
   
152.083   Fences and walls
   
152.084   Foundation requirements
   
152.085   Landscaping requirements
Industrial (M-1) Zone
   
152.100   Purpose
   
152.101   Occupancy permit required
   
152.102   Permitted uses
   
152.103   Conditional uses
   
152.104   Lot requirements
   
152.105   Development setbacks
   
152.106   Height restrictions
   
152.107   Lot coverage
   
152.108   Water regulations
   
152.109   Fences and walls
   
152.110   Access
   
152.111   Sanitation regulations
   
152.112   Parking regulations
   
152.113   Limitations of use
Open Space/Public Facilities (O/S) Zone
   
152.125   Purpose
   
152.126   Occupancy permit required
   
152.127   Permitted uses
   
152.128   Conditional uses
   
152.129   Yards, minimum building setbacks
   
152.130   Height restrictions
   
152.131   Open space and building coverage
   
152.132   Water regulations
   
152.133   Fences and walls
   
152.134   Access
   
152.135   Sanitation regulations
   
152.136   Parking regulations
   
152.137   Foundation requirements
Supplemental Design and Use Regulations
   
152.150   Maintenance of minimum requirements of this chapter
   
152.151   General provisions
   
152.152   General provisions regarding accessory uses
   
152.153   Regulate fences, walls, and plant(ings) for safety
   
152.154   Vision clearance
   
152.155   Sign regulations
   
152.156   Historic structure preservation
   
152.157   Access and circulation
   
152.158   Moving buildings
   
152.159   Satellite receiving antenna
   
152.160   Minimum standards for the construction or alteration of service
stations
   
152.161   Service station abandonment
   
152.162   Manufactured dwelling park design and improvement standards
   
152.163   Landscaping requirements
   
152.164   Home occupations
   
152.165   Temporary use permits
Off-Street Parking Spaces and Loading Facilities
   
152.180   Compliance with chapter
   
152.181   Required off-street parking spaces
   
152.182   Parking facilities for the physically disabled
   
152.183   Required loading facilities
   
152.184   Parking design standards
   
152.185   Parking lot construction
   
152.186   Parking uses not identified in the table of off-street parking
requirements
   
152.187   Designated improvement standards for parking lots of four or more
spaces
   
152.188   Off-street loading requirements
   
152.189   Bicycle parking requirements
Site Plan Approval
   
152.200   Purpose
   
152.201   Applicability and public hearing requirement
   
152.202   Notice of intent to construct shall be first action required
   
152.203   Site plan committee
   
152.204   Procedures
   
152.205   Appeal
   
152.206   Revisions to an approved site plan
   
152.207   Time limit for compliance and procedure to extend time limit
Exceptions and Variances
   
152.220   Nonconforming uses
   
152.221   General exceptions to yard requirements
   
152.222   General exceptions to building height limitations
   
152.223   Projections into yard setbacks
   
152.224   Authorization to grant and deny variances
Conditional Uses
   
152.235   Purpose
   
152.236   Site plan approval required
   
152.237   Authorization to grant or deny conditional uses
   
152.238   Procedure for taking action on a conditional use application
   
152.239   Time limit on a permit for a conditional use
Amendments to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval
   
152.250   Purpose
   
152.251   Applicability
   
152.252   Major modifications
   
152.253   Minor modifications
Amendments to the Zoning Map and Text
   
152.265   Purpose
   
152.266   Legislative amendments
   
152.267   Quasi-judicial amendments
   
152.268   Conditions of approval
   
152.269   Record of amendments
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the city zoning standards.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.010)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   These standards are adopted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, peace, convenience, economic wellbeing, and the general welfare of the
city.
   (B)   These standards are not limited to, but intended specifically to
achieve the following designated objectives:
      (1)   To implement the comprehensive plan as adopted by the City Council
on November 13, 1978;
      (2)   To comply with O.R.S. Chapters 227 and 197;
      (3)   To promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the city;
      (4)   To protect the character and values of land and buildings, the
economic stability of zoning districts, and to enhance the quality of the
desired environment in each zone by preventing the intrusion of inharmonious
uses, preventing encroachment on desirable open space, providing for the safe
and efficient movement of present and future traffic, and assuring the
provision of necessary off-street parking space for vehicles;
      (5)   To provide the additional growth and development in a manner
appropriate to the character of the city and which will contribute to the
economic stability of the city;
      (6)   To assure that future development occurs in an orderly manner and
provides for economy and efficiency in public services and utilities; and
      (7)   To assure satisfactory physical relationships between zoning
districts of different uses and to minimize conflicts among land uses.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.020)
§ 152.003 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Headings. In the event there is any conflict or inconsistency between
the heading of a chapter, section, or division of this chapter and the context
thereof, the heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of such context.
   (B)   More restrictive provisions shall apply. Where a provision of this
chapter differs from another ordinance or requirement of the city, the
provision or requirement which is more restrictive shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.030)
§ 152.004 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine
includes the feminine and neuter; the word MAY is discretionary; the word SHALL
is mandatory. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUTTING. Adjoining with a common boundary line, except that where two or
more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall not be considered as
ABUTTING unless the common property line between the two parcels measures no
less than eight feet in a single direction.
   ACCESS or ACCESS WAY. Any way or means by which pedestrians and/or vehicles
shall have safe and adequate and usable ingress and egress to/from a property;
the right to cross between public and private property allowing pedestrians and
vehicles to enter and leave property.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A secondary housing unit on a single-family lot
used for residential purposes.
   ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A use or structure incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the property and located on the same lot as
the principal use, but not to be used for any residential purpose.
   ADJACENT. Near, close; for example, an industrial zone across the street or
highway from a residential zone shall be considered as ADJACENT.
   AGENT. Any person who represents or acts for any other person with regard to
ownership interest in either developed or undeveloped property. Includes a real
estate broker as defined in O.R.S. 696.010(12) but does not include an
attorney-at-law whose representation of another person consists solely of
rendering legal services.
   AISLE. The traveled way by which vehicles enter and depart parking spaces.
   ALLEY. A public way, permanently dedicated or reserved as a secondary means
of access to abutting property. An ALLEY is not a street as defined in this
section.
   APARTMENT. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by five or
more families living independently of each other.
   APPLICANT. Any person submitting an application in connection with either
developed or undeveloped property.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Premises used for the commercial storage or sale
of used automobile or truck parts or for the commercial storage, dismantling,
or abandonment of junk, obsolete automobiles, trailers, trucks, machinery, or
parts thereof, but not including such places where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building and such uses are not of a
commercial nature.
   BARNDOMINIUM. A steel structure originally intended for agricultural,
commercial, or industrial use that is placed upon a lot or parcel and has
living quarters constructed within it to serve as a single-family residence.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground. A BASEMENT shall be counted as a story
in building height measurement when the floor level directly above is more that
six feet above the average level of the adjoining ground.
   BLOCK. A contiguous series of lots bounded on all sides by streets, railroad
rights-of-way, or pedestrian access ways.
   BUILDING. A sidewall enclosed covered structure, or manufactured dwelling,
excluding a covered deck or patio without sidewalls, designed, built, or used
for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind.
   BUILDING, EXISTING. Any building, upon which construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the
effective date of amendments to the ordinance codified in this chapter, may be
completed, and thereafter shall be considered an EXISTING BUILDING.
   BUILDING LINE. A dashed or solid line on a site plan drawing or plot plan
drawing indicating the location of buildings or structures on the property and
the distance from the property lines as required by this chapter.
   CARGO CONTAINER CONVERSION. One or more cargo containers designed to ship
cargo by land, sea, and air that is being converted into a single-family
dwelling. Such cargo containers must be certified by the seller to have never
been used to carry hazardous material.
   CARPORT. A permanent covered parking space that is not a garage and meets
structural codes.
   CHURCH. A permanently located building or other structure commonly used for
religious worship and instruction by a religious society within commonly
accepted or historic meaning of the word.
   CITY. The municipality of Metolius, Jefferson County, Oregon. The municipal
corporation known as “City of Metolius.”
   CITY COUNCIL. Metolius City Council.
   CLINIC. A place where group medical services, which do not involve overnight
housing of patients, are offered or provided.
   COMMERCIAL. The purchase, sale, or other transaction involving the handling
or disposition, other than as included in the term “industrial,” as defined in
this section, of any article, substance, or commodity for livelihood or profit,
including shops for the sale of personal services, including professional
services, and places where commodities, services, or merchandise are sold or
agreement are made to furnish them.
   COMMISSION. The City of Metolius Planning Commission.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan adopted by the Commission and Council providing
the objectives and policy guidelines for the growth and development of the
city, including amendments thereto.
   CONTIGUOUS. Two or more parcels or units of land, including water, under a
single ownership which are not separated by an intervening parcel of land under
separate ownership, including limited access right-of-way which would deny
access between the two parcels under single ownership.
   CURBLINE. The line dividing the roadway from a planting strip or footway.
   DECK. A structure constructed of wood; a wooden platform structure built on
concrete pads or pressure-treated wooden timbers placed on the earth; or other
approved materials may be covered or uncovered. A COVERED DECK shall not be
considered a building unless it is enclosed by sidewalls.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
   DISABLED PARKING. Off-street parking spaces as required by the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act.
   DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units designed or intended as the
residence of two families living independently of each other on one lot or
parcel.
   DWELLING. A building, including structural additions, designed and/or used
as a residence for human occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease, and
physically separated from any other room or dwelling units which may be in the
same building, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a parcel of land or portion thereof
for specific purposes, where ownership of the land or portion thereof is not
transferred.
   FAMILY. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption or
legal guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit at which meals or
lodging may also be provided for not more than four additional persons,
excluding servants, or individuals or groups of not more than five persons,
excluding servants, who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption, or
legal guardianship, living in a dwelling unit.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including:
      (1)   Attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet;
      (2)   Basement, if the floor above is less than six feet above grade;
      (3)   Uncovered steps of fire escapes;
      (4)   Private garages, carports, or porches;
      (5)   Accessory water towers or conning towers; and
      (6)   Accessory off-street parking or loading spaces.
   FOURPLEX. A detached building containing four dwelling units designed or
intended as the residence of four families living independently of each other,
on one lot or parcel.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An association of persons or fraternal order which
has more than 50 active members and/or which carries on commercial activities
such as, but not limited to, dispensing or sale of alcoholic beverages.
   GARAGE. A building or structure intended to be used for motor vehicle
storage for the private use of a resident of a dwelling unit.
   GRADE. The surface of a lot, parcel, or tract of land. The average of the
finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls
are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, alley, or other public way,
the finished ground level should be measured at the elevation of the sidewalk,
alley, or public way.
   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USE. The manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging,
or assembling of products, the process of which requires or creates emissions
or discharges other than normal sanitary sewage wastes or the storage of
materials which require permits be issued by the Oregon State Department of
Environmental Quality.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. The vertical distance measured from the
“grade” to the highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs, to the deck line
of mansard roofs, or to the highest point of any structure, or gable, hip, or
gambrel roofs.
   HISTORIC AREA. Lands with sites, structures, and objects that have been
officially designated as having local, regional, statewide, or national
historical significance.
   HOME OCCUPATION. The lawful occupation carried on by a resident of a
dwelling as an accessory use within the same dwelling, or accessory structure,
on the same lot or parcel of land, in conformance with §
152.164.
   HOTEL (MOTEL). A building or group of buildings used for transient
residential purposes, containing three or more rental units which are designed
to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out for sleeping purposes.
   INDUSTRIAL. The making of commodities by manufacturing, assembling,
fabrication, generating, or compounding by manual labor or machinery. The term
includes physical or chemical processes or combinations thereof.
   LANDSCAPE. To improve by landscape architecture or gardening, or the result
thereof. The term LANDSCAPE includes primarily trees, grass, bushes, shrubs,
flowers, and garden areas, and incidental arrangements of fountains, patios,
decks, street furniture, and ornamental concrete or stonework areas and
artificial turf or carpeting.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE. The manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging,
warehousing, distribution, or assembling of product, the process of which does
not require or create emissions or discharges, other than normal sanitary
sewage wastes, or require the storage of materials which require permits issued
by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
   LIVESTOCK. Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for
profit or other purposes.
   LODGE. An association of persons or fraternal order which carries on no
commercial activities such as the sale of food or alcoholic beverages and has
fewer than 50 active members.
   LOT. A single unit of land created by a subdivision plat filed in the office
of the County Clerk, in conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92. The term LOT does
not include condominiums as used under O.R.S. 91.505 through 91.675, Unit
Ownership Law.
   LOT AREA. The total area of the lot measured in the horizontal plane within
the lot boundary lines exclusive of public or private streets, but inclusive of
any lawful easement providing access to other properties.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the bisecting
points of the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT LINE. Any line bounding a lot as defined in this section.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line on a lot abutting a street, other than an alley.
Corner lots have two FRONT LOT LINES.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line which is not a front line or rear lot
line.
   LOT, REVERSE CORNER. A corner lot which rears upon the side yard of another
lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
the widest point of the lot.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A transportable single-family dwelling conforming to the
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, but is not regulated by the Oregon
State Structural Specialty Code and Fire Life Safety regulations, and is
intended for permanent occupancy and must comply with all city codes.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As defined by O.R.S. Chapter 446. It does not
include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being rented or leased for
occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot if the subdivision
was approved by the local government unit having jurisdiction under an
ordinance adopted pursuant to O.R.S. 92.010 to 92.190.
   MODULAR HOME. A building, including structural additions, designed, built,
assembled, or erected from pre-built sections or modules, such as complete or
nearly complete wall sections transported to the site of assembly by vehicle,
and designed for use as a single-family residence. Use of pre-built trusses may
not cause a structure to be a MODULAR HOME.
   MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING. Housing that provides three or more dwellings on a lot
(e.g., multi- plexes, apartments, and condominiums).
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, LOT, PARCEL, OR USE. A lawful existing structure,
lot, parcel, or use at the time this title or any amendment thereto becomes
effective which does not conform to the requirements of the land division
ordinance or zone in which it is now located.
   OPEN SPACE. Lands used for agricultural or other open space used, and any
land area that would, if preserved and continued in its present use:
      (1)   Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources;
      (2)   Protect air or streams or water supply;
      (3)   Conserve landscape areas, such as public or private golf courses,
that reduce pollution and enhance the value of abutting or neighboring parks or
other open space, enhance recreation opportunities, preserve historic,
geological, and archeological sites; or
      (4)   Promote orderly urban development and minimize land-use conflicts.
   OWNER. A person whose name is on the most recently-recorded deed for a unit
of land, or his or her authorized agent, or his or her lawful representative
having legal authority to use, transfer, or lease that land.
   PARCEL. A tract of land as created by a partitioning of land.
   PARKING SPACE. An area designed for vehicular or bicycle parking that
complies with the zoning code provisions for parking.
   PATIO. A structure resting on the earth and often placed next to an exterior
sidewall of a building; usually a concrete slab resting on the earth, but may
also be made of other materials placed on the earth; may be covered or
uncovered. A COVERED PATIO shall not be considered a building unless it is
enclosed by sidewalls.
   PERSON. Unless context indicates otherwise, means and includes an
individual, partnership, corporation, and both public and private association
and club.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Metolius City Planning Commission.
   PLANTING STRIP. The part of a public right-of-way lying between a curb line
and a property line, and designated as an area to be landscaped and maintained
by the owner of adjacent property.
   PLOT PLAN. A drawing which shall include the lot dimensions; proposed and
existing structures, including dimensions and height of building(s); proposed
and existing setbacks from all property lines; driveway locations and off-
street parking locations; water and sewer locations and sidewalk locations.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use to which the property is or
may be devoted, and to which all other uses of the premises are accessory.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICES. A place where professional services (including, but
not limited to, accounting, law, medical, dental, counseling, and insurance)
are provided by licensed persons possessing specialized education
qualifications particular to their profession.
   PUBLIC USE. A structure or use intended to be used as a public facility and
to which all other uses on the premises are also public.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is
designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational,
seasonal, or emergency purposes, and has a gross floor area not exceeding 400
square feet in the set-up mode.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any privately owned place or facility that
provides temporary water, and/or electricity, and/or sewer hookups, and/or
sewage disposal, and/or rents space for the temporary parking of recreational
vehicles within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land
within the same ownership. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK does not include a place
used solely for the storage of recreational vehicles.
(O.R.S. Chapter 446)
   RESIDENCE or RESIDENTIAL USE. A structure or use designed or used for
occupancy as a human dwelling or lodging place, such as single-family dwelling,
duplex, triplex, fourplex, apartment, boarding, lodging, or rooming house,
manufactured home, mobile home, manufactured home park, or mobile home park.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A residential treatment or training home or adult
foster care home providing care for six to 15 individuals and licensed by the
state in accordance with O.R.S. 197.660 to 197.670.
   RESIDENTIAL HOME. A residential treatment or training home or adult foster
care home providing care for five or fewer individuals, and licensed by the
state in accordance with O.R.S. 197.660 to 197.670.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the boundary lines of an alley, easement,
street, or highway.
   ROADWAY. The portions of the right-of-way of a street or highway developed
for vehicular and bicycle traffic. New streets are required to be developed
with sidewalks.
   SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNA. A combination of:
      (1)   A device or structure used for receiving television,
telecommunication, or microwave signals transmitted via satellites from earth-
based transmitters; and
      (2)   An amplifier which is situated at the focal point of the receiving
components, the purpose of which is to magnify and transfer signals.
   SERVICE STATION. Any lot or parcel used in the normal course of business for
the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and lubricants for delivery on the
premises. May also include a convenience store or automotive services.
   SETBACK. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or
line of reference, such as a property line, to the nearest vertical wall or
other element of a building or structure (which is not exempted in §
152.223) as defined herein.
   SIGNS. An outdoor sign, display, message, emblem, device, figure, painting,
drawing, placard, poster, billboard, or other thing that is used, designed, or
intended for advertising purposes or to inform or attract the attention of the
public. The term includes the sign-supporting structure, display surface, and
all other component parts of the SIGN. When dimensions of the SIGN are
specified, the term includes the panels and frames, and the term includes both
sides of the SIGN of specified dimension or area, but the term shall not
include a SIGN as reasonably necessary or required by any branch or agency of
the government pursuant to any public law or regulation.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A structure designed and built exclusively for the
occupancy of one family. The structure may be site-built, a manufactured
dwelling, or a qualified mobile home. SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS include both
attached (e.g., townhomes), detached dwellings, and sustainable housing,
including barndominium and cargo containers meeting specified standards.
   SITE PLAN. A written plan with narrative prepared to scale, showing
accurately and with complete dimensions, all of the uses proposed for a
specific parcel of land.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, except the TOP STORY
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
top-most floor and ceiling or roof above.
   STREET. A public way which provides or will provide or is intended to
provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or
tracts of land. This includes the entire width between the right-of-way lines
of every public way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and includes the terms
“road,” “highway,” “lane,” “place,” “avenue,” “alley,” or other similar
designation which is commonly open to use by the public. PRIVATE STREETS are
located within a “tract,” and have an associated right-of-way for the benefit
of covenant parties.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change to the supporting members of a structure
including foundation, bearing walls, or partitions, columns, beams, girders, or
any structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. Something which is designed, intended, assembled, erected,
constructed, or built having a fixed base on, or fixed connections to the
ground or another structure. The word STRUCTURE shall be construed to include
any part thereof.
   SUBDIVISION and SUBDIVIDED LANDS. To divide an area or tract of land into
four or more lots, in conformance with O.R.S. Chapter 92, when such area or
tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single
ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   TRACT or AREA. Measurable extent or stretch of contiguous land.
   TRIPLEX. A detached building containing three dwelling units designed or
intended as the residence of three families living independently of each other
on one lot or parcel.
   USE. The purpose for which land or building is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   VISION CLEARANCE AREA. A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two
streets, or at the intersection of a street and a railroad right-of-way, as
provided in §
152.154.
   WALKWAY. A sidewalk or pathway designed for or used by pedestrians.
   YARD. An open area on a lot that is unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, and includes driveways.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard between the side lot lines and measured horizontally at
right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to the nearest point
of a building foundation. Any yard meeting this definition abutting on a street
other than an alley shall be considered a FRONT YARD.
   YARD, REAR. A yard between the side lot lines and measured horizontally at
right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point
of a building foundation.
   YARD, SIDE. The yard between the front and rear yard measured horizontally
at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of a building.
   ZONING DISTRICT. See §§
152.035 to
152.037.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.040) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.015 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Strict compliance required. Land shall be used and a structure or part
of a structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, occupied, or used
only as this chapter shall permit.
   (B)   Illegal occupancy. Any use of a premises or building or other
structure which deviates from or violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be an illegal occupancy, and the persons responsible therefor shall be
subject to penalties provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.016 BUILDING PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Notice of intent to construct shall be first action required. Prior to
securing any required building permit, or construction, reconstruction,
alteration, improvement, modification, erection, or moving in of any building,
storage sheds, fences, decks, or other types of structures within the city, the
owner shall submit for approval a notice of intent to construct which shall
include with it a plot plan as defined in §
152.004. Notice of intent forms shall be available from the City Recorder. The
city will notify the applicant if a site plan approval, in accordance with §§
152.200 to
152.207, is also required.
   (B)   Building permits. A building permit is required prior to any
construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, modification, or change
of use of a structure or lot if such is required under the Uniform Building
Code of the state. Building permits are issued by County Community Development,
not by the city. However, building permit applicants must possess an approved
notice of intent to construct (and approved site plan when required) endorsed
by the city before applying for a building permit with the county.
   (C)   City requirements for approval of a notice of intent to construct.
      (1)   The proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, or change of
use of a structure or lot must conform to the requirements of all applicable
law, including city ordinances. The city administrative officer(s), usually the
City Recorder and/or the Public Works Director, are responsible for reviewing
all notice of intent to construct applications and corresponding plot plans for
conformity with all city laws and ordinances as established within the city
municipal code.
      (2)   Upon the determination of the city administrative officer(s) that
the notice of intent to construct and plot plan conform to the city’s
requirements, then they shall approve the notice and endorse it with the city’s
seal so that it may be presented to County Community Development.
   (D)   When notice of intent to construct is denied. If the city
administrative officer determines that a notice of intent to construct and/or
corresponding plot plan does not meet all of the city’s requirements, they
shall not approve the notice. The city administrative officer shall provide a
written explanation detailing the reasons for the denial to the applicant.
   (E)   Appeal right. The approval or denial of a notice of intent to
construct is an appealable decision pursuant to §
152.017.
   (F)   Before any dwelling or other building to be used by humans is
occupied. Before any dwelling or other building to be used by humans is
occupied, it shall be connected to the established domestic water supply system
and city sanitary sewer system, and the storm water management/disposal system
shall meet the city standards in
Chapter 151.
   (G)   Occupancy permit required. Before any building designed or intended
for use by humans may be used, an occupancy permit issued by an approved and
authorized building inspector is required and shall be furnished to the City
Recorder by owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.020) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.017 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals of ruling of city administrative officer. Except where this
chapter directs an appeal to the City Council, an appeal from a ruling of a
city administrative officer regarding a requirements of this chapter, or an
administrative decision made by a city administrative officer related to his or
her duties under this chapter, may be made only to the Planning Commission in
the same manner as set out in division (B) below. An appeal from a ruling of
the Planning Commission on such an appeal may be made only to the City Council
pursuant to division (B) below as well.
   (B)   Who may file, and requirement to file appeal. Any aggrieved party may
appeal an action or ruling of the Planning Commission (or city administrative
officer) pursuant to this chapter within 15 days after the decision.
      (1)   Written notice of appeal required. Written notice of the appeal
shall be filed with the City Recorder, and including name, address, and phone
number of appellants, decision appealed, basis for appeal, and applicable
approved criteria.
      (2)   Failure to make timely filing of appeal. If an appeal is not filed
within the 15-day period, the decision shall be final.
      (3)   Public hearing required. If an appeal from a ruling of the Planning
Commission is filed, the City Council shall receive the decision and findings
from the City Recorder and shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal as
provided in §
152.019. If an appeal from a city administrative officer’s decision is filed,
the Planning Commission shall receive the decision and findings from the City
Recorder and shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal in accordance with
the procedures found in §
152.019.
      (4)   Costs. Appeals based on administrative decisions made by a city
administrative officer and appeals of Planning Commission decisions require an
appeal fee to be paid to the City Recorder as directed by §
152.018. An appellant who has paid the appeal fee related to an administrative
decision does not have to pay a second appeal fee if he or she appeals the
Planning Commission’s findings regarding his or her issue to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.030) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019)
§ 152.018 FILING FEES.
   Filing fees shall be paid to the City Recorder upon filing of a land use or
appeal application for which fees are required. Such fees shall not be
refundable. These fees shall be established and changed by City Council
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.040)
§ 152.019 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notices of public hearings required. Each notice of hearing authorized
or required by this chapter shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least ten working days prior to the date of hearing.
   (B)   When mailed notices are required.
      (1)   Requests for variance, conditional use, zone change. A notice of
hearing on a conditional use, a variance, or an amendment to a zone boundary
shall be mailed to the applicant and owners of property within 100 feet of the
property for which the variance, conditional use, or zone boundary amendment
has been requested. This notice shall:
         (a)   Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or
uses that would be authorized;
         (b)   List the applicable criteria from the ordinance and the plan
that apply to the application;
         (c)   Set forth the street address and other easily understood
geographical reference to the subject property;
         (d)   State the date, time, and location of the hearing;
         (e)   State that the failure to raise an issue by the close of the
record at or following the final evidentiary hearing, in person or by letter,
precludes appeal to LUBA based on the issue;
         (f)   State that failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford
the decision maker an opportunity to respond to an issue that is raised,
precludes appeal to LUBA based on that issue;
         (g)   Include the name of a local government representative to contact
and a telephone number where additional information may be obtained;
         (h)   State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence
relied upon by the applicant, and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;
         (i)   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be
provided at reasonable cost; and
         (j)   Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission
of testimony and the procedure for the conduct of hearings.
      (2)   Mailed at least ten days before hearing. The notice of hearing
shall be mailed at least ten working days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (3)   If zone boundary change includes mobile home park. Notice of a
mobile home park zone boundary change shall be given in accordance with the
provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 446.
   (C)   Failure to receive notice. Failure of a person to receive the notice
prescribed in this section shall not impair the validity of the hearing.
   (D)   Recess in hearing authorized. The Planning Commission and the City
Council may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to
serve further notice upon other property owners of persons it decides may be
interested in the proposal being considered. Upon recessing, the time and date
when the hearing is to be resumed shall be announced.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.050)
§ 152.020 AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES.
   The Planning Commission may, in a particular zone, recommend to the City
Council a use not listed in this chapter, provided the use is of the same
general type as the uses permitted in that zone by this chapter. However, this
section does not authorize the inclusion, in a zone where it is not listed, of
a use specifically listed in another zone, or which is of the same general type
and is similar to a use specifically listed in another zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.060)
§ 152.021 PROPOSED AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on all changes to the
comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance text, land division ordinance, and plan/
zone map. All proposed amendments shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures under §
152.019. Written notice of text and map amendments shall also be submitted to
the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development 45 days before the
first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be
reviewed.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.070)
§ 152.022 FINAL ACTION.
   (A)   Except as provided for under O.R.S. 227.178, the City Council shall
take final action on conditional use permits and variances, including the
resolution of all appeals to the City Council under O.R.S. 227.180, within 120
calendar days from the date a complete application is submitted to the city;
unless a written extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant.
   (B)   The 120-day time period will commence on the date the application is
deemed complete.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.080)
§ 152.023 ABATEMENT.
   In case a building or other structure is or is proposed to be located,
constructed, maintained, repaired, altered, or used, or land is or is proposed
to be used, in violation of this chapter, the building, structure, or land thus
in violation shall constitute a nuisance, and the city may utilize all legal
remedies available to it for enforcing this chapter, and as an alternative to
other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, may
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate proceedings to
prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate, or remove the unlawful
location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, or use.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.090)
ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
§ 152.035 ESTABLISHMENT OF LAND USE ZONES.
   This establishes the following land use zones.
 
Zone                          Abbreviated Designation
Commercial                    C
Industrial                    M-1
Manufactured home residential R-2
Multiple-family residential   R-3
Open space/public facilities  O/S
Residential                   R-1
 
(Prior Code, § 17.12.010)
§ 152.036 LOCATION OF ZONES.
   The boundaries of the zones listed in this chapter are indicated on the city
zoning map, which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, and on
file in the office of the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.020)
§ 152.037 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The official zoning map shall be maintained in the City Hall.
Amendments to this map shall be reflected as soon as practicable after adoption
by the City Council.
   (B)   Official ordinance text and map shall be maintained at the office of
the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.030)
RESIDENTIAL (R-1, R-2, AND R-3) ZONE
§ 152.050 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Residential Zone is intended to promote the livability, statement,
and improvement of the city’s neighborhoods.
   (B)   This subchapter provides standards for the orderly expansion and
improvement of neighborhoods based on the following principles:
      (1)   Make efficient use of land and public services, and implement the
comprehensive plan;
      (2)   Accommodate a range of housing needs, including owner-occupied and
rental housing;
      (3)   Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate
neighborhood scale; and
      (4)   Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks, and
neighborhood services.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.100)
§ 152.051 PERMITTED LAND USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   The land uses listed in Table 17.16.110.A are permitted in the
Residential Zone, subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Only land uses which are specifically listed in Table 17.16.110.A
may be permitted.
      (3)   The land uses identified with a “*” in Table 17.16.110.A require
conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use, in
accordance with §§
152.235 to
152.239.
Table 17.16.110.A
Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Residential Zones
R-1                       R-2               R-3
Single-Family Residential Manufactured Home Multiple-Family Residential
                          Residential
Table 17.16.110.A
Land Uses and Building Types Permitted in the Residential Zones
R-1                                                                R-2                                                                R-3
Single-Family Residential                                          Manufactured Home Residential                                      Multiple-Family Residential
(1)   Accessory buildings and structures (less than 240 sq. ft.)(1)   Accessory buildings and structures (less than 240 sq. ft.)(1)   Accessory buildings and structures (less than 240 sq. ft.)
(2)   Accessory structures (over 240 sq. ft.)*                  (2)   Accessory structures (over 240 sq. ft.)*                  (2)   Accessory structures (over 240 sq. ft.)*
(3)   Barndominiums meeting certain standards*                  (3)   Barndominiums meeting certain standards*                  (3)   Barndominiums meeting certain standards*
(4)   Bed & breakfast inns*                                     (4)   Bed & breakfast inns*                                     (4)   Bed & breakfast inns*
(5)   Churches*                                                 (5)   Churches*                                                 (5)   Churches*
(6)   Converted cargo containers meeting certain standards*     (6)   Converted cargo containers meeting certain standards*     (6)   Converted cargo containers meeting certain standards*
(7)   Duplexes (site-plan approval required)                    (7)   Duplexes (site-plan approval required)                    (7)   Duplexes (site-plan approval required)
(8)   Home occupations*                                         (8)   Government uses*                                          (8)   Government uses*
(9)   Government uses*                                          (9)   Home occupations*                                         (9)   Home occupations*
(10)   Livestock*                                               (10)   Livestock*                                               (10)   Livestock*
(11)   Lodges for civic organizations*                          (11)   Lodges for civic organizations*                          (11)   Lodges for civic organizations*
(12)   Manufactured homes on individual lots                    (12)   Manufactured dwelling parks (meeting standards in §     (12)   Manufactured homes on individual lots
                                                                   152.162)
(13)   Necessary public utilities*                              (13)   Manufactured homes on individual lots                    (13)   Multiple-family dwellings (site- plan approval required)
(14)   Professional offices*                                    (14)   Necessary public utilities*                              (14)   Necessary public utilities*
(15)   Public parks                                             (15)   Professional offices*                                    (15)   Professional offices*
(16)   Public schools and libraries*                            (16)   Public parks                                             (16)   Public parks
(17)   Residential facilities                                   (17)   Public schools and libraries*                            (17)   Public schools and libraries*
(18)   Single-family dwellings, including single-family modular (18)   Recreational vehicle parks*                              (18)   Residential facilities
homes                                                              (19)   Single-family dwellings, including single-family modular (19)   Single-family dwellings, including single-family modular
                                                                   homes                                                              homes
Note to table:
*   Uses marked with an asterisk are subject to conditional use permits, §§
152.235 to
152.239.
 
   (B)   Determination of similar land use. Similar use determinations shall be
made in conformance with the procedures in §
152.020.
   (C)   Prohibited land uses. Only uses specifically listed in Table
17.16.110.A and uses similar to those in Table 17.16.110.A are permitted in the
Residential zones. The following uses are expressly prohibited.
 
Table 17.16.110.B
Land Uses Prohibited in the Residential Zones
R-1                             R-2                             R-3
Single-Family Residential       Manufactured Home Residential   Multiple-Family Residential
(1)   Accessory dwelling unit(1)   Accessory dwelling unit(1)   Accessory dwelling unit
(2)   Commercial             (2)   Commercial             (2)   Commercial
(3)   Wireless communication (3)   Wireless communication (3)   Wireless communication
towers                          towers                          towers
 
(Prior Code, § 17.16.110) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.052 BUILDING SETBACKS.
   (A)   Building setbacks provide space for private yards, and building
separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight, and
air circulation.
   (B)   Building setbacks are measured from the closest building foundation to
the respective property line. Setbacks for decks and porches are measured from
the edge of the deck or porch to the property line. The setback standards, as
listed below, apply to primary structures as well as accessory structures. An
exception or variance is required in accordance with §§
152.220 to
152.224 to modify any setback standard.
      (1)   Front yard setbacks for residential uses.
         (a)   A minimum setback of 20 feet is required between the property
line and the foundation, except that an unenclosed porch may be within 15 feet
of the front property line, as long as it does not encroach into a public
utility easement.
         (b)   New garages and carports can be accessed from alleys or set back
from the front property line by a minimum of 20 feet.
         (c)   New housing shall also comply with the building orientation
standards in § 17.16.180.
      (2)   Rear yard setbacks. There shall be a rear yard of not less than
five feet in depth between the property line and the foundation on lots that
have alley access at the rear lot line. On lots that do not have alley access
at the rear lot line, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet in
depth.
      (3)   Side yard setbacks.
         (a)   The minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet between the
property line and the foundation.
         (b)   On corner lots, the interior side yard shall have a setback of
not less than ten feet, but the side yard setback on the street side of such
corner lot shall not be less than 20 feet.
      (4)   Setback exceptions.
         (a)   The following architectural features are allowed to encroach
into the yard setbacks: Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, and similar
architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than two feet.
         (b)   Porches, decks, and similar structures not exceeding 36 inches
in height may encroach into setbacks by no more than five feet.
         (c)   Walls and fences may be placed on property lines, subject to the
standards in §§
152.153 and
152.154.
      (5)   Special yards; distance between buildings on the same lot.
         (a)   To provide usable yard area and allow air circulation and light,
the minimum distance between buildings on the same lot shall be at least 12
feet.
         (b)   This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same
buildings separated from each other by a court, landscape yard, or other open
space.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.120) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.053 LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS.
 
                       Lot
Land Use      Lot Area Width/   Related Standards
                       Depth
Detached               Minimum
single-family          width:
housing;      Minimum: 75 ft.
manufactured  7,500    at front
homes on      sq. ft.  property All new housing shall have a primary entrance facing the street, in
lots;                 line     accordance with § 17.16.180B
barndominiums Maximum:  
and cargo     none     Maximum
containers             depth:
                       none
Manufactured  See § 17.16.200 for manufactured home park standards
home parks
                       Minimum
                       width:
              Minimum: 50 ft.
              5,625    per
              sq. ft.  housing
Multi-family  per      unit at  The maximum lot/parcel area shall comply with the standards in §§
housing       housing  front    151.35 to
              unit     property 151.45
                      line
              Maximum:  
              none     Maximum
                       depth:
                       none
Open spaces,
parks, and    None     None     NA
recreation
                       Minimum
              Minimum  width:
              area:    112 ft.
Two-family    11,250   at front The maximum lot/parcel area shall comply with the standards in §§
housing       sq. ft.  building 151.35 to
(duplexes)            line     151.45
              Maximum:  
              none     Maximum
                       depth:
                       none
 
(Prior Code, § 17.16.130) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.054 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (A)   General building height requirements. Building(s) or structure(s), or
portions thereof, shall not be erected to exceed a height of two stories and in
no instance shall the structure or building exceed a vertical height of 22 feet
for flat roofs or mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for gable,
hip, or gambrel roofs as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the lot.
   (B)   Multi-family dwellings. Building(s) or structure(s), or portions
thereof, shall not be erected to exceed a height of three stories, and in no
instance shall the building or structure exceed a vertical height of 30 feet,
as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.140) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.055 BUILDING ORIENTATION.
   (A)   All development shall be oriented to a street.
   (B)   The building orientation standard is met when all of the following
criteria are met:
      (1)   Compliance with the setback standards in §
152.052; and
      (2)   All buildings, including site-built, manufactured homes,
barndominiums, and cargo containers, shall have their primary entryway facing
the street. Multi-family building entrances used to comply with this standard,
may be entrances to individual units, lobby entrances, or breezeway/courtyard
entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces).
(Prior Code, § 17.16.150) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.056 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The architectural standards are intended to provide detailed,
human-scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building
styles.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to all of the following types of
buildings, and shall be applied during site plan review:
      (1)   Multi-family housing; and
      (2)   Duplexes.
   (C)   Standards. All buildings, which are subject to this section, shall
comply with all of the following standards. The graphics provided with each
standard are intended to show examples of how to comply. Other building styles
and designs can be used to comply, so long as they are consistent with the text
of this section. An architectural feature (i.e., as shown in the graphics) may
be used to comply with more than one standard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1030.jpg]
      (1)   Building form. All buildings shall incorporate design features such
as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to
preclude large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces, as shown in the
above figure. Along the vertical face of a structure, such features shall occur
at a minimum of every 30 feet, and on each floor shall contain at least two of
the following features:
         (a)   Recess (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance, or similar
feature) that has a minimum depth of six feet;
         (b)   Extension (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance, or similar
feature) that projects a minimum of two feet and runs horizontally for a
minimum length of four feet; and/or
         (c)   Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet or greater in
height.
      (2)   Eyes on the street. All building elevations visible from a street
right-of-way shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum
of 60% of front (i.e., street-facing) elevations, and a minimum of 30% of side
and rear building elevations, as applicable, shall meet this standard. PERCENT
OF ELEVATION is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing
doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. The standard applies to
each full and partial building story.
      (3)   Detailed design. All buildings shall provide detailed design along
all elevations (i.e., front, rear and sides). Detailed design shall be provided
by using at least two of the following architectural features on all
elevations, as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (may vary
features on rear/side/front elevations):
         (a)   Dormers;
         (b)   Gables;
         (c)   Recessed entries;
         (d)   Covered porch entries;
         (e)   Cupolas or towers;
         (f)   Pillars or posts;
         (g)   Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);
         (h)   Off-sets in building face or room (minimum 16 inches);
         (i)   Window trim (minimum four-inches wide);
         (j)   Bay windows;
         (k)   Balconies;
         (l)   Decorative patters on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles,
wainscotting, ornamentation, and similar features); and
         (m)   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
divisions (C)(3)(a) through (C)(3)(l) above.
      (4)   Garage or carport required. Every single-family and duplex dwelling
shall have a garage or carport of a minimum size of ten feet by 20 feet with
exterior materials matching the residence building.
      (5)   Supplemental design and use standards. The supplemental standards
in §§
152.150 to
152.165 shall also apply to all development.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.160) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.057 SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES.
   This section supplements the standards contained in §§
152.050 to
152.056. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control
the scale and compatibility of those uses within the Residential Zone.
   (A)   Accessory dwelling (attached, separate cottage, or above detached
garage). An ACCESSORY DWELLING is a small secondary housing unit on a single-
family lot. Accessory dwellings shall not be permitted.
   (B)   Manufactured homes on individual lots. Manufactured homes are
permitted on individual lots, subject to all of the following design standards,
consistent with O.R.S. 197.307(5). Exception: the following standards do not
apply to units that existed within the city prior to the adoption of Ordinance
194, 1995.
      (1)   Floorplan. The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and have
an enclosed floor area of not less than 1,200 square feet.
      (2)   Roof. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope
not less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees).
      (3)   Residential building materials. The manufactured home shall have
exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and appearance are
similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby
residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered
“superior” to metal siding and roofing).
      (4)   Garages and carports. The manufactured home shall have a garage or
carport constructed of like materials.
      (5)   Thermal envelope. The manufactured home shall be certified by the
manufacturer to meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for
a single-family dwelling constructed under the State Building Code. Evidence
demonstrating that the manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents” energy
efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope
certification requirement. Additional manufacturers certification shall not be
required.
      (6)   Placement. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated
and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the
manufactured home is located not more than 16 inches above grade, and complying
with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted O.A.R. Chapter 918. Where the
building site has a sloped grade, no more than 16 inches of the enclosing
material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home.
      (7)   Foundation skirt. The foundation area of the manufactured home
shall be fully skirted with block or poured concrete skirting.
      (8)   Siting restricted. Manufactured homes shall not be sited within any
historic district listed on the Register of Historic Landmarks and Districts.
   (C)   Manufactured home park. Manufactured home parks are permitted on
parcels of one acre or larger only within the Manufactured Home Zone (R-2)
subject to compliance with divisions (C)(1) to (C)(5) below.
      (1)   Permitted uses. Single-family residences, manufactured home park
manager’s office, home occupations, and accessory structures which are
necessary for the operation and maintenance of the manufactured home park
(e.g., landscape maintenance). Home occupations shall comply with §
152.164.
      (2)   Space. The minimum size pad or space for each home is 4,000 square
feet, provided that the overall density of the park does not exceed eight units
per acre.
      (3)   Setbacks and building separation. The minimum setback between park
structures is five feet. The minimum setback between park structures and public
street right-of-way is 25 feet. At least a ten-foot separation shall be
provided between all dwellings. Dwellings shall be placed a minimum of 14 feet
apart where flammable or combustible fuel is stored between units. Park
structures shall be placed no closer than five feet to a park street or
sidewalk/pathway. An accessory structure shall not be located closer than six
feet to any other structure or dwelling, except that a double carport or garage
may be built which serves two dwellings. When a double carport/garage is built,
the carport/garage shall be separated from all adjacent structures by at least
three feet.
      (4)   Perimeter landscaping. When manufactured homes are oriented with
their back or side yards facing a public right-of-way or abutting property, the
city requires installation of fencing and planting of a 15-foot wide landscape
buffer between the right-of-way and a manufactured home park for the privacy
and security of residents or aesthetics of the streetscape.
      (5)   Home design. Manufactured homes in parks shall meet the following
design standards, consistent with O.R.S. 197.314(6).
         (a)   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not
less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees).
         (b)   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing
which in color, material, and appearance are similar or superior to the
exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal
wood or wood-appearance siding is considered “superior” to metal siding and
roofing).
         (c)   Divisions (C)(5)(a) and (C)(5)(b) above do not apply to
manufactured homes which existed within the city prior to the effective date of
Ord. 194, 1995 except that these dwellings may not be transferred to another
lot, parcel, or manufactured home park within the city.
         (d)   The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to
meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for a single-family
dwelling constructed under the State Building Code. Evidence demonstrating that
the manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents” energy efficiency standards is
deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement.
Additional manufacturers certification shall not be required.
   (D)   Multi-family housing. Multi-family housing is allowed within the
Multi-Family Zone (R-3). MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING means housing that provides three
or more dwellings on an individual lot (e.g., multi-plexes, apartments,
condominiums, and the like). New multi-family developments shall comply with
all of the following standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1032.jpg]
      (1)   Building mass supplemental standard. Within the Multiple-Family
Zone (R-3), the maximum width or length of a multiple-family building shall not
exceed 160 feet (from end-wall to end-wall).
      (2)   Common open space standard. Inclusive of required setback yards, a
minimum of 15% of the site area shall be designated and permanently reserved as
usable common open space (e.g., patio, children’s play area, or similar usable
area in all multiple-family developments). The SITE AREA is defined as the lot
or parcel on which the development is planned, after subtracting any required
dedication of street right-of-way and other land for public purposes (e.g.,
public park or school grounds, and the like).
      (3)   Private open space standard. Private open space areas shall be
required for ground-floor and upper-floor housing units based on all of the
following standards.
         (a)   All ground-floor housing units shall have front porches, or rear
patios, decks, or similar usable area measuring at least 48 square feet.
GROUND-FLOOR HOUSING means the housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within
five feet of the finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and
landscaping).
         (b)   A minimum of 50% of all upper-floor housing units shall have
balconies or porches measuring at least 48 square feet. UPPER-FLOOR HOUSING
means housing units that are more than five feet above the finished grade.
         (c)   Private open space areas shall be oriented toward streets or
common open space areas, and away from adjacent single-family residences, trash
receptacles, parking, and drives to the greatest extent practicable.
      (4)   Trash receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be oriented away from
adjacent residences and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid
fence or wall of not less than six feet in height.
   (E)   Residential care home and facilities. Residential care homes and
facilities, as defined under §
152.004, shall comply with the following standards, consistent with O.R.S.
197.660-670.
      (1)   Licensing. All residential care homes shall be duly licensed by the
state.
      (2)   Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided for employees and
visitors, in accordance with §§
152.180 to
152.189.
      (3)   Site plan review. Development review shall be required for new
structures to be used as residential care homes or facilities, and for
conversion of an existing residence to be used as a residential care home, to
ensure compliance with the licensing, parking, and other requirements of this
code.
   (F)   Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure
on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the Residential Zone include
detached garages, sheds, workshops, green houses, and similar structures. All
accessory structures shall comply with all the following standards.
      (1)   Primary use required. An accessory structure shall be allowed
without another permitted use only with an approved conditional use permit.
      (2)   Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over an easement that
prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-
way. Shipping containers or other primarily metal containers or shells shall
not be used as an accessory use, including a storage building. Shipping
containers can be used to move personal property but cannot be located on the
property for more than 14 days. Accessory structures shall not have exterior
metal walls.
      (3)   Compliance with land division standards. The owner may be required
to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when
removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.
      (4)   Building height. The building height of detached accessory
structure shall not exceed 25 feet, as measured in accordance with §
152.054.
      (5)   Buffering. A minimum four-foot hedge or fence may be required to
screen the accessory structure from dwellings on adjacent lots, unless a
similar screen is provided on the adjacent lot or the distance to adjacent
dwelling(s) is greater than 50 feet.
   (G)   Bed and breakfast inns. The purpose of this division (G) is to provide
standards for the establishment of a bed and breakfast inn.
      (1)   Accessory use. A bed and breakfast inn must be a use that is
accessory to a household already occupying the structure as a residence.
(Requires conditional use permit).
      (2)   Maximum size. The bed and breakfast inn structure is limited to a
maximum of three bedrooms for guests and a maximum of six guests per night.
      (3)   Employees. The bed and breakfast inn may have up to two nonresident
employees for the facility.
      (4)   Food services. Food services may only be provided to overnight
guests of the bed and breakfast inn.
      (5)   Owner-occupied. The bed and breakfast inn shall be owner-occupied
and shall maintain the exterior physical characteristics of a single-family
dwelling. No separate structures shall be allowed (except for usual residential
accessory buildings such as sheds, or detached garages).
      (6)   Signs. Signs for a bed and breakfast inn must meet the standards in
§
152.155.
      (7)   Monitoring. All bed and breakfast inns must maintain a guest log
book. It must include the names and home address of guest, guests’ license
plate numbers if traveling by car, dates of stay, and room number of each
guest. The log must be available for inspection by city staff upon request.
   (H)   Barndominiums and cargo containers. Barndominiums and cargo containers
have certain design characteristics that denote the original intended use of
the structure other than a single-family dwelling. These structures have more
visual impact on a residential neighborhood than a site-built or manufactured
dwelling would have. For these reasons, these units will be required to be
placed on concrete foundations, have a minimum 3:12 roof, siding that is
commonly used on residential homes, and a reasonable amount of windows on each
floor. Further, a barndominium or cargo container conversion shall be required
to have an approval from the city for at least three to five of the listed
architectural features in §
152.056.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.170) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019; Ord. 263, passed 7-6-
2020) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.058 MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE.
   (A)   Occupancy permit required. Before any building designed or intended
for use by humans may be used, an occupancy permit issued by an approved and
authorized building inspector is required and shall be furnished to the City
Recorder by owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.010)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zone:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings, including single-family modular homes and
single-family manufactured homes, but not including mobile homes;
      (2)   Accessory building and structures, other than garages, with no more
than 240 square feet of combined floor area (except decks or patios, including
covered decks or patios, exceeding 240 square feet shall be permitted);
      (3)   Public parks;
      (4)   Duplexes (site plan approval as required in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required);
      (5)   Mobile homes and residential trailers on individual lots shall not
be treated as permitted uses or conditional uses under this chapter. Mobile
homes and residential trailers on individual lots presently sited within the
city limits shall be treated as nonconforming uses;
      (6)   Manufactured dwelling parks meeting the standards of §
152.162; and
      (7)   Residential homes.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.020)
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses require approval as provided in §§
152.235 to
152.239. Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235 to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
the conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
      (2)   Conditional uses which may be allowed are:
         (a)   Churches;
         (b)   Public schools and libraries;
         (c)   Governmental uses, such as City Hall, fire station, police
station, and offices of governmental agencies;
         (d)   Lodge for civic or fraternal organization;
         (e)   Necessary public utilities and public services with safeguards
against harm to adjacent or abutting residential property as required by the
City Council;
         (f)   Professional offices or medical facilities;
         (g)   Home occupation;
         (h)   Livestock;
         (i)   Accessory buildings and structures with more than 240 square
feet of combined floor area; and
         (j)   Recreational vehicle parks.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.030)
   (D)   Area requirements.
      (1)   Lot area.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings, single-family modular homes, single-
family manufactured homes, and manufactured home subdivision lots. Every lot
shall have a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet and an area of not less
than 7,100 square feet, and shall abut a street that is not an alley for no
less than 50 feet.
         (b)   Duplexes. Every lot shall have a minimum average width of not
less than 75 feet and an area not less than 5,325 square feet per family living
unit, and shall abut a street that is not an alley for no less than 75 feet.
         (c)   Manufactured dwelling parks. The minimum lot size for
manufactured home parks shall be that prescribed by the Oregon State Department
of Commerce regulations, but each lot shall abut a public or private street.
      (2)   Living area. Every single-family dwelling, including single-family
modular homes and single-family manufactured homes, shall contain a minimum of
1,000 square feet of living area (except manufactured homes located in a
manufactured dwelling park shall contain a minimum of 840 square feet of living
area).
      (3)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet in
depth.
      (4)   Side yard. On interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each
side of any building and side yard shall have a width of not less than ten
feet. On corner lots, the interior side yard shall have a width of not less
than ten feet but the side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not
be less than 20 feet in width.
      (5)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than five feet in
depth on lots which have alley access at the rear lot line. On lots which do
not have alley access at the rear lot line, there shall be a rear yard of not
less than ten feet in depth.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.040)
   (E)   Height restrictions.
      (1)   Mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be limited to one story.
      (2)   Other building or structure. Any other building or structure, or
portions thereof, shall not be erected to exceed a height of two stories and in
no instance shall the building or structure exceed a vertical height of 22 feet
for flat roofs or mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for gable,
hip, or gambrel roof’s as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.060)
   (F)   Parking regulations.
      (1)   Dwellings. Two parking spaces for each family dwelling unit shall
be provided on the lot, one of which shall be the garage or carport.
      (2)   Churches, lodges for civic organizations, schools, and libraries.
One parking space shall be provided on the lot for each four seats in the main
assembly rooms.
      (3)   Governmental uses, public utilities, and public services. One
parking space shall be provided on the lot for each permanent employee, plus
one parking space shall be provided for each four seats in the main assembly
area.
      (4)   Professional offices or medical facilities. Two parking spaces
shall be provided on the lot for each permanent employee.
      (5)   Home occupation. Additional parking spaces as determined by the
city during the conditional use process.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.070)
   (G)   Sanitation regulations. Before any mobile home, dwelling, or other
building to be used by humans is occupied, it shall be connected to the city
sanitary sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.080)
   (H)   Water regulations. Before any dwelling, or other building to be used
by humans, is occupied, it shall be connected to the established, local water
supply system.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.090)
   (I)   Foundation and skirting requirements.
      (1)   Manufactured homes. No manufactured home shall be allowed to remain
upon a lot for more than 90 days unless placed upon a continuous excavated and
backfilled foundation of block or concrete construction, constructed in
accordance with the Uniform Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the
perimeter with no more than 12 inches of the foundation exposed above grade, or
unless a skirt of metal, fiberglass, exterior plywood, or other sight-screening
material similar to the exterior surface and finish of the manufactured home is
placed entirely around the manufactured home from the ground to the floor
level, said foundation or skirt to be constructed, painted, and maintained in a
workmanlike manner.
      (2)   Other than manufactured homes. Every building (other than
manufactured homes) exceeding 120 square feet in floor area shall be placed
upon a concrete slab or permanent and continuous excavated and backfilled
foundation of block or concrete construction, constructed in accordance with
the Uniform Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the perimeter with no
more than 12 inches of the slab or foundation exposed above grade. (Not
applicable to decks or patios.)
      (3)   Time limit to complete foundation and the like. The required
concrete slab or permanent foundation shall be completed within 90 days of the
date of the issuance of the required occupancy permit or the date of the
written notice by the city to the owner of record at the address shown on the
Tax Assessor’s record, if required, whichever is later.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.100)
   (J)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Multi-sectional. A manufactured home placed outside a manufactured
home subdivision, or outside a manufactured home park, shall be multi-sectional
(“double wide” or wider).
      (2)   Minimum roof pitch. Manufactured homes shall have a roof with a
minimum pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet of run.
      (3)   Certified thermal envelope. Manufactured homes shall be certified
by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance
standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance
standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State
Building Code as defined in O.R.S. 455.010. Evidence demonstrating that the
manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents” energy efficiency standards is
deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement.
Additional manufacturers certification shall not be required.
      (4)   Siting restricted. Manufactured homes shall not be sited adjacent
to any structure listed on the Register of Historic Landmarks and Districts.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.110)
(Ord. 194, passed - -1995) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.059 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE.
   (A)   Occupancy permit required. Before any building designed or intended
for use by humans may be used, an occupancy permit issued by an approved and
authorized building inspector is required and shall be furnished to the City
Recorder by owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.010)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zone:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings, including single-family modular homes and
single-family manufactured homes, but not including mobile homes;
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures, other than garages, with no
more than 240 square feet of combined floor area (except decks or patios,
including covered decks or patios, exceeding 240 square feet shall be
permitted);
      (3)   Public parks;
      (4)   Duplexes (site plan approval required as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207);
      (5)   Multiple-family dwellings (site plan approval required as provided
in §§
152.200 to
152.207); and
      (6)   Residential facilities.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.020)
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses require approval as provided in §§
152.235  to
152.239. Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235  to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
the conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
      (2)   Conditional uses which may be allowed are:
         (a)   Churches;
         (b)   Public schools and libraries;
         (c)   Governmental uses such as City Hall, fire station, police
station, and offices of governmental agencies;
         (d)   Lodge for civic or fraternal organization;
         (e)   Necessary public utilities and public services with safeguards
against harm to adjacent or abutting residential property as required by the
City Council;
         (f)   Professional offices or medical facilities;
         (g)   Home occupation;
         (h)   Livestock; and
         (i)   Accessory buildings and structures with more than 240 square
feet of combined floor area.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.030)
   (D)   Area requirements.
      (1)   Lot area.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings, single-family modular homes and single-
family manufactured homes. Every lot shall have a minimum average lot width of
not less than 50 feet and an area of not less than 7,100 square feet, and shall
abut a street that is not an alley for no less than 50 feet.
         (b)   Duplexes. Every lot shall have a minimum average width of not
less than 75 feet and an area not less than 5,325 square feet per family living
unit, and shall abut a street that is not an alley for no less than 75 feet.
         (c)   Triplexes, four-plexes, apartments, and other multiple-family
dwellings. Site plan approval as provided under §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required. Every lot shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet
for the first unit, plus the additional minimum square footage based upon the
number of bedrooms per dwelling unit as shown in the following table, provided
that the overall density does not exceed one dwelling unit per 1,000 square
feet of lot area. Example:
            1.   A two-story triplex with two two-bedroom units and one one-
bedroom unit would require 5,000 + (2 x 1,250) + 900 = 8,400 square feet
minimum lot; and
            2.   A three-story apartment with nine one-bedroom units (three per
floor) would require 5,000 + (6 x 900) + (3 x 500) = 11,900 square feet.
 
                     Land Area              Land Area
                     First and Second Floor Third Floor and Above
Studio or efficiency 650 square feet        250 square feet
1 bedroom            900 square feet        500 square feet
2 bedroom            1,250 square feet      1,000 square feet
3 bedroom            1,850 square feet      1,550 square feet
4 bedroom            2,100 square feet      1,850 square feet
 
      (2)   Living area.
         (a)   Every single-family dwelling, including single-family modular
homes and single-family manufactured homes, and each dwelling unit of a duplex,
shall contain a minimum of 840 square feet of living area.
         (b)   Each dwelling unit of an apartment and multi-family dwelling,
other than as shown in division (D)(2)(a) above, shall contain the minimum
square feet of living area approved during the site plan approval process as
provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
         (c)   The area covered by the principal structure and its accessory
structures shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.040)
   (E)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet in
depth.
      (2)   Side yard. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side
of any building, and each side yard shall have a width of not less than ten
feet. On corner lots the interior side yard shall have a width of not less than
ten feet and the side yard on the street side of each corner lot shall not be
less than 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than five feet in
depth on lots which have alley access at the rear lot line. On lots which do
not have alley access at the rear lot line, there shall be a rear yard of not
less than ten feet in depth.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.050)
   (F)   Height restrictions.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings, single-family modular homes, single-family
manufactured homes, and duplexes. Building(s) or structure(s), or portions
thereof, shall not be erected to exceed a height of two stories and in no
instance shall the structure or building exceed a vertical height of 22 feet
for flat roofs or mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for gable, hip
or gambrel roofs, as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the lot.
      (2)   Apartments and multi-family dwellings. Building(s) or structure(s),
or portions thereof, shall not be erected to exceed a height of three stories,
and in no instance shall the building or structure exceed a vertical height of
30 feet, as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the lot. Maximum height shall
further be reduced as approved during the site plan approval process as
provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.060)
   (G)   Parking regulations.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings, single-family modular homes, single-family
manufactured homes, duplexes, triplexes, and four-plexes. Two parking spaces
for each dwelling unit shall be provided on the lot, one of which shall be the
garage or carport.
      (2)   Apartments and multi-family dwellings. The number of both covered
and uncovered parking spaces required for each dwelling unit shall be as
approved by the city during the site plan approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
      (3)   Churches, lodges for civic or fraternal organizations, schools, and
libraries. One parking space shall be provided on the lot for each four seats
in the main assembly rooms.
      (4)   Governmental uses, public utilities, and public services. One
parking space shall be proved on the lot for each permanent employee, plus one
parking space shall be provided for each four seats in the main assembly area.
      (5)   Professional offices or medical facilities. Two parking spaces
shall be provided on the lot for each permanent employee.
      (6)   Home occupation. Additional parking spaces as determined by the
city during the conditional use process.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.070)
   (H)   Sanitation regulations. Before any dwelling or other building to be
used by humans, is occupied, it shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer
system.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.090)
   (I)   Water regulations. Before any dwelling or other building to be used by
humans, is occupied, it shall be connected to the established, local water
supply system.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.090)
   (J)   Foundation requirements.
      (1)   Every building exceeding 120 square feet in floor area shall be
placed upon a concrete slab or permanent and continuous excavated and back
filled foundation of block or concrete construction, constructed in accordance
with the Uniform Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the perimeter with
no more than 12 inches of the slab or foundation exposed above grade. (Not
applicable to decks or patios.)
      (2)   The required concrete slab or permanent foundation shall be
completed within 90 days of the date of the issuance of the required occupancy
permit or the date of the written notice by the city to the owner of record at
the address shown on the Tax Assessor’s records, if required, whichever is
later.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.100)
   (K)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Multi-sectional. A manufactured home placed outside a manufactured
home subdivision, or outside a mobile home park shall be multi-sectional
(“double-wide” or wider).
      (2)   Minimum roof pitch. Manufactured homes shall have a roof with a
minimum pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet of run.
      (3)   Certified thermal envelope.
         (a)   Manufactured homes shall be certified by the manufacturer to
have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standard which reduce
heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-
family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code as defined in O.R.S.
455.010.
         (b)   Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured home meets “Super
Good Cents” energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior
thermal envelope certification requirement. Additional manufacturers
certification shall not be required.
      (4)   Siting restricted. Manufactured home shall not be sited adjacent to
any structure listed on the Register of Historic Landmarks and Districts.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.110)
(Ord. 194, passed - -1995) Penalty, see §
152.999
COMMERCIAL (C-1) ZONE
§ 152.070 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Commercial (C-1) Zone is to create and preserve areas
suitable for commercial uses and services on broad basis, to strengthen the
area as the logical place for people to gather and create a business center and
to serve as the central business area for the city.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.005)
§ 152.071 OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any building designed or intended for use by humans may be used, an
occupancy permit issued by an approved and authorized building inspector is
required and shall be furnished to the City Recorder by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.072 PERMITTED LAND USES.
   (A)   The uses listed in this section are permitted in the Commercial (C-1)
Zone. Only uses that are specifically listed in this section, and uses that are
approved by the Planning Commission as “similar” to those in this section, may
be permitted. The uses identified with a “CU” in this section require
conditional use permit approval prior to development or a change in use, in
accordance with §§
152.235 to
152.239.
   (B)   Land uses and building types permitted in the Commercial (C-1) Zone
are as follows:
      (1)   Commercial:
         (a)   Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, amusement uses) (CU);
         (b)   Hotels/motels;
         (c)   Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories;
         (d)   Office uses (i.e., those not otherwise listed);
         (e)   Personal and professional services (e.g., child care center
(CU), catering/food services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber
shops and salons, banks and financial institutions, and similar uses);
         (f)   Repair services, other than auto repair;
         (g)   Retail trade and services (inside an enclosed structure);
         (h)   Retail trade and services (outside an enclosed structure) (CU);
         (i)   Uses similar to those listed in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)(h)
above (subject to CU requirements, as applicable); and
         (j)   Grocery stores, food markets.
      (2)   Industrial: light manufacture (e.g., small-scale crafts, electronic
equipment, bakery, furniture, similar goods) when in conjunction with retail
(CU);
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Public and institutional:
         (a)   Churches and places of worship (CU);
         (b)   Clubs, lodges, similar uses (CU);
         (c)   Government offices and facilities (administration, public
safety, transportation, utilities, and similar uses);
         (d)   Libraries, museums, community centers, concert halls, and
similar uses;
         (e)   Public parking lots and garages;
         (f)   Private utilities (CU);
         (g)   Public parks and recreational facilities;
         (h)   Schools, public and private (CU);
         (i)   Special district facilities; and
         (j)   Uses similar to those listed in divisions (B)(4)(a) to (B)(4)(i)
above (subject to CU requirements, as applicable).
      (5)   Accessory uses and structures (less than 240 square feet combined
floor area); and
      (6)   Temporary retail businesses.
   (C)   Home occupations, public and institutional uses, accessory uses and
structures, and temporary retail businesses are subject to the standards in §
152.079. Home occupations are subject to the standards in §
152.164. Temporary uses are subject to the standards in §
152.165. CUs are subject to conditional use permit standards in §§
152.235 to
152.239.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.020)
§ 152.073 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Conditional uses require approval as provided in §§
152.235 to
152.239. Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235 to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.030) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.074 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   Minimum lot size shall be 2,500 square feet. Proposed commercial uses shall
meet setback and off-street parking requirements as specified during the site
plan approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207, and shall abut a street other than an alley for a minimum of 25 feet,
and must be in compliance with other sections of this code (landscape and
pedestrian circulation).
(Prior Code, § 17.28.040)
§ 152.075 BUILDING SETBACKS.
   (A)   Front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be ten feet
required between the property line and the foundation. The front ten feet of
the front yard shall be landscaped and maintained.
   (B)   Side yard setback.
      (1)   Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet. The required
side yard setback shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which
the commercial zone building, height exceeds 20 feet.
      (2)   Setback may be reduced based on Fire Code requirements/regulations.
   (C)   Rear yard setback.
      (1)   Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. The required rear
yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building,
located in a commercial zone, height exceeds 20 feet.
      (2)   Setback may be reduced based on Fire Code requirements/regulations.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.050)
§ 152.076 BUILDING ORIENTATION.
   This section is intended to promote the walkable, storefront character of
the “downtown” Commercial Zone by placing buildings close to the street. The
standards, as listed on the following page and illustrated above, compliment
the front yard setback standards in §
152.075.
   (A)   Applicability. 
      (1)   This section applies to new land divisions and all of the following
types of development within the “downtown” Commercial Zone (i.e., subject to
site design review):
         (a)   Public and institutional buildings; and
         (b)   Commercial buildings subject to site design review.
      (2)   Compliance with all of the provisions of divisions (B) through (E)
below shall be required.
   (B)   Building orientation standard. All of the developments listed in
division (A) below shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation
standard is met when all of the following criteria are met.
      (1)   The minimum and maximum setback standards in §
152.075 are met.
      (2)   (a)   Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to (facing)
the street. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units, lobby
entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard
entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces).
         (b)   Alternatively, a building may have its entrance facing a side
yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building entrance
and the street right-of-way.
      (3)   (a)   Off-street parking, driveways, or other vehicular circulation
shall not be placed between a building and the street that is used to comply
with division (B)(2) above.
         (b)   On corner lots, buildings and their entrances shall be oriented
to the street corner, as stated above; parking, driveways, and other vehicle
areas shall be prohibited between buildings and street corners.
   (C)   Active ground floor standard.
      (1)   The street-side portions of the lower floors of all buildings shall
contain shops, offices, lobbies, and other activities oriented toward the
passerby.
      (2)   Display windows for viewing the activity inside the building shall
be provided.
   (D)   Continuous building frontage.
      (1)   Buildings should be built to the setback standards in §
152.075 so as to create a near continuous line of storefronts.
      (2)   Access may be provided to the rear parking areas of the shops,
offices, and the like, by an internal walkway.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.060) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.077 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   The maximum height for any building, or portions thereof, shall not exceed
22 feet for flat roofs or mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for
gable, hip or gambrel roofs, as “height of building or structure” is defined in
§
152.004, when measured from centerline grade of the adjacent street, except a
vertical height of up to 30 feet may be approved during the site plan approval
process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.070) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.078 PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   This section is intended to complement the building orientation
standards in §
152.076 by providing comfortable and inviting pedestrian spaces within the
Commercial (C-1) Zone.
      (2)   Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for
socializing, resting, and enjoyment of the city’s commercial areas, and
contribute to a walkable district.
   (B)   Pedestrian amenity standards.
      (1)   Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right-of-way
(i.e., on the sidewalk or curb) when approved by the city (for city streets),
the county (for county roads), or the Oregon Department of Transportation
(“ODOT”) for state highways.
      (2)   Every commercial development shall provide at least one of the
pedestrian amenities listed and illustrated below:
         (a)   A plaza, courtyard, square, or extra-wide sidewalk next to the
building entrance (minimum width of eight feet);
         (b)   Sitting space (i.e., benches or ledges) between the building
entrance and sidewalk with a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in
width;
         (c)   Building, canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection
(minimum projection of four feet over a private sidewalk or other privately
owned pedestrian space); and/or
         (d)   Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture,
and the like).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1034.jpg]
      (3)   The example shown in the illustration above is meant to illustrate
examples of pedestrian amenities. Other types of amenities and designs may be
used.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.080) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.079 SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section supplements the standards contained §§
152.071 to
152.078. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control
the scale and compatibility of those uses within the Commercial District:
      (1)   Residential uses;
      (2)   Public and institutional uses;
      (3)   Accessory uses and structures;
      (4)   Outdoor storage and display; and
      (5)   Light manufacture.
   (B)   Residential uses. Residential use is not permitted within the
Commercial District. (Residential uses that existed prior to the effective date
of this code are nonconforming uses and exempt from this section.)
   (C)   Public and institutional uses. Public and institutional uses (as
listed in §
152.072(B)) are allowed in the Commercial (C-1) Zone.
   (D)   Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure
on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the Commercial (C-1) Zone
include small workshops, greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and similar
structures. Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all permitted land
uses within the Commercial (C-1) Zone, as identified in §
152.072(B). Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards.
      (1)   Combined floor area. Combined floor area shall be less than 240
square feet.
      (2)   Primary use required. An accessory structure shall not be allowed
before or without a primary use, as identified in §
152.072(B).
      (3)   Setback standards. Accessory structures shall comply with the
setback standards in §
152.075.
      (4)   Restrictions. A structure shall not be placed over a recorded
easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the
public right-of-way.
      (5)   Compliance with subdivision standards. The owner may be required to
remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval when
removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.
   (E)   Sidewalk displays. Sidewalk display of merchandise and vendors shall
be limited to those sidewalks on private property; to cards, plants, gardening/
floral products, food, books, newspapers, bicycles, and similar small items for
sale or rental to pedestrians (i.e., non-automobile oriented). A minimum
clearance of four feet shall be maintained on the sidewalk at all times to
allow pedestrians to pass by the displays. Display of larger items, such as
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles/boats,
construction equipment, building materials, and similar vehicles and equipment,
is prohibited. Temporary events such as parades or other special events where
the city issues permits may modify this requirement.
   (F)   Light manufacture. Light manufacture uses are allowed in the
Commercial Districts. LIGHT MANUFACTURE means production or manufacturing of
small-scale goods, such as crafts, electronic equipment, bakery products,
printing and binderies, and similar goods. Light manufacture uses shall conform
to all of the following standards that are intended to protect the pedestrian-
friendly, storefront character of the downtown Commercial (C-1) Zone.
      (1)   Retail or service use required. Light manufacture is allowed only
when it is in conjunction with a permitted retail or service use (e.g., a
bakery with retail baked goods outlet).
      (2)   Location. The light manufacture use shall be enclosed within a
building, or shall be located within a rear yard not adjacent to a street.
   (G)   Adult businesses and adult entertainment. The purpose of this division
(G) is to establish parameters by which an adult business or facility whose
main purpose is to provide adult entertainment may locate within the city. An
adult business or use is permitted in any nonresidential zone within the city,
provided the following minimum standards are maintained.
      (1)   Spacing. A use defined as an adult business or entertainment use
must be at least the following distances away from the following pre-existing
uses (measured in a straight line):
         (a)   One thousand five hundred feet from a public or private school;
         (b)   One thousand five hundred feet from a church, synagogue, or
other place of worship;
         (c)   One thousand five hundred feet from a public park, library, or
recreational facility;
         (d)   Five hundred feet from a residential zone; and
         (e)   One thousand five hundred feet from a similar adult business or
adult entertainment use.
      (2)   Permit required. A permit shall be required from the Bureau of
Licenses for any proposed adult business or use and prior to the establishment
of this use or business. It shall be a violation of this code for any person or
persons to engage in conduct or carry on or to permit to be engaged in or upon
any premises within the city the operation of any adult business or use unless
a permit has first been obtained from the Bureau of Licenses. At no time shall
a person or persons by employed by such a use prior to a permit issued by the
Bureau of Licenses.
      (3)   Application requirements. An applicant for an adult business or use
shall provide the following:
         (a)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Business occupation or employment for the three years
immediately preceding the date of the application;
         (c)   Business license and permit history of the person operating a
business identical to or similar to those regulated by this code section;
         (d)   Whether such person previously operating such business in this
or any other city or state under any license or permit, has had such license or
permit revoked or suspended. Reasons for any permit suspension or revocation
shall be provided, and the business activity or occupation of the person
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation shall be provided;
         (e)   The name, address, telephone number, birth date, and principal
occupation of the applicant and managing agent;
         (f)   The name, address, telephone number of the proposed business or
use, and a written description of the exact nature of the business to be
operated;
         (g)   The names, addresses, telephone number, birth dates of all
partners in the business or use. Included shall be the principal occupation of
each of the partners whether general, limited, or silent, and the respective
share of the business held by each partner. If a corporation, the corporate
name, a copy of the Articles of Incorporation, and the names, addresses, birth
dates, telephone numbers, and principal occupations of every officer, director,
and shareholder (having more than 5% of the outstanding shares) and the number
of shares held by each;
         (h)   Any criminal convictions or arrests relating to theft,
controlled substances, gambling, prostitution, obscenity, racketeering, fraud,
or tax evasion as defined in O.R.S. Chapter 166, of each applicant and natural
person enumerated in divisions (G)(3)(a) to (G)(3)(h) herein;
         (i)   All residence addresses of all persons described in divisions
(G)(3)(a) to (G)(3)(h) above within the past three years;
         (j)   A personal financial statement of each natural person enumerated
in divisions (G)(3)(a) to (G)(3)(h) above, including the location of all bank
accounts, the amounts respectively deposited therein, and a complete listing of
all outstanding debts and loans; and
         (k)   Each applicant and person described within divisions (G)(3)(a)
to (G)(3)(h) above shall appear in person before the County Sheriff, or his or
her designee, for fingerprinting and the taking of photographs.
      (4)   Confidentiality. The application form required pursuant to this
section, which contains personal and business information, shall remain
confidential to the maximum extent permitted by law.
   (H)   Home occupations, commercial transition neighborhoods. This division
(H) applies only to existing residential use lots within the Commercial (C-1)
Zone. Home occupations are permitted only in residential dwellings existing at
the time of adoption of this code and are subject to the following standards.
      (1)   Appearance of residence.
         (a)   The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully built
enclosed structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward
appearance of a business.
         (b)   The home occupation shall not result in any structural
alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or
building code occupancy classification.
         (c)   The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of
development approval (i.e., prior development permit approval).
         (d)   No products and or equipment produced or used by the home
occupation may be displayed outside any structure.
      (2)   Storage.
         (a)   Outside storage is prohibited.
         (b)   On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic,
explosive, noxious, combustible, or flammable) beyond those normally incidental
to residential use is prohibited.
         (c)   Storage of inventory, products, equipment, and fixtures
associated with the home occupation shall be allowed in any structure.
      (3)   Employees.
         (a)   Other than family members residing within the dwelling located
on the home occupation site, there shall be no more than one full time employee
at the home occupation site at any given time. As used in this subchapter, the
term HOME OCCUPATION SITE means the lot on which the home occupation is
conducted.
         (b)   Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the
home occupation, so long as they do not report to work or pick up/deliver at
the home.
         (c)   The home occupation site shall not be used as a headquarters for
the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch
to other locations.
      (4)   Vehicles, parking, and traffic.
         (a)   One commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home
occupation is allowed at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that
will not encroach onto the public right-of-way, including the sidewalk and
planter strip, when parked in the driveway or other location on the home
occupation site.
         (b)   There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries
to or from the home occupation site daily. Commercial vehicle deliveries are
allowed during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. weekdays, excluding
holidays.
         (c)   There shall be no more than two client or customer vehicles at
any one time and no more than eight per day at the home occupation site or in
the right-of-way abutting the lot.
      (5)   Business hours. There shall be no restriction on business hours,
except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily.
      (6)   Prohibited home occupation uses.
         (a)   Any activity that produces radio, television, other electronic
interference, noise, glare, vibration, smoke, or odor beyond allowable levels
as determined by local, state, or federal standards, or that can be detected
beyond the property line is prohibited.
         (b)   Any activity involving on-site retail sales is prohibited,
except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home
occupation or retail use that does not result in more than two vehicle trips
per hour is allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music by
music teachers, art or craft supplies by arts or crafts instructors, computer
software by computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by home
business are allowed subject divisions (H)(1) to (H)(6) of this section. Also,
the business hours of retail operation would be restricted to 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
         (c)   Any uses described in this section or uses with similar
objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor,
dust, smoke, or vibration, such as:
            1.   Ambulance service;
            2.   Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels, or animal
boarding;
            3.   Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting and
detailing; or
            4.   Repair, reconditioning, or storage of motorized vehicles,
boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes, appliances, or large equipment on-
site.
      (7)   Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer or city designee may
visit and inspect the site of home occupations in accordance with this
subchapter to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations with reasonable
notice during normal business hours. In the event of neighbor complaint(s), the
home occupation shall cease and desist immediately upon notification by the
city.
      (8)   Site plan required. At the point in time that the home occupation
no longer conforms to divisions (H)(1) to (H)(8) of this section, owner shall
terminate home occupation or submit and gain site plan approval to conform to
commercial development standards.
   (I)   Temporary retail businesses. This division (I) is to set parameters
for temporary seasonal retail businesses operating for a maximum of 30 working
days per calendar year which take place either inside or outside an enclosed
structure: e.g., Christmas tree sales, or seasonal fruit and/or vegetable
stands (other temporary uses refer to § 152.165).
      (1)   Temporary retail business may be allowed under the following policy
and guidelines as established by the City Council.
         (a)   The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and
does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior
development permit approval).
         (b)   The applicant has proof of the property owner’s permission to
place the use on his or her property.
         (c)   No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the
temporary use, which is needed by the property owner to meet the minimum
parking requirement under §§
152.180 to 152.189.
         (d)   The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by §
152.154 and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets.
         (e)   Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the
other uses of the property; as required by §
152.157.
         (f)   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including
vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights that affect an
adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do
not affect the adjoining use.
         (g)   The use is adequately served by sewer and water, if applicable.
(The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any relating permits.)
      (2)   City Recorder may, with Mayor’s approval, under the guidelines in
division (I)(1) above, issue a permit for a maximum of 30 working days per
calendar year to an operator to conduct such commercial endeavor.
      (3)   Operator shall pay, in advance at time of application for permit, a
fee per day plus a clean-up/damage deposit, set by City Council as part of the
policy and guidelines; fee shall be refundable if permit is not approved, and
clean-up/damage deposit shall be refundable to the extent it is not required
for clean-up/damage repair expenses; operator shall be responsible for actual
expense exceeding deposit.
      (4)   Any permit issued by City Recorder may be for less than 30 working
days, but in no case shall any operator be allowed to operate a total of more
than 30 working days per calendar year.
      (5)   Failure to meet the conditions of the permit or creating a nuisance
may be cause for the city to cancel the permit. The permit may be cancelled by
providing written notice to the permit holder. The decision to cancel the
permit may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the
City Recorder within three days of the written cancellation notice.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.090) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.080 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Side and rear yards, where approved, may be used for parking or access for
parking or loading. All structures must meet the parking requirements in §§
152.180 to
152.189.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.100) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.081 SANITATION REGULATIONS.
   Before any structure or building to be used by humans is occupied, restroom
facilities shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.101) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.082 WATER REGULATIONS.
   Before any dwelling, or other building to be used by humans, is occupied, it
shall be connected to the established Deschutes Valley Water District water
supply system.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.102) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.083 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   A solid wall or fence of not less than three feet and no more than six
feet in height may be required along a property line that is the zone boundary
abutting a residential district.
   (B)   Need for the fence or wall will be determined during site plan
approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.103)
§ 152.084 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Buildings exceeding 120 square feet in floor area. Every building
exceeding 120 square feet in floor area shall be placed upon a concrete slab or
permanent and continuous excavated and backfilled foundation of block or
concrete construction, constructed in accordance with the current Uniform
Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the perimeter with no more than 12
inches of the slab or foundation exposed above grade. (Not applicable to decks
or patios.)
   (B)   Time limit to complete foundation and the like. The required concrete
slab or permanent foundation shall be completed prior to the issuance of the
required occupancy permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.110) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.085 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   See §
152.163.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.120)
INDUSTRIAL (M-1) ZONE
§ 152.100 PURPOSE.
   To provide for light industrial uses such a light manufacturing, research,
transportation facilities, and similar uses that have a limited impact on
surrounding properties and are compatible with clean non-polluting industries
and to provide for heavier industrial uses by conditional use.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.005)
§ 152.101 OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any building designed or intended for use by humans may be used, an
occupancy permit issued by an approved and authorized building inspector is
required and must be furnished to the City Recorder by owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Site plan approval as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required.
   (B)   Light industrial listed below are permitted in the M-1 Zone. Land uses
with (CU) shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with §§
152.235 to
152.239:
      (1)   Industrial:
         (a)   Light manufacture (e.g., electronic equipment, printing,
bindery, furniture, and similar goods);
         (b)   Research facilities;
         (c)   Warehousing and distribution;
         (d)   Mini-warehouse and storage; and
         (e)   Similar uses.
      (2)   Commercial:
         (a)   Automobile-oriented uses (vehicle repair, sales, rental,
storage, service, and drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities);
         (b)   Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories;
         (c)   Outdoor commercial uses (e.g., outdoor storage and sales);
         (d)   Personal and professional services (e.g., child care, catering/
food services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber shops and
salons, banks and financial institutions, and similar uses);
         (e)   Repair services;
         (f)   Retail trade and services, not exceeding 60,000 square feet of
floor area per building;
         (g)   Wholesale trade and services, not exceeding 60,000 square feet
of floor area per building; and
         (h)   Uses similar to those listed in divisions (B)(2)(a) through (B)
(2)(g) above.
      (3)   Civic and semi-public uses:
         (a)   Government facilities (e.g., public safety, utilities, school
district bus facilities, public works yards, transit and transportation, and
similar facilities);
         (b)   Utilities (e.g., natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable, and
similar facilities);
         (c)   Special district facilities (e.g., irrigation district and
similar facilities); and
         (d)   Uses similar to those listed in divisions (B)(3)(a) to (B)(3)(c)
above.
      (4)   Accessory uses and structures;
      (5)   Wireless communication equipment; and
      (6)   Business parks (CU).
(Prior Code, § 17.32.020)
§ 152.103 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Site plan approval as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required.
   (B)   Conditional uses require approval as provided in §§
152.235 to
152.239. Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235 to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
conditional use and approved site plan.
   (C)   Conditional uses not listed in §
152.102(B) may be allowed, except for the following:
      (1)   Explosive manufacture or storage;
      (2)   Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction or dumping; and/or
      (3)   Any use which has been declared a nuisance by statute or ordinance,
or by any court of competent jurisdiction, or which may be obnoxious or
offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, or noise.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.030)
§ 152.104 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   Lot requirements for the Industrial (M-1) Zone will be determined by spatial
requirements for that use, associated landscaped areas and parking
requirements.
(Prior Code, 17.32.040)
§ 152.105 DEVELOPMENT SETBACKS.
   Development setbacks provide building separation for fire protection/
security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering,
and visual separation. Building setbacks are measured from the building
foundation to the respective property line.
   (A)   Front yard setbacks. The minimum front yard building setback shall be
15 feet, except that additional setback yards may be required to provide for
planned widening of an adjacent street.
   (B)   Rear yard setbacks. The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten feet,
except that buildings shall be setback from the Residential Zone by a minimum
of 20 feet.
   (C)   Side yard setbacks. The minimum side-yard setbacks shall be ten feet,
except that buildings shall be setback from the Residential Zone by a minimum
of 15 feet.
   (D)   Other yard requirements.
      (1)   Buffering. A 20-foot minimum buffer zone shall be required between
development and any adjacent Residential District. The buffer zone shall
provide landscaping to screen parking, service and delivery areas, and walls
without windows or entries, as applicable. The buffer may contain pedestrian
seating but shall not contain any trash receptacles or storage of equipment,
materials, vehicles, and the like. The landscaping standards in §
152.163 may require buffering other situations, as well.
      (2)   Neighborhood access. Construction of pathway(s) and fence breaks in
setback yards may be required to provide pedestrian connections to adjacent
neighborhoods or other districts.
      (3)   Building and Fire Codes. All developments shall meet applicable
Fire and Building Code standards, which may require setbacks different from
those listed above (e.g., combustible materials, and the like).
(Prior Code, § 17.32.050) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.106 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Maximum building or structure height shall be 22 feet for flat roofs
or mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for gable, hip, or gambrel
roofs, as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the industrial lot or parcel
of land.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall review each industrial development
proposal during the site plan approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207, and may increase or decrease the requirement as deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.060) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.107 LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   The maximum allowable lot coverage in the Light Industrial District is
75%. The maximum allowable lot coverage is computed by calculating the total
area covered by buildings and impervious (paved) surfaces, including accessory
structures.
   (B)   Compliance with other sections of this code may preclude development
of the maximum lot coverage for some land uses.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.070) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.108 WATER REGULATIONS.
   Before any dwelling, or other building to be used by humans, is occupied, it
shall be connected to the established, local water supply system.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.080) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.109 FENCES AND WALLS.
   Security fencing may be required to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.090)
§ 152.110 ACCESS.
   Vehicular and pedestrian access to a lot or parcel shall be from a dedicated
and improved public street other than an alley.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.100) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.111 SANITATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Before any industrial use building or structure is occupied, restroom
facilities shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   No liquid residue or byproduct from any industrial use may be
discharged into the city sanitary sewer system without Level IV processing by
the industry doing the discharging and properly certified by party(ies)
approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.110) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.112 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   As a general rule, one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of
retail or wholesale floor area, plus one parking space for each 150 square feet
of office and public use floor area, shall be required.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall review each industrial development
proposal and may increase or decrease the requirement as deemed necessary
during the site plan approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.120) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.113 LIMITATIONS OF USE.
   (A)   All uses must meet local, state, and federal environmental standards
relating to noise, smoke, odor, water, sewage, air emissions, dust, and
hazardous waste.
   (B)   Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner that will
not attract insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard. All
materials stored outdoors shall be screened from view of adjacent properties
and the public.
   (C)   All parking or loading shall be accommodated on the premises and
entirely off all public streets.
   (D)   The city may require pretreatment of any waste generated by the use.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.125) Penalty, see §
152.999
OPEN SPACE/PUBLIC FACILITIES (O/S) ZONE
§ 152.125 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the O/S Zone is to provide for open space areas of natural,
scenic, or historical significance, to provide areas for recreational use, and
to provide public facility uses such as public schools, wastewater treatment
facilities, well sites, and public works facilities.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.001)
§ 152.126 OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any building designed or intended for use by humans may be used, an
occupancy permit issued by an approved and authorized building inspector is
required and must be furnished to the city by owner.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.127 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The O/S Zone allows open space, recreation, school, and other public
uses. The uses listed in division (B) below are permitted in the Open Space (O/
S) Zone. Only uses that are specifically listed in division (B) below, and uses
that are approved as “similar” to those in division (B) below may be permitted.
The uses identified with a “CU” in division (B) below require conditional use
permit approval prior to development or a change in use, in accordance with §§
152.235 to
152.239. All uses shall require site plan approval as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207. Any physical changes to an approved site plan shall require approval
of an amended site plan.
   (B)   Land uses and building types permitted in the Open Space (O/S) Zone as
follows, and conditional uses (CU) are subject to approval as provided in §§
152.235 to
152.239:
      (1)   Community building;
      (2)   Concession stand providing food, beer, and/or wine;
      (3)   Museum;
      (4)   Public buildings, structures, and/or yards, excluding correctional
facilities;
      (5)   Public park, playground, swimming pool, skateboard park, or similar
recreation facilities intended for use by the public;
      (6)   Public play fields, sports complexes, and similar recreational
facilities without night lighting for play fields;
      (7)   Public reservoirs, well sites, pump stations, and similar utility
buildings or structures. Sewage treatment facilities;
      (8)   Public or private schools;
      (9)   Public trails, natural areas, open space, future park sites, and
similar public or special district owned minimal improvements;
      (10)   Public college or university;
      (11)   Accessory uses and buildings customarily used to support a
permitted use or an approved conditional use (CU);
      (12)   Minor repairs and maintenance to any permitted or conditional use;
      (13)   Parking lots and parking areas to serve a permitted or conditional
use;
      (14)   Public utility maintenance facilities and operation yards with
outdoor storage of materials and supplies;
      (15)   Public ball fields, sports complexes, and similar outdoor
recreational areas that have night lighting and/or amplified sound systems
(CU); and
      (16)   Permanent outdoor facilities for performance of music, theater,
and similar community events that have night lighting and/or amplified sound
systems (CU).
(Prior Code, § 17.36.010)
§ 152.128 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235 to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
   (B)   Conditional uses which may be allowed are:
      (1)   Necessary traffic directional or similar public service signs that
exceed four square feet; and/or
      (2)   Illuminated public service signs.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.020)
§ 152.129 YARDS, MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACKS.
   (A)   No building shall be located closer than 40 feet from a right-of-way
or from any side or rear property line.
   (B)   The setback requirement may be decreased to a minimum of zero feet at
the discretion of the Council if it finds that a lesser setback would not
adversely impact surrounding properties and would promote orderly development.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.030) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.130 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   Maximum building or structure height shall be 22 feet for flat roofs or
mansard roofs or other structures, and 30 feet for gable, hip, or gambrel
roofs, as “height of building or structure” is defined in §
152.004, when measured from the average grade of the industrial lot or parcel
of land.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.040) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.131 OPEN SPACE AND BUILDING COVERAGE.
   No requirements, except as provided in §
152.129.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.050)
§ 152.132 WATER REGULATIONS.
   Before any dwelling, or other building to be used by humans, is occupied, it
shall be connected to the established Deschutes Valley Water supply system.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.060) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.133 FENCES AND WALLS.
   Security fencing or retaining walls may be required, as determined during
the site plan review process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207, to protect the health, safety, and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.070)
§ 152.134 ACCESS.
   Vehicular and pedestrian access shall be from a dedicated and improved
public street other than an alley.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.080) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.135 SANITATION REGULATIONS.
   Before any building or structure is occupied, it shall be connected to the
city sanitary sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.090) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.136 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   One parking space for each 1,000 square feet of public use open space area,
plus one parking space for each 150 square feet of office and public use floor
area shall be required. The Planning Commission shall review each open space/
public facilities proposal, during the site plan review process as provided in
§§
152.200 to
152.207, and may increase or decrease the requirement as permitted by §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.100) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.137 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every building exceeding 120 square feet in floor area shall be placed
upon a concrete slab or permanent and continuous excavated and back filled
foundation of block or concrete construction, constructed in accordance with
the current Uniform Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the perimeter
with no more than 12 inches of the slab or foundation exposed above grade. (Not
applicable to decks or patios.)
   (B)   The required concrete slab or permanent foundation shall be completed
prior to the issuance of the final permit inspection, use, or the date of the
written notice by the city to the owner of record at the address shown on the
Tax Assessor’s records, if required, whichever is later.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.110) Penalty, see §
152.999
SUPPLEMENTAL DESIGN AND USE REGULATIONS
§ 152.150 MAINTENANCE OF MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS OF THIS CHAPTER.
   No lot or parcel area, yard, or other undeveloped area existing on or after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be reduced
below the minimum required for it by this chapter, and no lot or parcel area,
yard, or other open space which is required by this chapter for use shall be
used as the required lot or parcel area, yard, or other open space for another
use.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.151 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Must conform to laws. All buildings, structures, utilities, lots, and
tracts shall conform to this chapter, and to applicable provisions of the
current Uniform Building Code of the state, any other applicable codes of the
city, of the county, of the state, and of the United States of America.
   (B)   Occupancy permit required. Before any building designed or intended
for use by humans may be used, an occupancy permit issued by an approved and
authorized building inspector is required, and a copy shall be furnished to the
City Recorder.
   (C)   Manufactured homes. Every manufactured home shall comply with the
provisions of §
152.057(B) or (C), as applicable.
   (D)   Other buildings. Buildings other than manufactured homes in
manufactured home parks that exceed 120 square feet in floor area shall be
placed upon a concrete slab or permanent and continuous excavated and back-
filled foundation of block or concrete construction, constructed in accordance
with the current Uniform Building Code of the state, and enclosed at the
perimeter with no more than 12 inches of the slab or foundation exposed above
grade. (Not applicable to decks or patios.)
   (E)   Garage or carport required. Every detached and attached single-family
and duplex dwelling shall have a garage or carport of a minimum size of ten
feet by 20 feet with exterior materials matching the residence building.
   (F)   No bare metal siding or roofing allowed. No building or other
structure in residential or industrial zones shall have bare metal siding or
roofing. Baked enamel, vinyl, or painted surfaces shall be required.
   (G)   Clean-up requirements and time limit for completion. Within ten
working days after a building or other structure is completed and put into use:
      (1)   All scrap lumber, trash, debris, and other materials and equipment
used in completing the dwelling or other structure or facilities shall have
been removed from the premises; and
      (2)   All holes, underground structures and utilities, excavations, and
the like shall be filled to the rough grade level as indicated in the building
permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.020) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.152 GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING ACCESSORY USES.
   An accessory use shall comply with the requirements for a principal use,
except that additional standards for accessory uses may be required by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.030) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.153 REGULATE FENCES, WALLS, AND PLANT(INGS) FOR SAFETY.
   (A)   Fence regulations.
      (1)   Workmanship and materials. All fences must be constructed in a
workmanlike manner of attractive and properly finished materials. Fences will
be maintained in such a manner that will not be offensive or obnoxious to the
neighborhood.
      (2)   Maximum height or special permit requirements. Fences located on or
along any property line shall not exceed a vertical height of six feet above
existing natural grade at time of erection and/or construction, except as
permitted by variance procedures outlined in §§
152.220 to
152.224. Fences within front yards, including along side lot lines within front
yard setbacks, shall not exceed a vertical height of four feet above existing
natural grade.
      (3)   Clear vision at corners required. Any fence located within the
triangular area described in §
152.154 of this section shall be of open type construction and not exceed 36
inches in height, to permit clear vision across said triangular area.
      (4)   Use of barbed wire requires special permit. Fences shall not
utilize barbed wire in any way or fashion except as permitted by special
permit:
         (a)   The special permit for barbed wire may be granted by the City
Council upon approval of the application made by the property owner citing, as
reason, the necessity for use of barbed wire in providing security for the
affected property, and then only when evidence submitted by the property owner
clearly supports the need cited in the application;
         (b)   Permitted barbed wire shall be added to the top of another fence
of at least six feet in height above the existing natural grade;
         (c)   Provided such addition of barbed wire would not, solely in the
opinion of the City Council, infringe the public safety and welfare or the
individual rights of any adjacent property owner; and
         (d)   Special permits required by this section shall be revocable by
the City Council on ten working days’ notice, mailed to the property owner at
his or her last address on record in city files, and such notice may require
removal within the number of days specified by such notice.
      (5)   Electric fences restricted. Fences charged with electricity shall
not be allowed except under the following circumstances:
         (a)   When located on private property a minimum of three feet inside
a property line bounded by another fence or hedge, or more than 54 inches above
the existing natural grade on the inside of another fence;
         (b)   When powered by a commercially manufactured charger approved by
the Underwriters Laboratories, and rated and operated at no more than two and
one-half watts, 110 volts, and when said charger is located inside a building
or other structure, and is fused as specified by the manufacturer and local
electrical code;
         (c)   When powered by a commercially manufactured charger rated and
operated at no more than manufacturer’s specifications when attached to a
single six or 12 volt battery, and when said charger and battery are located
inside a building or other structure, and is fused as specified by the
manufacturer and local electrical code; and
         (d)   The charged wire shall be smooth and free of all barbs or other
sharp ends, and signs advising and warning the public that an electrically
charged fence is in use shall be prominently displayed at the property lines.
   (B)   Plants, shrubs, trees, hedges, and any other vegetation.
      (1)   Clear vision requirements. Plants, shrubs, trees, hedges, and any
other vegetation having their location within, or any part hanging over the
triangular area described in §
152.154 shall not be allowed to exceed 30 inches in height above the existing
natural grade, unless such planting shall permit a clear and mostly
unobstructed view from the top of the 30 inches maximum height to a vertical
height of eight feet or more above the existing natural grade.
      (2)   Other restrictions. Plants, shrubs, trees, hedges, and any other
vegetation having their location outside, and not in any way hanging over the
triangular area described in §
152.154, shall be unrestricted except when they, in fact, infringe the public
safety and welfare, as supported by formal complaint, investigation, and
subsequent citation authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.040) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.154 VISION CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Clear vision area described. The triangular area referred to in this
division (A) and division (B) below shall consist of a triangular area, two
sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the
street for a distance of not less than 15 feet (or where the lot lines have
rounded comers, the lot lines extended in a straight line to a point of
intersection and so measured) and the third side of which forms a complete
triangle across the corner of the lot joining the nonintersecting ends of the
other two sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1036.jpg]
   (B)   Corner properties in the Main Street Commercial Zone. Structures or
buildings located on corner properties in areas zoned for main street
commercial use may be located within 30 feet of a property line adjacent to a
public or private street or driveway, provided there is a clear vision area
from ground level to a minimum vertical height of eight feet over the
triangular area illustrated in the above figure.
   (C)   Sight obstructions forbidden. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to permit a sight obstruction within any required yard area at a street
intersection, which interferes with the view of operations of motor vehicles on
the streets to such an extent as to constitute a hazard to drivers,
pedestrians, or bicyclists.
      (1)   Authority to order removal or modification. If the city finds a
sight obstruction within any required yard area at a street intersection, which
interferes with the view of operations of motor vehicles on the streets to such
an extent as to constitute a hazard to drivers, pedestrians, or bicyclists, the
city shall have the authority to order in writing the removal or specific
modification of any such obstruction within ten working days.
         (a)   The order shall be effective upon delivery of the notice to
remove or modify the obstruction.
         (b)   Said notice shall be in writing and may be given by certified
letter, receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the address indicated in
the records of the County Tax Assessor.
         (c)   The ten-day period shall run from the date of delivery of such
notice.
      (2)   Appeal of order to remove or modify. Such decision by the city may
be appealed in writing to the City Council as provided in §
152.017.
   (D)   Failure to remove or modify. It is unlawful for any owner of such real
property, within which such an obstruction has been found, to fail to remove or
modify the obstruction within ten working days after receiving the notice to
remove or modify; or, if appealed, within ten working days after the final
decision of the City Council ordering removal or modification. The penalty for
failure to comply with an order shall be a fine and/or lien on the subject
property for the purpose of abating the violation. The City Attorney or Police
Chief, as designated by City Council, shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.050) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.155 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Residential zones. Signs erected in all zones except Main Street
Commercial, Industrial, and Open Space/Public Facilities shall meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Size. Maximum size shall be four square feet per side; and
      (2)   Illumination. None allowed.
   (B)   Main Street Commercial (C) and Industrial (I) Zones. Applications for
signs over four square feet per side to be erected in Main Street Commercial
and Industrial Zones shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, and shall
meet the following standards:
      (1)   Size. The total area of a combination of all signs shall not exceed
150 square feet, in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Freestanding. Fifty square feet, placed not to exceed 20 feet
above adjacent street grade; and
         (b)   Flush-mounted to structure or building. One hundred square feet,
placed not to exceed the height of the structure or building.
      (2)   Illumination types prohibited. Signs prohibited: any flashing,
moving, animated, blinking, or rotating sign whose illumination changes with
time, or which is designed in a manner to simulate motion; time and temperature
signs excluded.
      (3)   Sign location restrictions. No sign shall project more than two
feet into a required yard or public right-of-way nor, when projecting more than
four inches into said right-of-way, be placed less than ten feet above ground
level of such right-of-way.
      (4)   Exempted signs. Necessary traffic directional or similar public
service signs are excluded from these provisions.
   (C)   Open Space/Public Facilities Zone. Signs that exceed the standards in
division (A) above shall require conditional use approval as provided in §§
152.235 to
152.239.
      (1)   Any physical change in an approved conditional use shall require
approval of an amended conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §§
152.235 to
152.239. All conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with terms of
conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
      (2)   Conditional uses that may be allowed are:
         (a)   Necessary traffic directional or similar public service signs
that exceed four square feet; and
         (b)   Illuminated public service signs.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.060) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.156 HISTORIC STRUCTURE PRESERVATION.
   (A)   Application for demolition or major exterior alterations.
      (1)   No historic site, structure, or object, as designated by the
comprehensive plan, may be demolished, nor may major exterior alterations be
made thereto, without an application and procedure complying with this section.
      (2)   Upon receiving an application for demolition or major exterior
alterations involving an historic area, site, structure or object, the Planning
Commission, in a public meeting, shall review the application to determine its
conformance with the historic preservation criteria of this section.
   (B)   Demolition or exterior modification procedure.
      (1)   Review requirements. If it is determined the land use action will
result in the demolition or extensive exterior modification of any historical
building, the Planning Commission shall review the application, taking into
account the following:
         (a)   State of repair of the building;
         (b)   The reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair;
         (c)   The purpose of preserving such designated historical building
and site;
         (d)   The character of the neighborhood; and
         (e)   All other factors the Planning Commission feels are appropriate.
      (2)   Actions available to Planning Commission.
         (a)   Following the Planning Commission review, the Planning
Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
permit for land use action, or delay action for 60 working days to allow
cognizant agencies or other cognizant parties to explore alternatives.
         (b)   If no suitable alternatives are available, the permit may be
issued.
         (c)   The Planning Commission, upon finding significant progress is
being made toward preserving the structure, may extend the delay for an
additional 30 working days, as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Major exterior alteration procedure.
      (1)   Exterior alteration requirements. Exterior alterations shall be in
accordance with the following.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a major exterior alteration
of an historic structure listed in the comprehensive plan, the Planning
Commission, in a public meeting, shall review the proposed alteration to
determine if the resource’s historical significance will be altered. This
review shall be based on the criteria for determining historical significance
contained in the comprehensive plan.
         (b)   MAJOR EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS, as defined by this section, include
any change or alteration of a facade, texture, design, materials, fixtures, or
other treatment.
         (c)   All applications for major exterior alteration shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications of the proposed alteration. The
Planning Commission may request additional sketches and other information
deemed necessary to make an informed decision.
         (d)   1.   In order to recommend approval of the application, the
Planning Commission shall find the alteration harmonious and compatible with
the resource with respect to style, scale, texture, and construction materials,
and/or find the alterations will enhance the historical value of the resource.
Conditions may be attached to the approval if the Planning Commission deems it
necessary to achieve the above objectives.
            2.   The Planning Commission shall disapprove the request if the
proposal would reduce the resource’s value or historic significance.
      (2)   Conditions which may be attached are limited. Conditions attached
to a permit for major exterior alteration of an historic structure shall be
limited to permit requirements addressing architectural design, surface
texture, materials, fixtures, or other facade or surface treatments which are
deemed inconsistent with the integrity of the historic values being preserved.
      (3)   Requirements restricted. The Planning Commission shall not make any
recommendations of requirement except for the purpose of preventing
developments out of character with the historic aspects of the resource.
   (D)   Maintenance or repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural
feature which does not involve a change of design, or the construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of such feature which the building inspectors
certify is required by the public safety because of unsafe conditions.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.070) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.157 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
   All developments shall comply with the vehicle access and circulation
standards contained in §
151.37. Additionally, all of the following standards for pedestrian access and
circulation shall be met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1038.jpg]
   (A)   Pedestrian access and circulation. To ensure safe, direct, and
convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, except single-family
detached housing (i.e., on individual lots), shall provide a continuous
pedestrian and/or multi-use pathway system. (Pathways only provide for
pedestrian circulation. Multi-use pathways accommodate pedestrians and
bicycles.) The system of pathways shall be designed based on the standards in
divisions (A)(1) to (A)(3) below.
      (1)   Continuous pathways.
         (a)   The pathway system shall extend throughout the development site,
and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails, public parks,
and open space areas whenever possible.
         (b)   The developer may also be required to connect or stub pathway(s)
to adjacent streets and private property, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 151.
      (2)   Safe, direct, and convenient pathways. Pathways within developments
shall provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between
primary building entrances and all adjacent streets, based on the following
definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         PRIMARY ENTRANCE.
            1.   For commercial, industrial, mixed use, public, and
institutional buildings, the main public entrance to the building. In the case
where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the
main employee entrance.
            2.   For residential buildings, the front door (i.e., facing the
street). For multi-family buildings in which each unit does not have its own
exterior entrance, the PRIMARY ENTRANCE may be a lobby, courtyard, or
breezeway, which serves as a common entrance for more than one dwelling.
         REASONABLY DIRECT. A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a
straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-
direction travel for likely users.
         SAFE AND CONVENIENT. Bicycle and pedestrian routes that are reasonably
free from hazards and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between
destinations.
      (3)   Connections within development. Pathways shall connect all building
entrances to one another. In addition, pathways shall connect all parking
areas, storage areas, recreational facilities, and common areas (as
applicable), and adjacent developments to the site, as applicable.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef479e44b51316c095d4a7963be76c52b92fbf70/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1040.jpg]
   (B)   Design and construction. Pathways shall conform to all of the
standards in divisions (B)(1) to (B)(5) below.
      (1)   Vehicle/pathway separation. Where pathways are parallel and
adjacent to a driveway or street (public or private), they shall be raised six
inches and curbed, or separated from the driveway/street by a five-foot minimum
strip with bollards, a landscape berm, or other physical barrier. If a raised
path is used, the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with curb ramps.
      (2)   Housing/pathway separation. Pedestrian pathways shall be separated
a minimum of five feet from all residential living areas on the ground floor,
except at building entrances. Separation is measured as measured from the
pathway edge to the closest dwelling unit. The separation area shall be
landscaped in conformance with the provisions of §
152.163. No pathway/building separation is required for commercial, industrial,
public, or institutional uses.
      (3)   Crosswalks. Where pathways cross a parking area, driveway, or
street, they shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials, humps/
raised crossings, or painted striping. An example of contrasting paving
material is the use of a concrete crosswalk through an asphalt driveway. If
painted striping is used, it shall consist of thermo-plastic striping or
similar type of durable application.
      (4)   Pathway surface. Pathway surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt,
brick/masonry paves, or other durable surface, at least five feet wide, and
shall conform to ADA requirements. Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycles and
pedestrians) shall be the same materials, at least ten feet wide.
      (5)   Accessible routes. Pathways shall comply with the Federal Americans
with Disabilities Act, which requires accessible routes of travel.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.080) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.158 MOVING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Move must conform to laws. No building or structure shall be moved
from, within, or into the city without conforming to this chapter, to the
building code, and to other applicable codes of the city, the county, the
state, and the United States of America.
   (B)   Moving permit required. Prior to moving the building or structure, a
moving permit shall be obtained from the city.
   (C)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Within 90 days. Within 90 days after a building has been moved onto
a lot within the city:
         (a)   The building shall have been placed upon its foundation in
accordance with the Building Code;
         (b)   All sanitation facilities shall have been completed to the
satisfaction of the city;
         (c)   The building shall have been so remodeled and redesigned as to
meet requirements of the Building Code;
         (d)   All scrap lumber, trash, debris, and other materials including
timbers and equipment for the moving of said building shall have been removed
from the premises; and
         (e)   All holes, underground structures, and excavations shall be
filled to the rough grade level as indicated in the building permit.
      (2)   Building occupancy prohibited. No building shall be occupied until
all the requirements in division (C)(1) above have been met.
      (3)   While moving is in progress. While moving is in progress, the owner
of said building shall at all times protect the same from damage and protect
passersby and citizens of the city from injury due to condition of the building
or property to or from which the building was moved.
      (4)   Leaving building on streets restricted. No building shall be left
on the streets of the city after sunset unless the owner thereof, with written
authorization by the city, shall provide warning lights (or flares) and a night
watchperson for protection of the citizens using said street.
      (5)   Clean-up Requirements. Within ten working days after a building is
moved:
         (a)   The lot from which the building was moved shall be cleared of
all debris including pipe, concrete, scrap lumber, and other materials that may
cause a health hazard or nuisance, or constitute a danger;
         (b)   The lot to which the building is moved shall be cleared of all
debris including pipe, concrete, scrap lumber, and other materials that may
cause a health hazard or nuisance, or constitute a danger; and
         (c)   All basements, abandoned septic tanks and wells shall be filled
with earth, except that upon written application made to the Planning
Commission, the City Council may give permission for useful basements or other
structures to remain, provided the same are fenced or left open only for such
period of time as the Council may allow.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.090) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.159 SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNA.
   (A)   Placement.
      (1)   Must be screened from view. Satellite receiving antennae having a
diameter or largest lineal dimension of three feet, or more shall be placed in
such a manner as to be screened from view from the public right-of-way,
excepting alleys, by a building, sight-obscuring fence, dense landscape buffer,
or any combination thereof.
      (2)   Height restricted. No satellite receiving antennae may be placed at
a height in excess of the building height of the applicable zone.
   (B)   Placement in zoning districts with no yard/setback area. The placement
standards may be adjusted through the variance process when a finding can be
made that placement in compliance is not possible because of lack of yard/
setback area.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.100) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.160 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION OF SERVICE
STATIONS.
   Any service station (i.e., gas station or gas station/convenience store)
that is constructed or undergoes major alteration after the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall conform to the following
standards.
   (A)   Location. No portion of any service station shall hereafter be
constructed within 1,500 feet of any part of a building housing another service
station, except where such other service station is abandoned and subject to
removal under §
152.161.
   (B)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for a service station site
shall be 10,000 square feet on a corner lot and 12,000 square feet on any other
lot.
   (C)   Minimum street frontages.
      (1)   The minimum street frontage of a corner lot shall be 100 feet.
      (2)   The minimum street frontage on other than a corner lot shall be 120
feet.
   (D)   Minimum lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
   (E)   Minimum setbacks. The service station and any attached or freestanding
canopies on the service station property shall be set back not less than ten
feet from any property line.
   (F)   Minimum screening requirements.
      (1)   When property used for a service station abuts property used for
residential purposes, there shall be placed along the boundary between the
residential property and the service station a solid wall or fence six feet
high or as an alternative, an evergreen hedge at least four feet high and
capable of attaining a height of six feet.
      (2)   Any area used for the storage of trash or other waste shall be
screened by a solid wall or fence that prevents the objects from being visible
from any public street or sidewalk.
   (G)   Landscaping. As a general guideline, there shall be landscaping on at
least 10% of the service station lot. Landscaping shall require review and
approval during the site plan approval process as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207, and may be increased or decreased as the site plan committee deems
necessary.
   (H)   Lighting.
      (1)   Lighting shall be of such illumination, direction, color and
intensity as not to create a nuisance on adjacent property or to create a
traffic hazard.
      (2)   Wiring for the business and its sign and outdoor light fixtures
shall be underground.
   (I)   Permitted activities. A service station’s principal use shall be the
retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels and lubricants, and may engage in the
following activities, which shall be incidental to its principal use:
      (1)   The sale and installation of motor vehicle accessories;
      (2)   Motor vehicle repairs;
      (3)   Sale of food, beverages, and convenience items; and
      (4)   Any other sale, service, or activity customarily provided by
service stations.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.110) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.161 SERVICE STATION ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   When abandonment occurs. Whenever a service station is not in use as a
service station for a continuous period of 12 months, all structures and
facilities above and below the ground located on the lot which were connected
with the operation of the service station shall be removed, unless said
structures are converted to another use as allowed by the underlying zone.
   (B)   Minimum operation to avoid abandonment. Operation for at least 90
consecutive working days shall be required to interrupt a continuous 12-month
period.
   (C)   Abandoned service stations declared a nuisance. All service stations
which are not in use as a service station for a continuous period of 12 months
are declared to be a nuisance and subject to abatement and penalty as provided
in this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Fixing responsibility for compliance with ordinance.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the improvements to
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that the owner of said real property fails to comply,
the city may remove the improvements and make the costs of said removal a lien
against the property.
   (E)   Inspections. The city shall make periodic inspections of the service
station, and when a service station has been found not to be in use as a
service station for a period of 12 consecutive months, the following persons
shall be notified of the requirements to be met under this chapter:
      (1)   The owner of record of the real property;
      (2)   The oil company(ies) that last supplied petroleum products to the
station; and
      (3)   The last operator of the station.
   (F)   Notice and abatement. The following shall be satisfactory notice under
this section.
      (1)   Notice shall be posted on the property. A notice shall be
prominently posted on the premises where the station is located.
      (2)   Copy of notice shall be mailed. At the time of posting, the City
Recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registration or
certified mail, postage prepaid, to the persons identified in division (E)
above.
      (3)   Content of notices. The notice shall direct the owner or person in
charge of the station to comply with the directives of this chapter. The
notices shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which the service station is located;
         (b)   A description of the removal work necessary to comply with this
chapter;
         (c)   A direction to comply with the requirements contained in said
notice within 30 working days from the date of notice;
         (d)   A statement that failure to perform as required by this chapter
may result in penalty and/or abatement as provided in §
152.023, or in court prosecution, and that, unless the required work is done,
the city may cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be a lien
against the property; and
         (e)   A statement that the owner or other person in charge of the
property may appeal the directives contained in the notice by notifying the
City Recorder in writing within ten working days from the date of the notice.
      (4)   City record keeping. Upon completion of the posting and mailing,
the person posting and mailing the notice shall execute and file a certificate
stating the date and place of mailing and posting.
      (5)   Posted notice sufficient. An error in the name or address of the
owner or person in charge of the property, or the use of a name other than that
of the owner or such other person, shall not make the notice void, and in such
a case, the posted notice shall be sufficient.
      (6)   Appeal. An order of the city may be appealed within 15 working days
after date of the notice required by this section.
         (a)   Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the City
Recorder.
         (b)   If the appeal is not filed within the 15-day period, the
decision shall be final.
         (c)   If a timely appeal is filed, the City Council shall receive the
decision and findings and shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal as
provided in §
152.019.
         (d)   The appellant shall be granted a hearing before the City Council
as provided in §
152.019, and action taken by the City Council after the hearing shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.120) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.162 MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   Manufactured dwelling parks shall require site plan review approval, and
shall comply with the provisions of §
152.057.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.130) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.163 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Developed site area. For purposes of this section, DEVELOPED SITE AREA
means the square footage of the area indicated on the site plan minus the
ground floor area of the building(s), including accessory structures. At a
minimum, the area indicated on the site plan shall include the area required
for parking, ingress and egress, setback areas, and other areas that may be
required as a condition of site plan approval, which are part of the ownership.
   (B)   Standards for landscaping materials. Where landscaping is required,
the materials used are subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Allowable materials. Landscaping shall include some combination of
the following materials, where appropriate, to achieve the intended or required
purpose of the landscaping (e.g., screening, and the like):
         (a)   Trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, flowers, or grass lawns;
         (b)   Natural features, such as rock or stone outcrops; and/or
         (c)   Structural features, including fountains, pools, artwork, walls,
and fences.
      (2)   Excluded materials. Landscaping proposed to satisfy the
requirements of this chapter in locations abutting existing public or private
under or above-ground electrical lines, cables or conduits, pipes or other
utilities; or public or private sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or paved parking and
turnaround areas, drainage improvements, or adjacent structures, foundations,
or landscape materials, shall not include plant materials which have root
structures or branching habits which, in their mature state, may damage or
interfere with the normal use of public facilities and utilities.
   (C)   Minimum area requirement; new construction. Landscaping shall be
provided as follows:
      (1)   Industrial uses: 5% of the developed site area;
      (2)   Commercial use types: 10% of the developed site area;
      (3)   Open space/public use: 10% of the developed site area; and
      (4)   Residential, manufactured dwelling parks, and multi-family uses:
20% of the developed site area.
   (D)   Minimum area requirements; additions. Additions to existing structures
that require landscaping, and which represent greater than 50% of the floor
area of the primary structure, shall provide landscaping as follows:
      (1)   Industrial uses: 5% of the addition’s total square footage;
      (2)   Commercial use types: 10% of the addition’s total square footage;
      (3)   Open space/public facilities: 10% of the addition’s total square
footage; and
      (4)   Manufactured dwelling parks, residential uses: 10% of the
addition’s total square footage.
   (E)   Street trees.
      (1)   Plantings. Street trees shall be planted in planter strips on all
streets in accordance with the City Public Works Standards and in Chapter 151.
Planting of unimproved or substandard existing streets shall be deferred until
the construction of sidewalks.
      (2)   Growth characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on Ordinance
236, 2006. The following should guide tree selection:
         (a)   Provide a broad canopy where shade is desired;
         (b)   Use low-growing trees for spaces under utility wires;
         (c)   Select trees that can be “limbed up” where vision clearance is a
concern;
         (d)   Use narrow or columnar trees where awnings or other building
features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between buildings
and the street;
         (e)   Use species with similar growth characteristics on the same
block for design continuity;
         (f)   Avoid using trees that are susceptible to insect damage, and
avoid using trees that produce excessive seeds or fruit;
         (g)   Select trees that are well adapted to the environment, including
soil, wind, sun exposure, and exhaust. Drought-resistant trees should be used
in areas with sandy or rocky soil;
         (h)   Select trees for their seasonal color, as desired; and
         (i)   Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun.
      (3)   Caliper size. The minimum caliper size at planting shall be two
inches, based on the American Association of Nurserymen Standards.
      (4)   Spacing and location. If a planter strip is provided, street trees
shall be planted within the planting strip. If a planter strip is not provided,
trees shall be planted behind the sidewalk or in sidewalk tree wells. Street
tree spacing shall be based upon the type of tree(s) selected and the canopy
size at maturity. In general, trees shall be spaced no more than 30 feet apart,
except where planting a tree would conflict with clear vision requirements,
existing trees, retaining walls, utilities, and similar physical barriers.
      (5)   Soil preparation, planting, and care. The developer shall be
responsible for planting street trees, including soil preparation, ground cover
material, staking, and temporary irrigation for two years after planting. The
developer shall also be responsible for tree care (pruning, watering,
fertilization, and replacement as necessary) during the first two years after
planting.
      (6)   Assurances. The city shall require the developer to provide a
performance and maintenance bond in an amount determined by the City Engineer,
to ensure the planting of the tree(s) and care and any necessary tree
replacement during the first two years after planting.
   (F)   Installation. Required landscaping shall be installed prior to
occupancy. Extensions of time may be granted by the city if good faith efforts
are being made to complete the required work and the developer provides a bond
to the city to cover the cost of required landscaping.
   (G)   Maintenance. All required planting shall be maintained in good
condition by the adjacent property owner, and in any case where a required
planting has not survived, shall be replaced as soon as is practical with new
plant materials similar to those which died.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.140) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.164 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   When allowed under conditional use permit and business licenses, home
occupations shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Appearance of residence.
      (1)   The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully built enclosed
structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward
appearance of a business, except that one small sign shall be permitted in
conformance with division (D) below.
      (2)   The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations
or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or building code
occupancy classification.
      (3)   The home occupation shall not violate any condition of development
approval (i.e., prior development permit approval).
      (4)   No products and/or equipment produced or used by the home
occupation may be displayed to be visible from outside any structure.
   (B)   Storage.
      (1)   Outside storage, visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
properties, is prohibited.
      (2)   On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive,
noxious, combustible, or flammable) beyond those normally incidental to
residential use is prohibited.
      (3)   Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures,
and activities associated with the home occupation shall be allowed in any
structure, unless prohibited by the current Uniform Building Code as adopted by
the state.
   (C)   Employees.
      (1)   Other than family members residing within the dwelling located on
the home occupation site, there shall be no more than one full time equivalent
employee at the home occupation site at any given time. As used in this
chapter, the term HOME OCCUPATION SITE means the lot on which the home
occupation is conducted.
      (2)   Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the
home occupation, so long as they do not report to work or pick up/deliver at
the home.
      (3)   The home occupation site shall not be used as a headquarters for
the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch
to other locations.
   (D)   Advertising and signs. Signs shall comply with the provisions of §
152.155. In no case shall a sign exceed the Residential District standard of
four square feet per side (e.g., two feet by two feet). Signs mounted onto
vehicles (except magnet-type signs) shall not be permitted.
   (E)   Vehicles, parking, and traffic.
      (1)   One commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home
occupation is allowed at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that
would not overhang into the public right-of-way when parked in the driveway or
other location on the home occupation site.
      (2)   There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries to
or from the home occupation site daily. There shall be no commercial vehicle
deliveries during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
      (3)   There shall be no more than one client or customer’s vehicle at any
one time and no more than eight per day at the home occupation site.
   (F)   Business hours. There shall be no restriction on business hours,
except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation from 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. only, subject to divisions (A) and (E) above.
   (G)   Prohibited home occupation uses.
      (1)   Any activity that produces radio or TV interference, noise, glare,
vibration, smoke, or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local,
state, or federal standards, or that can be detected beyond the property line
is prohibited.
      (2)   Any activity involving on-site retail sales is prohibited, except
that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is
allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music
teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer
software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by
home business are allowed subject divisions (A) to (F) above.
      (3)   Any uses described in this section or uses with similar
objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor,
dust, smoke, or vibration, such as:
         (a)   Ambulance service;
         (b)   Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels, or animal
boarding;
         (c)   Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting; and
         (d)   Sale, repair, reconditioning, or storage of motorized vehicles,
boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes, or large equipment on-site.
      (4)   Any activity for which the structure does not meet Uniform Building
Code requirements (e.g., welding).
   (H)   Enforcement. The city police officer or designee may visit and inspect
the site of home occupations in accordance with this chapter periodically to
insure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business
hours, and with reasonable notice. Code violations shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.999.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.150) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.165 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
   Temporary uses are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and
by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary
uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices,
temporary carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and
seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. Two types of
temporary uses require permit approval using the site plan approval procedure
in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
   (A)   Seasonal and special events. These types of uses occur only once in a
calendar year and for no longer a period than 30 days. The Planning Commission
shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of a temporary use
permit based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does
not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior
development permit approval).
      (2)   The applicant has proof of the property-owner’s permission to place
the use on his or her property.
      (3)   No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the
temporary use that is needed by the property owner to meet their minimum
parking requirement under §§
152.180 to 152.189.
      (4)   The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by this
chapter, and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets.
      (5)   Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the
other uses of the property, as required by this chapter.
      (6)   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle
traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights that affect an adjoining
use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect
the adjoining use.
      (7)   The use is adequately served by sewer and water, if applicable.
(The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits.)
   (B)   Temporary sales office or model home. The Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application for
the use of any real property within the city as a temporary sales office for
the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, or model home in any
subdivision or tract of land within the city, but for no other purpose, based
on the following criteria.
      (1)   Temporary sales office.
         (a)   The temporary sales office shall be located within the
boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to
be sold.
         (b)   The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not
be permanently improved for that purpose.
         (c)   The sales office shall be removed no later than 60 days after
closing on the sale of the last lot or house within the subdivision.
      (2)   Model house.
         (a)   The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the
subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated.
         (b)   The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that
meets all relevant requirements of this code and other applicable laws.
   (C)   Temporary building. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of an application for a temporary trailer
or prefabricated building for use on any real commercial or industrial property
within the city as a temporary commercial or industrial office or space
associated with the primary use on the property, but for no other purpose,
based on following criteria.
      (1)   The temporary trailer or building shall be located within the
boundaries of the parcel of land on which it is located.
      (2)   The primary use on the property to be used for a temporary trailer
is already developed.
      (3)   Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the
other uses of the property, as required by this chapter.
      (4)   There is adequate parking for the customers or users of the
temporary use as required by §§
152.180 to
152.189.
      (5)   The use will not result in vehicular congestion on streets.
      (6)   The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use.
      (7)   The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle
traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights that affect an adjoining
use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect
the adjoining use.
      (8)   The building complies with applicable building codes.
      (9)   The use can be adequately served by sewer and water, if applicable.
(The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits.)
      (10)   The length of time that the temporary building will be used shall
not exceed 12 months. When a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the
applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use
permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.160)
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES AND LOADING FACILITIES
§ 152.180 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   No parking or loading area, or parking spaces provided for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall hereafter be eliminated,
reduced, or converted in any manner below the requirements established in this
chapter, unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere in conformity with
the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Eligibility of street parking spaces. Parking spaces in a public
street, including an alley, shall not be eligible as fulfilling any part of the
parking requirements.
   (B)   Computation rule for more than one use in a structure. In the event
that several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total
requirements of off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the
several uses computed separately.
   (C)   Shared parking facilities. Required parking facilities of two or more
uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking
facilities used jointly, to the extent that it can be shown by the owners or
operators that the need for the facilities does not materially overlap (e.g.,
uses primarily of a daytime vs. nighttime nature), and provided that such right
of joint use is evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or similar written
instrument establishing such joint use.
   (D)   Computation rule for fractions. If after calculating the number of
required off-street parking spaces, a quotient is obtained containing a
fraction of one-half or more, an additional space shall be required; if such
fraction is less than one-half, it may be disregarded.
   (E)   Computation rule based on number of employees. When the parking
requirement is based on the number of employees, the number of spaces shall be
based on the number of working persons typically engaged in the specified
activity on the lot during the largest shift of the peak season.
   (F)   Computation rule based on number of seats. When the parking
requirement is based on the number of seats, each 18 inches of benches, and 24
inches of booths, pews, or similar facilities shall be counted as one seat.
   (G)   Computation rule based on number of students. When the parking
requirement is based on the number of students, the number of spaces shall be
based on the entire occupant load of the structure regardless of the number of
students in attendance.
   (H)   Non-specified number of parking spaces. When a required number of
parking spaces is not specified for a particular use or facility, the Planning
Department shall recommend a number of parking spaces or loading berths based
on a determination of the traffic generation of the activity, the amount of
frequency of loading operations thereof, the time of operation of the activity,
their location, and such other factors as affect the need for off-street
parking or loading. Any such determination shall be subject to appeal pursuant
to the appeal procedures as defined in §
152.017.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.181 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Off-street parking with adequate provision for safe ingress and egress
shall be provided for the various uses defined in this chapter. Standards for
number of required parking spaces are presented in division (B) below. Division
(B) below is part of the land development code, and all references to this code
include it.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.020)
   (B)   When using the minimum standard option, the number of required off-
street vehicle parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the
following standards:
      (1)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Single-family detached housing: two parking spaces, one of which
may be a garage, shall be provided for each detached single-family dwelling or
manufactured home on an individual lot;
         (b)   Two- and three-family housing: two spaces per dwelling unit;
         (c)   Multi-family and single-family attached housing:
            1.   Studio units or one-bedroom units less than 500 square feet:
one space per unit, one of which may be a garage;
            2.   One-bedroom units 500 square feet or larger: two spaces per
unit, one of which may be a garage;
            3.   Two-bedroom units: two spaces per unit, one of which may be a
garage;
            4.   Three-bedroom or greater units: two spaces per unit, one of
which may be a garage; and
            5.   Retirement complexes for seniors 55 years or greater: two
spaces per unit.
         (d)   Rooming and boarding houses, dormitories: one space of each
guest room; and
         (e)   Manufactured home parks: two parking spaces, one of which may be
a garage, shall be provided for each detached single-family dwelling or
manufactured home on an individual lot.
      (2)   Commercial uses:
         (a)   Auto, boat, or trailer sales, retail nurseries, and similar bulk
retail uses: one space per 1,000 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet of
gross land area; plus one space per 5,000 square feet for the excess over
10,000 square feet of gross land area; and one space per two employees;
         (b)   Business, general retail, personal services:
            1.   General: one space for 350 square feet of gross floor area;
            2.   Furniture and appliances: one space per 750 square feet of
gross floor area;
            3.   Chapels and mortuaries: one space per four fixed seats in the
main chapel; and
            4.   Hotels and motels: one space for each guest room, plus one
space for the manager.
         (c)   Offices:
            1.   Medical and dental offices: one space per 350 square feet of
gross floor area; and
            2.   General offices: one space per 450 square feet of gross floor
area.
         (d)   Restaurants, bars, ice cream parlors, and similar uses: one
space per four seats or one space per 100 square feet of gross leasable floor,
whichever is less; and
         (e)   Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, gymnasiums, and similar uses:
one space per four seats.
      (3)   Industrial uses:
         (a)   Industrial uses, except warehousing: one space per employee on
the largest shift plus one space per company vehicle;
         (b)   Warehousing: one space per employee plus one space per company
vehicle; and
         (c)   Public utilities (gas, water, telephone, and the like), not
including business offices: one space per employee on the largest shift, plus
one space per company vehicle; a minimum of two spaces are required.
      (4)   Public and institutional uses:
         (a)   Childcare centers having 13 or more children: one space per
employee; a minimum of two spaces is required;
         (b)   Churches and similar places of worship: one space per four
seats;
         (c)   Golf courses, except miniature: eight spaces per hole, plus
additional spaces for auxiliary uses set forth in this section;
         (d)   Miniature golf: four spaces per hole;
         (e)   Hospitals: two spaces per patient bed;
         (f)   Nursing and convalescent homes: one space per three patient
beds;
         (g)   Rest homes, homes for the aged, or assisted living: one space
per two patient beds or one space per apartment unit;
         (h)   Schools, elementary and junior high: two spaces per classroom,
or the requirements for public assembly areas as set forth herein, whichever is
greater;
         (i)   High schools: two spaces per classroom, plus one space per ten
students the school is designed to accommodate, or the requirements for public
assembly as set forth herein, whichever is greater; and
         (j)   Colleges, universities, and trade schools: two spaces per
classroom, plus one space per five students the school is designed to
accommodate, plus requirements for on-campus student housing.
      (5)   Unspecified uses: Where a use is not specifically listed in this
table, parking requirements shall be determined by finding that a use is
similar to those listed in terms of parking needs.
(Prior Code, Table 17.44.020.A)
Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.182 PARKING FACILITIES FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED.
   Public accommodations or facilities, including, but not limited to:
auditoriums, theaters, restaurants, hotels, motels, stadiums, shopping centers,
and office buildings, shall provide parking spaces for the physically disabled
in accordance with the Uniform Building Code and American Disabilities Act.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.030) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.183 REQUIRED LOADING FACILITIES.
   The following provisions shall apply to all loading facilities.
   (A)   The minimum area required for loading spaces shall be not less than
250 square feet each, where the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot or
parcel of land is not more than 20,000 square feet.
   (B)   The minimum area required for loading spaces shall not be less than
500 square feet each, where the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot or
parcel of land is more than 20,000 square feet; however, less than 50,000
square feet.
   (C)   The minimum area required for loading spaces shall be not less than
750 square feet each, where the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot or
parcel of land exceeds 50,000 square feet.
   (D)   The minimum required loading area shall not be less than ten feet in
width and 25 feet in length and shall have an unobstructed height of not less
than 14 feet.
   (E)   The required loading area shall be easily accessible from a street,
highway, or area.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.040) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.184 PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. Off-street parking with adequate provision for safe ingress
and egress shall be provided for the various uses defined in this chapter.
Standards for number of required parking spaces are presented in §
152.181(B).
   (B)   Aisle dimensions. The aisle dimensions for angle parking are to be
based upon the angle and width of the parking space, as set forth in the
following chart. The use of a wider parking space enables a reduction of the
aisle width, as shown.
 
Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
Angle (A)                     Curb Length One-Way     Two-Way      Stall Depth
(in        Type     Width (B) (C)         Aisle Width Aisle Width  (E)
Degrees)                                  (D)         (D)
0          Standard NA        23'         12'         24'          9'
(Parallel)
30         Standard 10'       20'         12'         24'          16'
45         Standard 10'       14'         12'         24'          20'
60         Standard 10'       11'6"       20'         24'          22'
90         Standard 10'       10'         28'         28'          22'
 
      (1)   TIER means two rows of parking spaces plus an aisle. Tier width may
not add to aisle width plus two times the space to curb distance in the chart
above, because additional tier width may be required for safety precautions.
      (2)   Space dimensions for parallel parking are to be nine feet by 23
feet.
   (C)   Parking area access.
      (1)   Driveways serving residential uses shall have a minimum width of
not less than 12 feet when serving four or less dwelling units, and a driveway
width of not less than 16 feet when serving five or more dwelling units, or in
lieu thereof, two separate driveways, each no less than nine feet in width.
      (2)   Driveways serving other than residential uses shall have a minimum
width of 15 feet to accommodate one-way traffic, and a minimum width of 25 feet
to accommodate two-way traffic.
      (3)   (a)   Parking areas for four or more vehicles shall be designed to
prevent cars from backing out into a public street, public or private
pedestrian walk, or public alley, in order to leave the area or to maneuver out
of the parking space.
         (b)   Parking lots shall be designed and improved so as to prevent
ingress and egress at any point other than designated entrance or exit drives.
      (4)   Access driveways to parking areas containing four or more spaces
shall be located and designed as follows.
         (a)   Parking area entrance and exit driveways shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from the nearest street intersection, as measured from the
centerline of the driveway to the nearest travel lane of the intersecting
street.
         (b)   Entrance and exit driveways crossing the street property line of
a single site shall be limited to two along the frontage of any single street.
The centerline of driveways on the same property is to be separated by a
minimum of 30 feet.
   (D)   Parking area location. The location of off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   Required parking facilities for residential uses as provided herein
shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use the parking
facilities are intended to serve. Such facilities shall be conveniently
accessible and located at a place where the erection of garages or carports is
permitted.
      (2)   Required parking facilities for uses other than residential shall
be located as follows:
         (a)   On the same lot or parcel of land as the use such parking or
loading facilities are intended to serve; except that for industrial uses,
required parking shall not be located in a required front or side yard abutting
a public street, unless the structure is provided with adequate setbacks and
landscaping;
         (b)   On a lot or parcel of land held under the same or joint
ownership, provided such parking or loading facilities are located adjoining
the use or uses served;
         (c)   On a lot or parcel of land within 500 feet of the use or uses
served;
         (d)   Required loading facilities shall be located on the same lot or
parcel of land as the uses served; and
         (e)   Binding agreements between land uses for mutual use of parking
facilities during nonconflicting hours may be recognized by the city in lieu of
the standards in this chapter.
   (E)   Drop-off points required. When located outside the central business
zone, parking areas for public assembly facilities shall include a designated
on-site location for dropping off passengers at an entrance to the facility in
advance of parking the vehicle. Drop-off areas are to consist of vehicle
turnout lanes located outside of normal travel lanes. Drop-off points are to be
provided for:
      (1)   Hotels and motels;
      (2)   Schools with 50 or more students;
      (3)   Churches with a capacity of 100 or more;
      (4)   Restaurants with a capacity of 50 or more customers;
      (5)   Public transportation terminals;
      (6)   Places of public assembly;
      (7)   Public buildings; and
      (8)   Offices larger than 5,000 feet.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.050) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.185 PARKING LOT CONSTRUCTION.
   All parking areas containing three or more off-street parking spaces shall
be designed as follows, except as otherwise provided by this section.
   (A)   Surfacing. All parking areas shall be surfaced with an asphalt,
concrete, or chip seal surface in conformance with city standards. Where
concrete or asphalt is required, brick or other masonry paving units may be
substituted including vertically oriented concrete block.
   (B)   Lining and marking. Parking spaces in paved parking areas shall be
marked with paint striping, a minimum of four inches in width. Parking spaces
in other types of lots may be identified by wheel stop barriers.
   (C)   Wheel stops. Wheel stops or continuous concrete or asphalt curbing
shall be required in all parking lots to define the perimeter of the parking
arm and to protect landscaping from vehicle encroachment. Wheel stops shall be
constructed as follows.
      (1)   Wheel stops shall be constructed of durable material not less than
six inches in height. Wheel stops shall be securely installed and maintained as
a safeguard against damage to adjoining vehicles, machinery, or abutting
property.
      (2)   Wheel stops or other vehicle barriers less than two feet in height
shall be located no closer than three feet to any property lines.
   (D)   Vertical clearance. Covered parking spaces shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven feet six inches above the parking lot surface for
all uses except residential.
   (E)   Slope. The finished grade of a parking lot shall not exceed a 5%
slope.
   (F)   Landscaping. A minimum of 5% of the interior of all parking lots with
20 or more spaces shall be landscaped, in addition to any perimeter landscaping
required by division (G)(2) below. The total aggregate area of landscaping need
not exceed the minimum requirements in §
152.163.
   (G)   Screening.
      (1)   Parking lots which abut a residential zone shall be visually
screened by a landscaping strip with a minimum height of five feet, or a six-
foot-high solid fence or wall located on the parking lot side of the property.
      (2)   Parking lots abutting a public street shall be separated from the
street right-of-way by a landscaping strip with a minimum width of four feet.
   (H)   Storm water. All drainage resulting from the improvements shall be
collected on-site in such a manner that it can be discharged to an approved
storm water collection system without flowing across any public sidewalk or
street.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.060) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.185 PARKING USES NOT IDENTIFIED IN THE TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For any use not listed in §
152.181(B), the required off-street parking shall be recommended by the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   In recommending the off-street parking requirements of any unlisted
use, the Planning Commission shall first make a finding that all of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   Field investigations disclose that the subject use and its
operations are compatible with one or more uses under which parking area is
designated; and
      (2)   The proposed parking area requirements will adequately serve the
intended use and be located in such a manner to protect the public health,
peace, safety, and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.070)
§ 152.187 DESIGNATED IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOTS OF FOUR OR MORE
SPACES.
   (A)   Each paved space must be marked by striping.
   (B)   Traffic flow arrows and signs may be required.
   (C)   No parking space shall back onto a street without site plan approval.
   (D)   Adequate drainage shall be specified at the time of site plan review.
   (E)   Bumper guards or steel stops may be required near buildings, fences,
or sidewalks during site plan review.
   (F)   Driveway locations shall be approved by the city or the State Highway
Division.
   (G)   Artificial lighting may be required but, where installed, shall not
cast a direct light on residences.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.080) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.188 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   At the time a use is erected or enlarged, or an existing building use
changed, off-street loading areas may be required.
   (A)   Merchandise. Any use receiving a majority of its goods by truck shall
provide an off-street loading/unloading area which will not impede traffic flow
or parking availability.
   (B)   Passengers. A lane or driveway must be provided out of the flow of
traffic for loading and unloading passengers to any site designed to
accommodate more than 100 people at one time.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.090) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.189 BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   All uses which are subject to site plan review shall provide bicycle
parking, in conformance with the following standards, which are evaluated
during site design review.
   (A)   Number of bicycle parking spaces. A minimum of two bicycle parking
spaces per use is required for all uses with greater than ten vehicle parking
spaces. The following additional standards apply to specific types of
development.
      (1)   Multi-family residences. Every residential use of four or more
dwelling units provides at least one sheltered bicycle parking space for each
dwelling unit. Sheltered bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage,
storage shed, basement, utility room, or similar area. In those instances in
which the residential complex has no garage or other easily accessible storage
unit, the bicycle parking spaces may be sheltered from sun and precipitation
under an eave, overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover.
      (2)   Parking lots. All public and commercial parking lots and parking
structures shall provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every ten
motor vehicle parking spaces.
      (3)   Schools. Elementary and middle schools, both private and public,
shall provide one bicycle parking space for every ten students and employees.
High schools provide one bicycle parking space for every five students and
employees. All spaces should be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent
structure, or similar cover.
      (4)   Colleges and trade schools. Colleges and trade schools shall
provide one bicycle parking space for every ten motor vehicle spaces plus one
space for every dormitory unit. Fifty percent of the bicycle parking spaces
should be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar
cover.
      (5)   Main Street Commercial Zone. Within the Main Street Zone, bicycle
parking for customers shall be provided along the street at a rate of at least
one space per use. Individual uses may provide their own parking, or spaces may
be clustered to serve up to six bicycles. Bicycle parking spaces should be
located in front of the stores along the street, either on the sidewalks or in
specially constructed areas such as pedestrian curb extensions. Inverted “U”
style racks are recommended. Bicycle parking shall not interfere with
pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least 36 inches between bicycles
and other existing and potential obstructions. Customer spaces may or may not
be sheltered. When provided, sheltered parking (within a building, or under an
eave, overhang, or similar structure) should be provided at a rate of one space
per ten employees, with a minimum of one space per store.
   (B)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family, two-family,
and three-family housing (attached, detached or manufactured housing), home
occupations, agriculture and livestock uses, or other developments with fewer
than ten vehicle parking spaces.
   (C)   Location and design. Bicycle parking should be conveniently located
with respect to both the street right-of-way and at least one building entrance
(e.g., no farther away than the closest parking space). It should be
incorporated whenever possible into building design and coordinated with the
design of street furniture when it is provided. STREET FURNITURE includes
benches, streetlights, planters, and other pedestrian amenities.
   (D)   Visibility and security. Bicycle parking should be visible to cyclists
from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient
security from theft and damage.
   (E)   Options for storage. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and
employee parking can be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle
lockers, racks, or other secure storage space inside or outside of the
building.
   (F)   Lighting. Bicycle parking should be at least as well lit as vehicle
parking for security.
   (G)   Reserved areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking should be clearly
marked and reserved for bicycle parking only.
   (H)   Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to
pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision
clearance standards of § 152.154.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.100) Penalty, see §
152.999
SITE PLAN APPROVAL
§ 152.200 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of site plan approval is to determine compliance with the
objectives of this chapter, implement the city comprehensive plan and preserve
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.010)
§ 152.201 APPLICABILITY AND PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENT.
   All developments except for single-family detached housing, (including
conditional uses involving construction or alteration of any building or
structure), shall be subject to site plan review, covered in § 152.203. A
public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to § 152.024 shall be
required for all site plan approvals.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.020)
§ 152.202 NOTICE OF INTENT TO CONSTRUCT SHALL BE FIRST ACTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Owner of a property shall file with the city a notice of intent to
construct pursuant to § 152.016 before any structure, including any fence,
shall be constructed, demolished, altered, erected, or moved onto any property.
Notice of intent forms shall be available from the City Recorder.
   (B)   Approval of a notice of intent to construct and corresponding plot
plan shall precede issuance of site plan approval pursuant to this section,
which shall precede issuance of any building permit pursuant to § 152.021, and
shall precede any construction, demolition, erection, or moving onto any
property, of any building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.030) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.203 SITE PLAN COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Site plan committee. The Planning Commission and the City Recorder
are, as a site plan committee, to carry out the duties set forth in this
section. The City Recorder shall review all site plan applications for
completeness. Upon finding an application is complete, per §
152.204, City Recorder shall provide the application and staff report to the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Authority. This committee shall recommend to the Council to approve,
disapprove, or to approve with conditions the site plan for all proposed new
buildings or structures in those circumstances where site plan approval is
required.
   (C)   Committee governed by purposes and objectives. In the review of plans,
the site plan committee shall be governed by the purposes and objectives of
this section as set forth in §§
152.200 and
152.201.
   (D)   Recommendation referred to City Council. The recommendation of the
site plan committee shall then be brought before the City Council, along with a
complete record of the meeting and applicable city regulations, at the next
regular City Council meeting following after the appeal period has expired on
said decision.
   (E)   City Council actions available. The City Council shall review the
recommendation of the site plan committee, on the record, without hearing
further evidence. It shall either affirm the recommendation of the site plan
committee, at which time the decision shall be final, or shall set the matter
for hearing de novo before the City Council, after which the City Council shall
affirm, reverse, or modify the recommendation of the site plan committee.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.040)
§ 152.204 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Site plan requirements. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and
shall indicate the following:
      (1)   Actual shape, dimensions, and area of the parcel;
      (2)   Locations and details of all buildings and structures, including
fences, both existing and proposed;
      (3)   Location, layout, and details of all off-street parking and loading
facilities;
      (4)   Locations and details of all points of entry and exit for motor
vehicles and pedestrians, and internal circulation pattern(s);
      (5)   Location of all walls and fences and indication of their height(s)
and materials of their construction;
      (6)   Locations and details of proposed exterior lighting standards and
devices;
      (7)   Locations, sizes, and details of proposed exterior signs and
outdoor advertising;
      (8)   Location and details of proposed landscaping, lawns, trees, shrubs,
and the like;
      (9)   Locations and details of proposed grading and slopes where they
affect relationship of the buildings and drainage;
      (10)   Indications of the heights of proposed buildings and structures;
      (11)   Indication of the proposed use(s) of existing and proposed
buildings;
      (12)   Any other architectural or engineering data which may be required
to allow necessary findings that the provisions of this chapter are complied
with;
      (13)   Location and details of proposed sidewalks, walkways, patios,
courtyards, and/or decks;
      (14)   (a)   Location and details of proposed storm drainage system,
including, but not limited to, drainage and grading plan, existing topography,
and elevations.
         (b)   Construction grading or other human-made physical changes shall
not be allowed to increase runoff which may affect downstream property or
properties.
         (c)   Additional runoff must be contained within on-site systems or an
approved drainage system.
      (15)   Location and details of existing utilities (i.e., electric, gas,
television, telephone, water, and the like);
      (16)   Location and details of existing and proposed sanitary sewer
system or location and details of septic tank(s) and drain field(s);
      (17)   Location and details of proposed water supply, showing size of
main(s), water flow(s), and size of water line(s);
      (18)   Location and details of existing and, if any, proposed fire
hydrants with size and flow data;
      (19)   Location and details of existing and proposed public improvements;
      (20)   Where an attachment of a minor addition (i.e., less than a 50%
increase in floor space) to an existing building or structure is proposed, the
site plan shall indicate the relationship of said proposal to the existing
development, but need not include other data required in divisions (A)(1) to
(A)(19) above unless they are affected by the proposed minor addition; and
      (21)   Specify and describe intended use(s) of the structure(s) (i.e.,
residential, assembly, educational, manufacturing, processing, storage, and
type of contents and the like).
   (B)   Site plan committee and time limit.
      (1)   Applications submitted for site plan review must be reviewed within
30 days of submission and either deemed complete or incomplete. If complete,
the city has 120 days from the date the application is deemed complete to
undertake and finish the site plan review application process, including all
appeals.
      (2)   If the application is deemed incomplete, the applicant shall have
180 days to submit the requested material. If that does not occur within the
180 days from the date the application was deemed incomplete, the application
shall be deemed void on the one-hundred eighty-first day.
   (C)   Approval criteria. In order to recommend approval of the site plan,
the site plan committee shall find that:
      (1)   All provisions of this chapter are complied with;
      (2)   All buildings, structures, and facilities, access points, parking
and loading facilities, landscaping, signs, lighting and walls or fences, are
so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, and pedestrian and vehicular
safety and welfare are protected;
      (3)   Adverse effect on surrounding property will be minimized;
      (4)   All provisions of the Public Works Standards and Specifications are
complied with; and
      (5)   All provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code are complied with.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.050) (Ord. 265, passed 1-1-2019)
§ 152.205 APPEAL.
   The applicant or any interested party may appeal a recommendation of the
Planning Commission to the City Council, in accordance with the procedures of §
152.202.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.060)
§ 152.206 REVISIONS TO AN APPROVED SITE PLAN.
   Revisions made by the applicant to an approved site plan may be made
pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§
152.250 to
152.253.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.070)
§ 152.207 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE AND PROCEDURE TO EXTEND TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Site plan approval shall be valid for 18 months, or any lesser time as
may be approved by the City Council to allow completion as approved.
   (B)   An applicant may apply to the City Council, through the Planning
Commission, for extensions to allow completion of the site plan requirements,
which, if granted, shall each be subject to the maximum time limitations of
this section unless a lesser time limit is set for the extension.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.080)
EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES
§ 152.220 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Continuing, altering, or enlarging a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use or structure may be continued, altered, or enlarged only as
provided in this subchapter.
      (1)   Expansion of a nonconforming use. The expansion of a nonconforming
use to a portion of a structure that already was arranged or designed for the
nonconforming use at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this
chapter is not an enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming use.
      (2)   Altering or enlarging a nonconforming use. A nonconforming
structure that conforms with respect to use may be altered or enlarged if the
alteration or enlargement does not cause the structure to deviate further from
the standards of this chapter.
      (3)   When alteration or expansion not allowed. The alteration or
expansion of a nonconforming use is not allowed unless the finished structure
and lot or parcel meet the standards of the zone in which the structure would
be allowed as a permitted or conditional use.
      (4)   Site plan approval required. Site plan approval as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required prior to the alteration, enlargement, expansion,
construction, or reconstruction of any nonconforming use.
   (B)   If nonconforming use discontinued for one year. If a nonconforming use
is discontinued for a period of one year:
      (1)   Further nonconforming use requires approval. Site plan approval as
provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required prior to the alteration, enlargement, expansion,
construction, or reconstruction of any nonconforming use.
      (2)   Approval requires extenuating circumstances. Approval may be
granted only when the City Council finds that extenuating circumstances exist.
   (C)   If nonconforming use replaced by another use. If a nonconforming use
is replaced by another use, the new use shall conform to this chapter.
   (D)   If nonconforming structure destroyed. If a nonconforming structure or
a structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed by any cause:
      (1)   The structure may be replaced in compliance with the requirements
for building permits and shall meet all development standards of the zone in
which the structure would be permitted outright or as a conditional use;
      (2)   The replacement may continue the same nonconforming use, only if
replaced and occupied in conformance with the Uniform Building Code and other
applicable life and safety regulations, within one year of the structure being
destroyed;
      (3)   If the replacement structure shall be to continue a nonconforming
use as a residence then the replacement structure shall contain a minimum of
1,000 square feet of living area per single family (exclusive of facilities for
parking), and provision shall be made to provide off-street parking for a
minimum of two vehicles per single family, one of which shall be a garage or
carport; and/or
      (4)   Site plan approval as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207 is required prior to the replacement of the destroyed structure.
   (E)   Subsequent owner’s rights. The rights granted under this subchapter to
continue, alter, or enlarge a nonconforming use run with the land, and to the
extent such right exists, may be utilized by any subsequent owner of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.221 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   Exceptions to yard requirements may be authorized for a lot or parcel in any
zone, except a corner lot. All exceptions shall be requested in the site review
application.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.020)
§ 152.222 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Vertical projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft
housing, towers, aerials, antennas, flagpoles, and similar objects not used for
human occupancy cannot exceed 20 feet greater than allowed building height in
the zone without site plan approval.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.030) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.223 PROJECTIONS INTO YARD SETBACKS.
   Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades,
gutters, chimneys and flues, and the cover or roof over decks or patios shall
not project more than 24 inches into a required yard.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.040) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.224 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT AND DENY VARIANCES.
   (A)   When Planning Commission may recommend variance. The Planning
Commission may recommend a variance from the requirements of this chapter where
it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a
specific lot, strict application of the chapter would cause an undue or
unnecessary hardship or if, in the sole discretion of the city, the variance
would allow for use of the property in a manner more compatible with the
surrounding properties.
   (B)   When variance prohibited. No variance shall be granted to allow the
use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the
proposed use would be located.
   (C)   Planning Commission may attach conditions. In recommending a variance,
the Planning Commission may attach conditions that which it finds necessary to
protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity and
otherwise achieve the purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   Circumstances for granting a variance. A variance may be granted only
in the event that all the following circumstances exist.
      (1)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances required. Exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances shall apply to the property which do not apply
generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and which result
from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the owner
of the property has had no control.
      (2)   Variance necessary for preservation of a property right. The
variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant
substantially the same as owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity
possess.
      (3)   Variance would not be detrimental or conflict. The variance would
not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this chapter, or to property
in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise
conflict with the objectives of any city plan or policy.
      (4)   Variance requested is minimum variance. The variance requested is
the minimum variance that would alleviate the hardship.
   (E)   Procedure for taking action on a variance application. The procedure
for taking action on an application for a variance shall be as follows.
      (1)   Only an owner may initiate a variance request. A property owner may
initiate a request for variance by filing an application with the City
Recorder, using forms prescribed pursuant to §
152.018.
      (2)   Public hearing required. Before the Planning Commission may act on
a variance application, it shall hold a public hearing thereon, following
procedure established in §
152.020.
      (3)   Decision of Planning Commission to City Council. The decision of
the Planning Commission shall then be brought before the City Council, along
with a complete record of the hearing, at the next regular Council meeting
after the appeal period has expired following said decision.
   (F)   Review on the record and decision by City Council.
      (1)   City Council reviews without hearing further evidence. The City
Council shall review the decision of the Planning Commission on the record
without hearing further evidence.
      (2)   Actions available to the City Council. The City Council shall:
         (a)   Either affirm the decision of the Planning Commission, at which
time the decision shall be final; or
         (b)   Shall set the matter for a hearing de novo before the City
Council, after which the Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision
of the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Written notice of decision, to applicant, required within time limit.
Within ten working days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a
variance application, the City Recorder shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the decision of the City Council.
   (H)   Time limit on a permit for a variance. Authorization of a variance
shall be void after one year unless substantial construction has taken place.
However, the Planning Commission may extend authorization for an additional
period not to exceed one year, on written request of the property owner, to
complete the variance requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.050)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 152.235 PURPOSE.
   There are certain uses that, due to the nature of their impacts on
surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and
analysis. The zoning districts identify these as CONDITIONAL USES. The purpose
of this subchapter is to provide standards and procedures under which a
conditional use may be permitted, enlarged, or altered if the site is
appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.010)
§ 152.236 SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   All conditional uses shall require site plan approval per §§
152.200 to
152.207.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.015) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.237 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   How conditional use may be permitted, enlarged, altered. Conditional
uses listed in this subchapter may be permitted, enlarged, or otherwise altered
upon authorization by the City Council in accordance with the standards and
conditions in this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional conditions may be imposed. In permitting a conditional use,
or the modification of a conditional use, the Planning Commission may impose,
in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this
subchapter, any additional conditions the Planning Commission considers
necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or the city
as a whole.
   (C)   Standards for granting conditional use. Standards for granting
conditional uses are as follows.
      (1)   Proposal shall be consistent. The proposal shall be consistent with
the comprehensive plan and the objectives of this chapter and other applicable
policies of the city.
      (2)   Have minimal adverse impact. Taking into account location, size,
design, and operating characteristics, the proposed use shall have a minimal
adverse impact on the:
         (a)   Livability;
         (b)   Value; and/or
         (c)   Appropriate development of abutting properties and the
surrounding area compared to the impact of development that is permitted
outright.
      (3)   Location and design shall be attractive. The location and design of
the site and structures for the proposed use shall be as attractive as the
nature of the use and its setting warrants.
      (4)   Use shall preserve assets of interest. The proposed use shall
preserve assets of particular interest to the community.
      (5)   Applicant intent, capability, purpose, and motivation. The
applicant shall have a bona fide intent and capability to develop and use the
land as proposed, and has some appropriate purpose for submitting the proposal,
and is not motivated solely by such purposes as the alteration of property
values for speculative purposes.
      (6)   Conditional use permit amendments. Any physical change in an
approved conditional use shall require approval of an amended conditional use
permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter. All
conditional uses shall require continuing compliance with the terms of the
approved conditional use and approved site plan, if any.
   (D)   Additional conditions may be imposed.
      (1)   Planning Commission or City Council may impose additional
conditions. In permitting a new conditional use, or the alteration of an
existing conditional use, the Planning Commission or City Council may impose,
in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this
subchapter, additional conditions which the city considers necessary to protect
the best interests of the surrounding area or the city as a whole.
      (2)   Conditions may include. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
         (b)   Limiting the height, size, or location of building or structure;
         (c)   Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
         (d)   Increasing the street width;
         (e)   Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
         (f)   Limiting the number, size, location, and lighting of signs;
         (g)   Requiring diking, grading, fencing, screening, landscaping, or
other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property;
         (h)   Designating sites for open space;
         (i)   Designating specific hours of operation; or
         (j)   Requiring a site plan to be filed and approved as provided in §§
152.200 to
152.207.
   (E)   Changes in use shall conform to this chapter. In the case of a use
existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter
and classified in this chapter as a conditional use, any change in the use or
in lot area, or an alteration of structure, shall conform with the requirements
for conditional use.
   (F)   Temporary conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditions necessary for temporary conditional use. In the case
where a property owner proposes that a conditional use be allowed for a
specific period of time, and where the proponent demonstrates that the proposed
use will not change the character or nature of the property nor make any
permanent improvements thereon, or where the proponent demonstrates to the city
that the proponent will utilize only temporary structures and/or temporary
buildings, or structures or buildings that already conform to the provisions of
the zone for which the use is intended, the city may issue a temporary
conditional use permit.
      (2)   City may waive, defer, or modify provisions of this chapter. In
permitting the temporary conditional use, the city may waive, defer, or modify
any provision of this chapter when the Planning Commission determines that the
provision would impose an undue hardship or unnecessary restriction upon the
proponent of the temporary conditional use, taking into consideration the best
interests and development policies of the city.
      (3)   This subchapter governs. Except as specifically authorized under
division (F)(2) above, the city shall issue the temporary conditional use
permit only according to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   Revisions in an approved conditional use.
      (1)   Changes in approved conditional use. Any change in an approved
conditional use shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
section for conditional use approval.
      (2)   Failure to comply unlawful. Where required conditional use has been
approved, it is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any construction,
reconstruction, improvement, erection, or moving in of buildings, storage
sheds, fences, decks, or other structures, or to cause or permit any change in
use to take place in any manner except in complete and strict compliance with
the approved conditional use.
      (3)   Exception. If the change is solely a change in use to a permitted
use in the zone where the property is located, the change shall not be
unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.020) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.238 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION.
   The procedure for taking action on a conditional use application shall be as
follows.
   (A)   Owner may initiate request for conditional use. A property owner may
initiate a request for a conditional use by filing an application with the City
Recorder.
   (B)   Public hearing required. Before the Planning Commission may act on a
conditional use application, it shall hold a public hearing thereon, following
procedures established in §
152.020.
   (C)   Recommendation of Planning Commission to City Council. The
recommendation of the Planning Commission shall then be brought before the City
Council, along with a complete record of the hearing, at the next regular
Council meeting.
   (D)   Review on the record and decision by City Council.
      (1)   City Council review without hearing further evidence. The City
Council shall review the recommendation of the Planning Commission on the
record without hearing further evidence.
      (2)   Actions available to the City Council. The City Council shall:
         (a)   Either affirm the recommendation of the Planning Commission, at
which time, the decision of the City Council shall be final; or
         (b)   Shall set the matter for a hearing de novo before the City
Council, after which the Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Written notice of decision, to applicant, required within time limit.
Within ten working days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a
conditional use application, the City Recorder shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the decision of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.030)
§ 152.239 TIME LIMIT ON A PERMIT FOR A CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   Authorization good for limited time only. Authorization of a
conditional use shall be void after one year or such lesser time as the
authorization may specify unless substantial construction has taken place;
substantial construction shall be solely determined by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Conditions under which City Council may grant extension. However, the
City Council may extend authorization for an additional period not to exceed
one year, on written request by the property owner, to allow additional time to
complete the requirements necessary to meet the conditional use provisions
approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Revoking a conditional use permit.
      (1)   The conditional use permit may be revoked by the City Council for
violation of any conditions of approval or violation of any ordinances of the
city. Reconsideration of the revocation of a conditional use permit is to the
City Council.
      (2)   Any reconsideration request must be in writing and filed with the
City Recorder within three days after notice of the revocation of the
conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.040)
AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
§ 152.250 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide an efficient process for
modifying land use decisions and approved development plans, in recognition of
the cost and complexity of land development and the need to conserve city
resources.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.010)
§ 152.251 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all development applications approved
through the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 151, including:
      (1)   Site plan approvals;
      (2)   Subdivisions, partitions, and lot line adjustments;
      (3)   Conditional use permits;
      (4)   Master planned developments; and
      (5)   Conditions of approval on any of the above application types.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to land use district changes, text
amendments, temporary use permits, variances, or other permits. For amendments
to zoning map and text, see §§
152.265 to
152.269.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.020)
§ 152.252 MAJOR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Major modification determined. The City Recorder shall determine that
a major modification(s) is required if one or more of the changes listed below
are proposed:
      (1)   A change in land use;
      (2)   An increase in the number of dwelling units;
      (3)   A change in the type and/or location of access ways, drives, or
parking areas that affect off-site traffic;
      (4)   An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by
more than 10%;
      (5)   A reduction of more than 10% of the area reserved for common open
space and/or usable open space;
      (6)   A reduction to specified setback requirements by more than 10%, or
to a degree that the minimum setback standards of the land use district cannot
be met; and/or
      (7)   Changes similar to any of those listed in divisions (A)(1) to (A)
(6) above, which are likely to have an adverse impact on adjoining properties.
   (B)   Major modification request. An applicant may request a major
modification as follows.
      (1)   Upon the City Recorder determining that the proposed modification
is a major modification, the applicant shall submit an application for the
major modification.
      (2)   The modification request shall be subject to the same review
procedure and approval criteria used for the initial project approval, however,
the review shall limited in scope to the modification request. For example, a
request to modify a parking lot shall require site plan review only for the
proposed parking lot and any changes to associated pathways, lighting, and
landscaping. Notice shall be provided in accordance with the applicable review
procedure.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.030)
§ 152.253 MINOR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Minor modification defined. Any modification to a land use decision or
approved development plan which is not within the description of a major
modification as provided in §
152.252 shall be considered a MINOR MODIFICATION. Minor partitions are governed
by this section.
   (B)   Minor modification request.
      (1)   An application for approval of a minor modification is reviewed by
the Planning Commission as a limited land use decision (e.g., decision made in
a public meeting with 14-day prior notice to adjacent property owners within
100 feet of the subject property).
      (2)   A minor modification shall be approved, approved with conditions,
or denied by the City Council based on written findings on the following
criteria.
         (a)   The proposed development is in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 151.
         (b)   The modification is not a major modification as defined in §
152.252.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.040)
AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING MAP AND TEXT
§ 152.265 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide standards and procedures for
legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the land use
district map. These will be referred to as MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS. Amendments
may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions,
needs, and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.010)
§ 152.266 LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENTS.
   Legislative amendments are policy decisions made by City Council. They are
reviewed in a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to
affected property owners (e.g., those whose property value could be impacted
negatively, and those who have requested in writing their desire to receive
notification), the county and any other affected governmental jurisdictions in
conformance with the City Council hearing notification procedures. The Oregon
Department of Land Conservation and Development shall be notified in writing of
proposed legislative amendments at least 45 days prior to the first hearing at
which testimony will be accepted.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.020)
§ 152.267 QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Quasi-judicial amendments. Quasi-judicial amendments are those that
involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application
or code revision. Quasi-judicial map amendments shall follow the procedures
outlined below.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review and recommend zoning map
changes which do not involve comprehensive plan map amendments. A public
hearing is required with 20 days’ prior written notice to adjacent property
owners within 100 feet of the subject property(ies).
      (2)   Following notice and public hearing in accordance with §
152.019, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council on an application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. The City
Council shall decide such applications.
      (3)   Following notice and public hearing in accordance with §
152.019, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council on zone change applications that also involve a comprehensive plan map
amendment. The City Council shall decide both applications.
   (B)   Criteria for quasi-judicial amendments. A recommendation or a decision
to approve, approve with conditions, or to deny an application for a quasi-
judicial map amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria:
      (1)   Demonstration of compliance with all applicable comprehensive plan
policies and map designations. Where this criterion cannot be met, a
comprehensive plan amendment shall be a prerequisite to approval;
      (2)   Demonstration of compliance with all applicable standards and
criteria of this code, and other applicable implementing ordinances; and
      (3)   Evidence of change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or
inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or land use district map regarding the
property which is the subject of the application.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.030)
§ 152.268 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with
conditions. A legislative decision may be approved or denied.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.040)
§ 152.269 RECORD OF AMENDMENTS.
   The City Recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this
code and the land use districts map in a format convenient for public use.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.050)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter or of any amendments to this
chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each day of violation
where the offense is a continuing offense, but such fine may not exceed $2,500.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.090)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
O.R.S. Cite Code Section
O.R.S. Cite             Code Section
34.010 to 34.100        50.15
34.100                  51.33
87.152                  70.19
91.505 through 91.675   151.08;
                        152.003
                        151.02;
                        151.04;
Chapter 92              151.08;
                        151.22;
                        152.003;
                        152.004
92.010 to 92.190        152.003
92.080                  151.24
92.120                  151.24
92.345                  151.62
Chapter 131             130.01
Chapter 132             130.01
Chapter 133             130.01
Chapter 135             130.01
Chapter 136             130.01
Chapter 137             130.01
Chapter 138             130.01
Chapter 142             130.01
Chapter 144             130.01
Chapter 146             130.01
Chapter 147             130.01
Chapter 151             130.01
Chapter 153             130.01
Chapter 156             130.01
Chapter 157             130.01
Chapter 161             130.01
Chapter 162             130.01
Chapter 163             130.01
Chapter 164             130.01
Chapter 165             130.01
Chapter 166             130.01;
                        152.079
Chapter 167             130.01
Chapter 169             130.01
192.105                 31.02
Chapter 197             152.002
197.307(5)              152.057
197.314(6)              152.057
197.505                 151.41
197.660 to 197.670      152.004;
                        152.057
Chapter 223             31.41
223.001(a)              31.40
223.297 to 223.214      50.15
223.299                 51.33
223.304                 51.32
223.505 through 223.650 51.18
223.610                 51.48
224.210 to 224.260      51.01
Chapter 227             152.002
227.178                 152.022
227.180                 152.022
                        31.18 
Chapter 279A            31.18;
                        31.20
279A.180                31.20
                        31.17 
Chapter 279B            31.18;
                        31.20
                        31.16 
Chapter 279C            31.18;
                        31.20
Chapter 419A            130.01
Chapter 419B            130.01
Chapter 419C            130.01
                        150.05;
Chapter 446             152.003;
                        152.019
446.990                 150.05
Chapter 447             150.05
447.160                 150.05
Chapter 455             150.05
455.895                 150.05
455.010                 152.058;
                        152.059
                        52.01;
Chapter 459             52.05;
                        52.04
Chapter 471             130.01
Chapter 475             130.01
476.030                 91.01
607.303 et seq.         90.04
696.010(12)             152.003
Chapter 801             70.01
Chapter 802             70.01
Chapter 803             70.01
Chapter 805             70.01
Chapter 806             70.01
806.010                 70.16
Chapter 807             70.01
Chapter 809             70.01
809.720                 70.16
Chapter 810             70.01
Chapter 811             70.01
811.175                 70.16
811.182                 70.16
Chapter 813             70.01
813.010                 70.16
Chapter 814             70.01
Chapter 816             70.01
Chapter 818             70.01
Chapter 819             70.01
Chapter 820             70.01
Chapter 821             70.01
Chapter 822             70.01
806.010                 70.16
809.720                 70.16
811.175                 70.16
811.182                 70.16
813.010                 70.16
                        
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
1.08.010           10.99
2.04.010           30.15
2.04.020           30.16
2.04.030           30.17
2.04.040           30.18
2.04.050           30.19
2.04.060           30.20
2.04.070           30.21
2.04.080           30.22
2.04.090           30.23
2.04.100           30.24
2.08.010           31.01
2.08.020           31.02
2.12.010           30.01
2.12.020           30.02
2.12.030           30.03
2.32.120           31.26
3.04.010           31.15
3.04.020           31.16
3.04.022           31.17
3.04.024           31.18
3.04.026           31.19
3.04.030           31.20
3.04.070           31.21
3.04.080           31.22
3.04.090           31.23
3.04.100           31.24
3.04.110           31.25
3.08.010           31.40
3.08.020           31.41
3.08.030           31.42
3.08.040           31.43
3.08.050           31.44
3.08.060           31.45
3.08.070           31.46
3.08.080           31.47
3.08.090           31.48
3.08.100           31.49
3.08.110           31.50
3.08.120           31.51
3.08.130           31.52
3.08.140           31.53
3.08.150           31.54
3.08.160           31.55
3.08.170           31.56
3.08.180           31.57
5.04.010           110.01
5.04.020           110.02
5.04.030           110.03
5.04.040           110.04
5.04.050           110.05
5.04.060           110.06
5.04.070           110.07
5.04.080           110.08
5.04.090           110.09
5.04.100           110.10
5.04.110           110.11
5.04.120           110.12
5.04.130           110.99
5.04.140           110.13
5.04.150           110.14
5.08.010           111.01
5.08.020           111.02
5.08.030           111.03
5.08.040           111.04
5.08.050           111.05
5.08.060           111.06
5.08.070           111.07
5.08.080           111.08
5.08.090           111.09
5.08.120           111.10;
                   111.11
5.08.130           111.12
5.08.140           111.13
5.12.010           112.01
5.12.020           112.02
5.12.030           112.03;
                   112.99
5.12.040           112.04
5.12.050           112.05
5.12.060           112.06
5.12.070           112.07
5.12.080           112.08
5.12.090           112.09
5.12.100           112.10
6.04.010           90.01
6.04.011           90.02
6.04.014           90.03
6.04.020           90.04
6.08.010           90.15
6.08.020           90.16
6.08.030           90.17;
                   90.99
6.08.040           90.18
6.08.050           90.19
6.08.060           90.20
6.08.070           90.21
6.08.080           90.99
8.04.010           92.20
8.04.020           92.21
8.04.030           92.22
8.04.040           92.23
8.04.050           92.24
8.04.060           92.25
8.04.070           92.26
8.04.080           92.27
8.04.090           92.28
8.04.100           92.29
8.04.110           92.30
8.04.120           92.31
8.08.010           91.01
8.08.020           91.02
8.12.010           92.01
8.12.020           92.02
8.12.030           92.03
8.12.040           92.04
8.12.050           92.05
8.12.060           92.06
8.12.070           92.07
8.12.080           92.99
8.16.010           91.15
8.16.020           91.16
8.16.030           91.17
8.16.040           91.18
8.16.050           91.19
8.16.060           91.20
8.16.070           91.99
8.20.010           52.01
8.20.020           52.02
8.20.030           52.03
8.20.040           52.04
8.20.050           52.05
9.04.010           130.01
9.08.010           130.15
9.08.020           130.16
9.08.030           130.17
9.08.040           130.18
10.04.010          70.01
10.080.010         70.15
10.080.020         70.16
10.08.030          70.17
10.08.040          70.18
10.08.050          70.19
13.04.010          51.01
13.04.020          51.02
13.04.021          51.03
13.04.030          51.04
13.04.040          51.05
13.04.050          51.06
13.04.060          51.07
13.04.070          51.08
13.04.080          51.09
13.04.090          51.10
13.04.100          51.11
13.04.110          51.12
13.04.120          51.13
13.04.130          51.14
13.04.140          51.15
13.04.150          51.16
13.04.160          51.17
13.04.170          51.18
13.04.180          51.99
13.08.010          51.30
13.08.020          51.31
13.08.030          51.32
13.08.050          51.33
13.12.010          51.45
13.12.020          51.46
13.12.030          51.47
13.12.040          51.48
13.12.050          51.49
13.12.060          51.50
13.12.070          51.51
13.12.080          51.52
13.12.090          51.53
13.12.100          51.54
13.12.110          51.55
13.12.120          51.56
13.12.130          51.57
13.12.140          51.58
13.12.150          51.99
13.14.010          50.01
13.14.020          50.02
13.14.030          50.03
13.14.040          50.04
13.14.050          50.05
13.14.060          50.06
13.14.070          50.07
13.14.080          50.08
13.14.090          50.09
13.14.100          50.10
13.14.110          50.11
13.14.120          50.12
13.14.130          50.13
13.14.140          50.14
13.14.150          50.15
13.14.160          50.16
13.14.170          50.99
13.14.180          50.17
15.04.010          150.01
15.04.020          150.02
15.04.030          150.03
15.04.040          150.04
15.04.050          150.05;
                   150.99
15.08.010          150.20
15.08.020          150.21
15.08.030          150.22
15.08.040          150.23
15.08.050          150.24
15.08.060          150.25
15.08.070          150.26;
                   150.99
16.04.010          151.01
16.04.020          151.02
16.04.030          151.03
16.04.040          151.04
16.04.050          151.05
16.04.060          151.06
16.04.070          151.07
16.04.080          151.08
16.08.010          151.20
16.08.015          151.21
16.08.020          151.22
16.08.030          151.23
16.08.040          151.24
16.12.010          151.35
16.12.020          151.36
16.12.030          151.37
16.12.040          151.38
16.12.050          151.39
16.12.060          151.40
16.12.070          151.41
16.12.080          151.42
16.12.090          151.43
16.12.100          151.44
16.12.110          151.45
16.16.010          151.60;
                   151.99
16.16.020          151.61
16.16.030          151.62
16.16.040          151.63
17.04.010          152.001
17.04.020          152.002
17.04.030          152.003
17.04.040          152.004
17.08.010          152.015
17.08.020          152.016
17.08.030          152.017
17.08.040          152.018
17.08.050          152.019
17.08.060          152.020
17.08.070          152.021
17.08.080          152.022
17.08.090          152.023;
                   152.999
17.12.010          152.035
17.12.020          152.036
17.12.030          152.037
17.16.100          152.050
17.16.110          152.051
17.16.120          152.052
17.16.130          152.053
17.16.140          152.054
17.16.150          152.055
17.16.160          152.056
17.16.170          152.057
17.20.010          152.057
17.20.020          152.057
17.20.030          152.057
17.20.040          152.058
17.20.060          152.058
17.20.070          152.058
17.20.080          152.058
17.20.090          152.058
17.20.100          152.058
17.20.110          152.058
17.24.010          152.059
17.24.020          152.059
17.24.030          152.059
17.24.040          152.059
17.24.050          152.059
17.24.060          152.059
17.24.070          152.059
17.24.090          152.059
17.24.100          152.059
17.24.110          152.059
17.28.005          152.070
17.28.010          152.071
17.28.020          152.072
17.28.030          152.073
17.28.040          152.074
17.28.050          152.075
17.28.060          152.076
17.28.070          152.077
17.28.080          152.078
17.28.090          152.079
17.28.100          152.080
17.28.101          152.081
17.28.102          152.082
17.28.103          152.083
17.28.110          152.084
17.28.120          152.085
17.32.005          152.100
17.32.010          152.101
17.32.020          152.102
17.32.030          152.103
17.32.040          152.104
17.32.050          152.105
17.32.060          152.106
17.32.070          152.107
17.32.080          152.108
17.32.090          152.109
17.32.100          152.110
17.32.110          152.111
17.32.120          152.112
17.32.125          152.113
17.36.001          152.125
17.36.005          152.126
17.36.010          152.127
17.36.020          152.128
17.36.030          152.129
17.36.040          152.130
17.36.050          152.131
17.36.060          152.132
17.36.070          152.133
17.36.080          152.134
17.36.090          152.135
17.36.100          152.136
17.36.110          152.137
17.40.010          152.150
17.40.020          152.151
able 17.44.020.A   152.181
17.40.030          152.152
17.40.040          152.153
17.40.050          152.154
17.40.060          152.155
17.40.070          152.156
17.40.080          152.157
17.40.090          152.158
17.40.100          152.159
17.40.110          152.160
17.40.120          152.161
17.40.130          152.162
17.40.140          152.163
17.40.150          152.164
17.40.160          152.165
17.44.010          152.180
17.44.020          152.181
17.44.030          152.182
17.44.040          152.183
17.44.050          152.184
17.44.060          152.185
17.44.070          152.186
17.44.080          152.187
17.44.090          152.188
17.44.100          152.189
17.48.010          152.200
17.48.020          152.201
17.48.030          152.202
17.48.040          152.203
17.48.050          152.204
17.48.060          152.205
17.48.070          152.206
17.48.080          152.207
17.52.010          152.220
17.52.020          152.221
17.52.030          152.222
17.52.040          152.223
17.52.050          152.224
17.56.010          152.235
17.56.015          152.236
17.56.020          152.237
17.56.030          152.238
17.56.040          152.239
17.60.010          152.250
17.60.020          152.251
17.60.030          152.252
17.60.040          152.253
17.64.010          152.265
17.64.020          152.266
17.64.030          152.267
17.64.040          152.268
17.64.050          152.269
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
                        30.15;
26       - -1959        30.16;
                        30.18—
                        30.24
                        110.01—
                        110.07;
56       - -1968        110.09—
                        110.14;
                        110.99
                        150.20—
58       - -1969        150.26;
                        150.99
                        91.15—
59       - -1969        91.20;
                        91.99
-        5-22-1973      Charter Ch. X, § 46a
                        51.01;
69       - -1974        51.02;
                        51.18;
                        51.99
69-A     - -1975        51.04
69 A     - -1976        51.04;
                        51.99
69 B     - -1976        51.18
                        31.15;
78       - -1977        31.16;
                        31.20—
                        31.24
87       - -1978        90.15—
                        90.21
91       - -1978        151.20
-        11-6-1979      Charter Ch. X, § 46
69-C     - -1980        51.18
III      - -1981        92.20;
                        92.30
II 3     - -1981        30.20
                        90.02;
47B      - -1981        90.04;
                        90.21
102      - -1981        30.01—
                        30.03
104      - -1981        31.22
                        110.07;
105      - -1981        110.13;
                        110.99
                        91.15;
109      - -1981        91.17;
                        91.20
                        90.15;
                        90.18;
110      - -1981        90.20;
                        90.21;
                        90.99
                        92.21—
111      - -1981        92.29;
                        92.31
113      - -1981        30.21;
                        30.22
                        92.01—
114      - -1981        92.07;
                        92.99
115      - -1981        31.40—
                        31.57
69-D     - -1982        51.02
69-E     - -1983        51.02
                        51.45—
128      - -1983        51.58;
                        51.99
136      - -1984        51.45—
                        51.47
-        5-15-1984      Charter Ch. II, § 5a
141      - -1985        92.04
                        31.15;
149      - -1987        31.16;
                        31.20—
                        31.24
151      - -1987        111.01—
                        111.13
154      - -1987        110.07
III A    - -1988        92.20
                        112.01—
155      - -1988        112.10;
                        112.99
161      - -1989        51.57
170      - -1990        52.01—
                        52.05
175      - -1991        130.15—
                        130.18
177      - -1991        31.01;
                        31.02
179      - -1993        51.51
182      - -1994        92.06
183      - -1995        51.18
184      - -1995        10.99
187      - -1995        31.40
188      - -1995        130.01
189      - -1995        70.01
191      - -1995        51.30—
                        51.33
192      - -1995        91.01;
                        91.02
193      - -1995        130.15
194      - -1995        152.058;
                        152.059
199      - -1996        51.02
201.5    - -1996        90.02
                        150.01—
214      - -1998        150.05;
                        150.99
-        5-16-2000      Charter, Ch. X, § 49
223      - -2001        51.05—
                        51.18
225      - -2001        52.02—
                        52.05
228      - -2002        30.16
                        50.02—
230      - -2003        50.17;
                        50.99
231      - -2004        70.19
233      - -2005        31.15—
                        31.26
238      - -2007        51.02
                        51.05;
246      - -2009        51.06;
                        51.18
247      - -2012        51.99
249      - -2013        110.02
251      - -2015        90.03
252      - -2016        90.03
256      - -2018        51.03
257      - -2018        51.02
258      - -2018        51.46
242      5-7-2007       151.20—
                        151.24
                        152.004;
                        152.016;
                        152.017;
265      1-1-2019       152.051—
                        152.055;
                        152.057;
                        152.202;
                        152.204
262      6-3-2019       92.03
263      7-6-2020       152.057
                       
 
